THE CHRISTIANS PATTERN or The Imitation of CHRIST


Printed by J:R. for John Williams at ye Crown in St Paul's Church yard 1677

THE Christians Pattern, OR A DIVINE TREATISE OF THE Imitation of Christ.

Written Originally in Latin, by THOMAS of KEMPIS, above 200. Years since.

Faithfully Englished.

And Printed in a large Character for the benefit of the Aged.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Sign of the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1695.

The Contents of the Chapters.
The First Book. CHAP. I.
OF the Imitation of Christ and contempt of all worldly vanities. Page 1 Of the
humble conceit of our selves. 3 Of the doctrine of Truth. 6 Of wisdom and
providence in our actions. 10 Of the reading of holy Scriptures. 11 Of
inordinate affections. 12 Of flying vain hope and pride. 13 That too much
familiarity is to be shunned. 15 Of obedience and subjection. 16 Of avoiding
superfluity in words. 17 Of the obtaining of peace, and zealous desire of
profiting in grace. 19 Of the profit of adversity. 22 Of resisting temptations.
23 Of avoiding rash judgment. 27 Of works done of Charity. 29 Of bearing with
the defects of others. 30 Of a retired life. 32 Of the examples of the holy
Fathers. 34 Of the exercise of a good and religious person. 37 Of the love of
solitude and silence. 41 Of compunction of heart. 46 Of the consideration of
humane misery. 49 Of the meditation of death. 54 Of judgment, and the
punishment of Sins. 58 Of the zealous amendment of our whole life. 63
The Second Book CHAP. I
OF the inward life. 70 Of humble submission. 75 Of a good and peaceable Man.
76 Of a pure mind, and upright intention. 78 Of the consideration of ones self.
80 Of the joy of a good conscience. 82 Of the love of Jesus above all things.
84 Of familiar conversation with Jesus. 86 Of the want of all comfort. 89 Of
thankfulness for the grace of God. 93 How few the lovers of the Cross os Christ
are. 97 Of the high way of the holy Cross. 99
The Third Book. CHAP. I.
OF the inward speech of Christ unto a faithful soul. 108 That truth speaks
inwardly without noise of words. 110 That the words of God are to be heard with
humility, and that many weigh them not. 112 That we ought to live iu truth, and
humility before God. 116 Of the wonderful effect of divine love. 119 Of the
proof of a true Lover. 123 That grace is to be hid under the veil of humility.
126 Of a mean conceit of our selves in the sight of God. 130 That all things
are to be referred unto God, as unto the last end. 132 That the world being
despised, it is a sweet thing to serve God, 133 That the desires of our heart
are to be examined and moderated. 137 Of Patience, and of striving against
concupiscence. 139 Of the humble obedience of a subject, according to the
example of Christ. 142 Of the secret judgment of God to be considered; lest we
be exalted in our good deeds. 144 How we are to stand affected, and what we are
to say, in every thing which we desire. 146 That true comfort is to be sought
in God alone. 149 That all our care is to be placed in God. 150 That temporal
miseries, after the example of Christ, must be born patiently. 152 Of suffering
of injuries; and who is proved to be truly patient. 154 Of the acknowledging of
our own infirmities; and of the miseries of this life. 157 That we are to rest
in God, above all his gifts and benefits. 160 Of the remembrance of the
manifold benefits of God. 164 Of four things that bring much peace. 167 Of
flying curious inquiry of the life of others. 170 Wherein the firm peace of the
heart, and true spiritual profiting consists. 172 Of the excellency of a free
mind, which humble Prayer sooner gains than Reading. 174 That private love
most hinders from the chiefest Good. 176 Against the tongues of slanderers.
179 How we ought to call upon God, and bless him when tribulation draws near.
180 Of craving the divine aid, and confidence of recovering grace. 182 Of the
contempt of all creatures, to find out the Creator. 186 Of denial of our
selves, and forsaking all inordinate desires. 189 Of inconstancy of heart, and
of directing our final intentions unto God. 191 That God is sweet, above all
things, and in all things, to him that loves. 193 That there is no security
from temptation in this life. 195 Against the vain judgments of Men. 197 Of a
full and pure resignation of our selves, for the obtaining freedom of heart.
199 Of good government in outward things, and of recourse to God in dangers.
202 That a Man be not over earnest in his affairs. 204 That a Man has no good
of himself, nor any thing whereof he can glory. 205 Of the contempt of all
temporal honors. 208 That our peace is not to be placed in Men. 209 Against
vain and secular knowledge. 211 Of not drawing outward things to our selves. 213
That credit is not to be given to all Men; and how prone Man is to offend in
words. 214 Of putting our trust in God, when evil words arise. 218 That all
grievous things are to be endured for life everlasting. 221 Of the everlasting
day, and shortness of this life. 224 Of the desire of everlasting life, and how
great rewards are promised to those that sight valiantly. 228 How a
disconsolate person ought to offer himself into the Hands of God. 233 That a
Man ought to employ himself in works of Humility, when strength is wanting for
higher employments. 238 That a Man ought to esteem himself not worthy of
comfort, but rather to deserve stripes. 239 That the grace of God does not join
it self with those that savor of Earthly things. 242 Of the different motions
of Nature, and Grace. 244 Of the corruption of Nature, and efficacy of divine
Grace. 250 That we ought to deny our selves, and imitate Christ by the Cross.
254 That a Man be not too much dejected when he falls into some defects. 257
Of not searching into high matters, and into the secret judgments of God 259
That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone. 265
The Fourth Book. CHAP, I.
WIth how great reverence Christ ought to be received. 270 That the great
goodness and love of God is exhibited to Man in this Sacrament. 277 That it is
profitable to communicate often. 281 That many benefits are bestowed upon them
that communicate devoutly. 284 Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and
Ministerial function, 288 An interrogation of the exercise before Communion.
290 Of the discussing of our own conscience, and purpose of amendment. 291 Of
the oblation of Christ on the Cross and resignation of our selves. 294 That we
ought to offer up our selves, and all that is ours unto God, and to pray for
all. 296 That the holy communion is not lightly to be forborne. 299 That the
body of Christ, and the holy Scriptures, are most necessary unto a faithful.
soul. 304 That he who is to communicate, ought to prepare himself with great
diligence. 309 That a devout soul ought to desire with her whole heart, to be
united unto Christ in the Sacrament. 312 Of the fervent desire of some devout
persons to receive the Body of Christ. 314 That the grace of devotian is
obtained by humility and denial of our selves. 316 That we ought to manifest
our necessities to Christ, and crave his grace. 319 Of fervent love and
vehement desire to receive Christ. 321 That Man be not a curious searcher of
the Sacrament, but an humble follower of Christ, submitting his sense to faith.
324
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Imitation of Christ, and contempt of all wordly vanities.
HE that follows me, walks not in darkness, says the Lord. These are the
words of Christ by which we are admonished, that we ought to imitate his life
and manners, if we will be truly enlightened, and be delivered from all
blindness of heart. Let therefore our chiefest endeavor be to meditate upon the
life of Jesus Christ.

2. The doctrine of Christ exceeds all the doctrines of holy Men; and he that
has the Spirit, will find therein an hidden Manna. But it falls out, that
many, who often hear the Gospel of Christ, are yet but little affected, because
they are void of the Spirit of Christ. But whosoever will fully and feelingly
understand the words of Christ, must endeavor to conform his life wholly to the
life of Christ.

3. What will it avail thee to dispute profoundly of the Trinity, if thou be
void of humility, and art thereby displeasing to the Trinity? High words surely
make a Man neither holy nor just, but a virtuous life makes him dear to God. I
had rather feel compunction, than understand the definition thereof. If thou
did know the whole Bible, and the sayings of all the Philosophers by heart,
what would all that profit thee without the love of God, and without grace?
Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity, but to love God, and to serve him only.
This is the highest wisdom, by contempt of the world to tend toward the
Kingdom of Heaven.

4. It is therefore vanity to seek after perishing riches, and to trust in
them. It is also vanity to hunt after honors, and to climb to high degree. It
is vanity to follow the desires of the flesh, and to labor for that, for which
thou may afterward suffer more grievous punishment. Vanity it is to wish to
live long, and to be careless to live well. It is vanity to mind only this
present life, and not to foresee those things which are to come, It is vanity
to set thy love on that which speedily passes away, and not to hasten thither,
where everlasting joy is permanent.

5. Call often to mind that Proverb, That the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor the ear filled with hearing. Endeavor therefore to withdraw thy heart from
the love of visible things, and to turn thy self to the invisible. For they
that follow their sensuality, do stain their own consciences, and loose the
favor of God.

CHAP. II. Of the humble conceit of our selves.
ALL Men naturally desire to know; but what avails knowledge without the fear
of God? Surely, an humble Husbandman that serves God, is better than a proud
Philosopher that neglecting himself laboreth to understand the course of the
heavens. Who so knows himself well, grows more mean in his own conceit, and
delights not in the praises of Men. If I understood all things in the world,
and were not in charity, what would that help me in the sight of God, who will
judge me according to my deeds?

2. Cease from an inordinate desire of knowing, for therein is much distraction
and deceit. The learned are willing to seem so to others, and to be accounted
wise. There be many things, which to know does little or nothing profit the
soul; and he is very unwise, that is intent upon other things than those that
may avail him for the welfare of his soul. Many words do not satisfy the soul;
but a good life comfort the mind, and a pure conscience gives great
assurance in the sight of God.

3. How much the more thou know, and how much the better thou understandest,
so much the more grievously shall thou therefore be judged, unless thy life be
also more holy. Be not therefore extolled in thine own mind for any Art or
Science which thou know, but rather let the knowledge given thee, make thee
more humble, and cautious. If thou think that thou understandest and know
much; know also that there be many things more which thou know not. Affect
not to be overwise, but rather acknowledge thine own ignorance. Why will thou
prefer thy self before others, since there be many more learned and skilful in
the Scripture than thou? If thou will know or learn any thing profitably;
desire to be unknown, and to be little esteemed of by Man.

4. The highest and most profitable reading is the true knowledge and
consideration of our selves. It is great wisdom and perfection to esteem
nothing of our selves, and to think always well and highly of others. If thou
should see another openly sin, or commit some heinous offense, yet ought
thou not to esteem the better of thy self; for thou know not how long thou
shall be able to remain in good estate. We are all frail, but thou ought to
esteem none more frail than thy self.

CHAP. III. Of the doctrine of truth.
HAppy is he whom Truth by it self does teach, not by figures and words that
pass away; but as it is in its self. Our own opinion and our own sense do often
deceive us, and it discerns little. What avails it to cavil and dispute about
dark and hidden things; whereas for being ignorant of them we shall not be so
much as reproved at the day of judgment? It is a great folly to neglect the
things that are profitable and necessary, and give our minds to that which is
curious and hurtful: we have eyes and see not.

2. And what have we to do with Genus and Species, the dry notions of
Logicians? He to whom the Eternal Word speaks, is delivered from a world of
unnecessary conceptions. From that one Word are all things, and all speak that
one; and this is the Beginning, which also speaks unto us. No Man without
that Word understands or judges rightly. He to whom all things are one, he
who reduces all things to one, and sees all things in one; may enjoy a quiet
mind, and remain peaceable in God. O God, who art the Truth, make me one with
thee in everlasting charity. It is tedious to me often to read and hear many
things: In thee is all that I would have and can desire. Let all Doctors hold
their peace; let all creatures be silent in thy sight; Speak thou alone unto me.

3. How much the more one is united within himself, and becomes inwardly
simple and pure, so much the more and higher things does he understand without
labor; for that he receives intellectual light from above. A pure, sincere,
and stable Spirit is not distracted, though it be employed in many works; for
that, it works all to the honor of God, and inwardly being still and quiet,
seeks not it self in any thing it does. Who hinders and troubles thee more than
the unmortified affections of thine own heart? A good and godly Man first of
all disposes within himself those things which he is outwardly to act; neither
do they draw him to the desires of an inordinate inclination, but he orders
them according to the prescript of right reason. Who has a greater combat,
than he that laboreth to overcome himself? This ought to be our endeavor, to
conquer our selves, and daily to wax stronger and to make a further growth in
holiness.

4. All perfection in this life has some imperfection mixed with it; and no
knowledge of ours is without some darkness. An humble knowledge of thy self is a
surer way to God, than a deep search after learning; yet learning is not to be
blamed, nor the mere knowledge of any thing whatsoever, to be disliked, it being
good in it self, and ordained by God; but a good conscience and a virtuous life
is always to be preferred before it. But because many endeavor rather to get
knowledge, than to live well; therefore they are often deceived, and reap either
none, or very slender profit of their labors.

5. O, if Men bestowed as much labor in the rooting out of vices, and planting
of virtues, as they do in moving of questions! Neither would there so much hurt
be done, nor so great scandal be given in the world; nor so much looseness be
practiced in religious Houses. Truly, at the day of Judgment we shall not be
examined what we have read, but what we have done; not how well we have spoken,
but how religiously we have lived. Tell me now, where are all those Doctors and
Masters, with whom thou wast well acquainted, whilst they lived and flourished
in learning? Now others possess their livings, and perhaps do scarce ever think
of them. In their lifetime they seemed something, but now they are not spoken
of.

6. O, how quickly does the glory of the world pass away! O that their life had
been answerable to their learning! then had their study and reading been to
good purpose. How many perish in this world by reason of vain-learning, who
take little care of the serving of God: And because they rather choose to be
great than humble, therefore they become vain in their imaginations. He is
truly great that is great in charity. He is truly great, that is little in
himself, and that makes no account of any height of honor. He is truly wise,
that accounts all earthly things as dung, that he may gain Christ. And he is
truly learned, that does the will of God, and forsakes his own will.

CHAP. IV. Of wisdom and providence in our actions.
WE must not give ear to every saying or suggestion, but ought warily and
leisurely to ponder things according to the will of God. But (alas) such is our
weakness that we rather often believe, and speak evil of others than good.
Those that are perfect Men do not easily give credit to every thing one tells
them; for they know that humane frailty is prone to evil, and very subject to
fail in words.

2. It is great wisdom not to be rash in thy proceedings, nor to stand stiffely
in thine own conceits; as also not to believe every thing which thou hear,
nor presently to relate again to others, what thou have heard or do believe.
Consult with him that is wise, and conscientious, and seek to be instructed by
a better than thy self, rather than to follow thine own inventions. A good life
makes a Man wise according to God, and gives him experience in many things.
How much the humbler one is in himself, and more subject and resigned unto God;
so much the more prudent shall he be in all his affairs, and enjoy greater
peace and quiet of heart.

CHAP. V. Of the reading of holy Scriptures.
TRuth, not eloquence, is to be sought for in holy Scripture. Each part of the
Scripture is to be read with the same Spirit wherewith it was written. We
should rather search after our spiritual profit in the Scriptures, than
subtilty of speech. We ought to read plain and devout books as willingly as
high and profound. Let not the authority of the Writer offend thee, whether he
be of great or small learning; but let the love of pure truth draw thee to
read. Search not who spoke this or that, but mark what is spoken.

2. Men pass away, but the truth of the Lord remains for ever. God speaks
unto us sundry ways, without respect of persons. Our own curiosity often
hinders us in reading of the Scriptures, when as we will examine and discuss
that which we should rather pass over without more ado. If thou desire to reap
profit, read humbly, plainly, and faithfully; never desire the estimation of
learning; Inquire willingly, and hear with silence the words of holy Men:
dislike not the parables of the Elders, for they are not recounted without
cause.

CHAP. VI. Of inordinate affections.
Whenever a Man desires any thing inordinately, he is presently disquieted
in himself. The proud and covetous can never rest. The poor and humble in
Spirit live together in all peace. The Man that is not yet perfectly dead to
himself, is quickly tempted and overcome in small and trifling things. The weak
in Spirit, and he that is yet in a manner carnal and prone to sensible things,
can hardly withdraw himself altogether from earthly desires. And therefore he
is often afflicted, when he goes about to withdraw himself from them; and
easily falls into indignation, when any opposition is made against him.

2. And if he has followed therein his appetite, he is presently disquieted
with remorse of conscience; for that he yielded to his passion which profits
him nothing to the obtaining of the peace he sought for. True quietness of
heart therefore is gotten by resisting our passions, not by obeying them. There
is no peace in the heart of a carnal Man, nor of him that is addicted to
outward things, but in the spiritual and fervent Man.

CHAP. VII. Of flying vain hope and pride.
HE is vain that puts his trust in Man, or Creatures. Be not ashamed to
serve others for the love of Jesus Christ; nor to be esteemed poor in this
world. Presume not upon thy self, but place thy hope in God. Do what lies in
thy power, and God will assist thy good affection. Trust not in thine own
knowledge, nor in the subtilty of any living Creature; but rather in the grace
of God, who helps the humble, and humbles those that are self-presuming.

2. Glory not in wealth if thou have it, nor in friends because potent; but in
God who gives all things, and above all desires to give thee himself. Extol
not thy self for the bigness or beauty of thy body, which is dissolved and
disfigured with a little sickness. Take not pleasure in thy natural gifts, or
wit, lest thereby thou displease God, to whom appertains all the good
whatsoever thou have by nature.

3. Esteem not thy self better than others, lest perhaps in the sight of God,
who knows what is in Man, thou be accounted worse than they. Be not proud of
well-doing; for the judgment of God is far different from the judgment of Men,
and that often offends him which pleases them. If there be any good in thee,
believe that there is much more in others, that so thou may conserve
humility within thee. It is no prejudice unto thee to debase thy self under all
Men; but it is very prejudicial to thee to prefer thy self before any one Man.
The humble enjoy continual peace, but in the heart of the proud is envy, and
frequent indignation.

CHAP. VIII. That too much familiarity is to be shunned.
LAy not thy heart open to every one; but treat of thy affairs with the wise
and such as fear God. Converse not much with young people, and strangers.
Flatter not the rich; neither do thou appear willingly before great personages.
Keep company with the humble and plain ones, with the devout, and virtuous; and
confer with them of those things that may edify. Be not familiar with any
Woman; but in general commend all good Women to God. Desire to be familiar with
God alone and his Angels, and fly the knowledge of Men.

2. We must have charity toward all, but familiarity with all is not
expedient. Sometimes it falls out, that a Person unknown to us, is much
esteemed of, from the good report given him by others; whose presence
notwithstanding is not grateful to the eyes of the beholders. We think
sometimes to please others by our company, and we rather distaste them with
those bad qualities which they discover in us.

CHAP. IX. Of obedience and subjection.
IT is a great matter to live in obedience, to be under a superior, and not to
be at our own disposing. It is much safer to obey, than to govern. Many live
under obedience, rather for necessity than for charity; such are discontented,
and do easily repine and murmur. Neither can they attain to freedom of mind,
unless they willingly and heartily put themselves under obedience for the love
of God. Go whither thou will, thou shall find no rest, but in humble subjection
under the government of a Superior. The imagination and change of places have
deceived many.

2. True it is, that every one willingly does that which agrees with his own
sense and liking; and is apt to affect those most that are of his own mind: But
if God be amongst us, we must sometimes for peace sake cease to adhere to our
own opinion. Who is so wise that he can fully know all things; Trust not
therefore to thine own opinion; but be willing to hear the judgment of others.
If that which thou think be not amiss, and yet thou submittest it for God,
and followest the opinion of another, it shall be better for thee.

3. I have often heard, that it is safer to hear and take counsel, than to give
it. It may also fall out, that each ones opinion may be good; but to refuse to
yield to others when as reason or cause requires it, is a sign of pride and
stiffness.

CHAP. X. Of the avoiding superfluity in words.
FLy the tumultuousness of the world as much as thou can; for the talk of
worldly affairs hinders very much, although they be recounted with sincere
intention; for we are quickly defiled, and enthralled with vanity. I could wish
that I had oftentimes held my peace, when I have spoken; and that I had not
been in company. Why do we so willingly speak and talk one with another, when
notwithstanding we seldom return to silence without hurt of conscience? The
cause why we so willingly talk, is for that by discoursing one with another, we
seek to receive comfort one of another, and desire to ease our mind overwearied
with sundry thoughts; and we very willingly talk and think of those things
which we most love and desire; or of those which we feel most contrary and
troublesome unto us.

2. But alas, oftentimes in vain, and to no end; for this outward comfort is
the cause of no small loss of inward and divine consolation. Therefore we must
watch and pray, lest our time pass away idly. If it be lawful and expedient
for thee to speak, speak those things that may edify. An evil custom and
neglect of our own good does give too much liberty to inconsiderate speech: Yet
religious discourses of spiritual things do greatly further our spiritual
growth, especially where persons of one mind and spirit be gathered together in
God.

CHAP. XI. Of the obtaining of peace, and zealous desire of profit in grace.
WE might enjoy much peace, if we would not busy our selves with the words and
deeds of other Men, which appertain nothing to our charge. How can he live long
in peace, that thrusts himself into the cares of others, that seeks occasions
abroad, that little or seldom recollecteth himself within his own breast?
Blessed are the single-hearted; for they shall enjoy much peace.

2. What is the reason, why some of the Saints were so perfect and
contemplative? Because they labored to mortify themselves wholly to all
earthly desires; and therefore they could with their whole heart give
themselves to God, and be free for holy retirement. We are too much led by our
passions, and too solicitous for transitory things. We also seldom overcome any
one vice perfectly, and are not inflamed with a fervent desire to grow better
every day; and therefore we remain cold and scarce warm in Religion.

3. If we were perfectly dead unto our selves, and not entangled within our own
breasts; then should we taste divine things, and have some acquaintance with
heavenly enjoyments. The greatest and indeed the whole impediment is, for that
we are not disentangled from our passions and lusts, neither do we endeavor to
enter into that path of perfection, which the Saints have walked before us; and
when any small adversity befalls us, we are too quickly dejected, and turn
our selves to humane comforts.

4. If we would endeavor like Men of courage to stand in the battle; surely we
should feel the favorable assistance of God from Heaven. For he who gives us
occasion to fight, to the end we may get the victory, is ready to succor those
that fight manfully, and do trust in his grace. If we esteem our progress in
religious life to confist only in some exterior observances, our devotion will
quickly be at an end. But let us lay the Axe to the root, that being freed from
passions, we may find rest to our souls.

5. If every year we would root out one vice, we should sooner become perfect
Men. But now oftentimes we perceive it goes contrary, and that we were better
and purer at the beginning of our conversion, than after many years of our
profession. Our fervor and profiting should increase daily; but now it is
accounted a great matter, if one can retain but some part of his first zeal. If
we would but a little force our selves at the beginning, then should we be able
to perform all things afterward with ease and delight.

6. It is a hard matter to leave that to which we are accustomed, but harder to
go against our own wills. But if thou do not overcome little and easy
things, how will thou overcome harder things? Resist thy inclinatiou in the
very beginning, and unlearn evil customs, lest perhaps by little and little
they draw thee to greater difficulty. O, if thou did but consider how much
inward peace unto thy self, and joy unto others thou should procure by
demeaning thy self well, I suppose thou would be more careful of thy
spiritual profiting.

CHAP. XII. Of the profit of adversity.
IT is good that we have sometimes some troubles and crosses; for they often
make a Man enter into himself, and consider that he is here in banishment, and
ought not to place his trust in any worldly thing. It is good that we be
sometimes contradicted; and that there be an evil or a lessening conceit had of
us; and this, although we do and intend well. These things help often to the
attaining of humility, and defend us from vain glory; for then we chiefly seek
God for our inward witness, when outwardly we be contemned by Men, and when
there is no credit given unto us.

2. And therefore a Man should settle himself so fully in God, that he need not
to seek many comforts of Men. When a good Man is afflicted, tempted, or
troubled with evil thoughts; then he understands better the great need he
has of God, without whom he perceives he can do nothing that is good. Then
also he sorroweth, lamenteth, and prays by reason of the miseries he
suffers. Then he is weary of living longer, and wishes that death would
come, that he might be dissolved and be with Christ. Then also he well
perceives, that perfect security and full peace cannot be had in this world.

CHAP. XIII. Of resisting temptations.
SO long as we live in this world we cannot be without tribulation and
temptation; for as it is written in Job, The life of Man is a warfare upon
earth. Every one therefore ought to be careful about his temptations, and to
watch in prayer, lest the Devil find an advantage to deceive him; who never
sleeps, but goes about seeking whom he may devour. No Man is so perfect and
holy, but has sometimes temptations; and we cannot be altogether without them.

2. Temptations are often profitable to Men, though they be troublesome and
grievous; for in them Man is humbled, purged, and instructed. All the Saints
have passed and profited through many tribulations and temptations; and they
that could not bear temptations, became reprobate, and fell away. There is no
order so holy, nor place so secret, where there be not temptations, or
adversities.

3. There is no Man that is altogether free from temptations whilst he lives
on earth; for in our selves is the root thereof, being born with inclination to
evil. When one temptation or tribulation goes away, another comes, and we
shall ever have something to suffer, because we are fallen from the state of
our felicity. Many seek to fly temptations, and do fall more grievously into
them. By flight alone we cannot overcome, but by patience and true humility we
become stronger than all our enemies.

4. He that only avoideth them outwardly, and does not pluck them up by the
roots, shall profit little; yea temptations will the sooner return unto him,
and he shall feel himself in a worse case than before. By little and little,
and by patience with longanimity (through Gods help) thou shall more easily
overcome, than with violence and thine own importunity. Often take counsel in
temptations, and deal not roughly with him that is tempted; but give him
comfort as thou would wish to be done to thy self.

5. The beginning of all evil temptations is inconstancy of mind, and little
confidence in God. For as a Ship without a stern is tossed to and fro with the
waves; so the Man that is negligent, and leaves his purpose is many ways
tempted. Fire tries Iron, and temptation a just Man. We know not oftentimes
what we are able to do, but temptations do show us what we are. We must be
watchful, especially in the beginning of the temptation; for the enemy is then
more easily overcome, if he be not suffered to enter the door of our hearts,
but be resisted without the gate at his first knock. Wherefore one said, Obsta
principiis, etc. Withstand the beginnings, for an after-remedy comes often too
late. First there comes to the mind a bare cogitation of evil, then a strong
imagination thereof, afterward delight and an evil motion, and then consent;
and so by little and little our wicked enemy gets entrance, whilst he is not
resisted in the beginning. And how much the longer one is negligent in
resisting, he becomes daily so much the weaker in himself, and the enemy
stronger against him.

6. Some suffer greatest temptations in the beginning of their conversion;
others in the latter end; others again are much troubled almost through the
whole time of their life. Some are but easily tempted according to the wisdom
and equity of the divine appointment, which weighs the states and deserts of
Men, and ordains all things for the welfare of his chosen ones.

7. We ought not therefore to despair when we are tempted, but so much the more
fervently to pray unto God, that he will vouchsafe to help us in all
tribulations; who surely, according to the words of St. Paul, will give with
the temptation such issue, that we may be able to bear it. Let us therefore
humble our selves under the hand of God in all temptations and tribulations,
for he will save and exalt the humble in spirit.

8. In temptations and afflictions, Man is proved how much he has profited;
and his reward is thereby the greater, and his graces do more eminently shine
forth. Neither is it any such great thing if a Man be devout and fervent, when
he feels no affliction; but if in time of adversity he bear himself
patiently, there is hope then of great proficiency in grace. Some are kept from
great temptations, and are often overcome in small ones which do daily occur;
to the end that being humbled, they may never presume on themselves in great
matters, who are baffled in so small things.

CHAP. XIV. Of avoiding rash judgment.
TUrn thine eyes unto thy self, and beware thou judge not the deeds of other
Men. In judging of others a Man laboreth in vain, often erreth, and easily
sins; but in judging and discussing of himself, he always laboreth
fruitfully. We often judge of things according as we fancy them; for private
affection bereaves us easily of true judgment. If God were always the pure
intention of our desire, we should not be so much troubled, through the
repugnance of our carnal mind.

2. But oftentimes something lurketh within, or else occurreth from without,
which draws us after it. Many secretly seek themselves in their actions, and
know it not. They seem also to live in good peace of mind, when things are done
according to their will and opinion; but if things succeed otherwise than they
desire, they are straightways troubled and much afflicted. The diversities of
judgments and opinions, cause oftentimes dissentions between religious and
devout Persons, between Friends and Countrymen.

3. An old custom is hardly broken, and no Man is willing to be led further
than himself can see. If thou do more rely upon thine own reason or industry,
than upon that power which brings thee under the obedience of Jesus Christ, it
will be long before thou become illuminated; for God will have us perfectly
subject unto him and that being enflamed with his love, we transcend the narrow
limits of humane reason.

CHAP. XV. Of works done of Charity.
FOr no worldly thing, nor for the love of any Man, is any evil to be done; but
yet, for the profit of one that stands in need, a good work is sometimes to
be intermitted without any scruple, or changed also for a better. For by doing
this, a good work is not lost, but changed into a better. The exterior work
without charity profits nothing; but whatsoever is done of charity, be it
never so little and contemptible in the sight of the world, it becomes wholly
fruitful. For God weighs more with how much love one works, than how much
he does. He does much, that loves much.

2. He does much, that does a thing well; he does well that rather serves
the community, than his own proper will. Oftentimes it seems to be charity,
and it is rather carnality; because natural inclination, self-will, hope of
reward, and desire of our own interest will seldom be away.

3. He that has true and perfect charity, seeks himself in nothing; but only
desires in all things that the glory of God should be exalted. He also envieth
none; because he affects no private good; neither will he rejoice in himself?
but wishes above all things to be made happy in the enjoyment of God. He
attributes nothing that is good to any Man, but wholly refers it unto God,
from whom as from the fountain all things proceed; in whom finally all the
Saints do rest as in their highest fruition. O, he that had but one spark of
true charity, would certainly discern that all earthly things be full of vanity.

CHAP. XVI. Of bearing with the defects of others.
THose things that a Man cannot amend in himself or in others, he ought to
suffer patiently, until God order things otherwise. Think that perhaps it is
better so for thy trial and patience, without which all our good deeds are not
much to be esteemed. Thou ought to pray notwithstanding when thou have such
impediments, that God would vouchsafe to help thee, and that thou may bear
them patiently.

2. If one that is once or twice warned will not give over, contend not with
him: but commit all to God, that his will may be fulfilled, and his name
honored in all his servants, who well knows how to turn evil into good.
Endeavor to be patient in bearing with the defects and infirmities of others,
of what sort soever they be; for that thy self also have many things which must
be suffered by others. If thou can not make thy self such an one as thou
would, how can thou expect to have another in all things to thy liking; We
would willingly have others perfect, and yet we amend not our own faults.

3. We will have others severely corrected, and will not be corrected our
selves. The large liberty of others displeases us; and yet we will not have
our desires denied us. We will have others kept under by strict laws; but in no
sort will our selves be restrained. And thus it appears, how seldom we weigh
our neighbor in the same balance with our selves. If all Men were perfect,
what should we have to suffer of our neighbor for God?

4. But now God has thus ordered it, that we may learn to bear one another
burden; for no Man is without fault, no Man but has his burden, no Man
sufficient of himself, no Man wise enough of himself; but we ought to bear with
one another, comfort one another, help, instruct, and admonish one another.
Occasions of adversity best discover how great virtue or strength each one
has; for occasions make not a Man frail, but do show what he is.

CHAP. XVII. Of a retired life.
THou must learn to break thy own will in many things, if thou will have peace
and concord with others. It is no small matter to dwell in a religious
community, and to converse therein without complaint, and to persevere therein
faithfully until death. Blessed is he that has there lived well, and ended
happily. If thou will persevere in grace as thou ought, and profit in
virtue, esteem thy self as a banished Man, and a pilgrim upon earth. Thou must
be contented for Christ's sake to be esteemed as a fool in this world, if thou
desire to lead an holy life.

2. The wearing of a religious habit, and shaving of the crown, do little
profit; but change of manners, and perfect mortification of passions, make a
true religious Man. He that seeks any thing else but God, and the salvation
of his soul, shall find nothing but tribulation and sorrow. Neither can he
remain long in peace, that laboreth not to be the least, and subject to all.

3. Thou came to serve, not to rule. Know that thou wast called to suffer and
to labor, not to be idle, or to spend thy time in talk. Here therefore Men are
proved as gold in the furnace. Here no Man can stand, unless he humble himself
with his whole heart for the love of God.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the examples of the holy Fathers.
COnsider the lively examples of the holy Fathers, in whom true perfection and
religion shined; and thou shall see how little it is, and almost nothing, which
we do now in these days. Alas, what is our life if it be compared to them! The
Saints and Friends of Christ served the Lord in hunger and thirst, in cold and
nakedness, in labor and weariness, in watchings and fastings, in prayer and
holy meditations, in persecutions and many reproaches.

2. O how many and grievous tribulations suffered the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and all the rest that endeavored to follow the steps of
Christ! They hated their lives in this world, that they might possess their
souls in everlasting life. O how strict and self-renouncing a life, led those
holy Fathers in the wilderness! How long and grievous tentations suffered they!
How often were they assaulted by the enemy! What frequent and fervent prayers
offered they to God! How rigorous an abstinence did they daily use! How great
zeal and care had they of their spiritual proficiency! How strong a combat had
they for the overcoming of their lusts! How pure and upright intentions kept
they unto God! In the day they labored, and in the night they attended to
continual prayer; although when they labored also, they ceased not from mental
prayer.

3. They spent all their time with profit; every hour seemed short for the
service of God; and by reason of the great sweetness they felt in
contemplation, they forgot the necessity of corporal refreshments. They
renounced all riches, dignities, honors, friends, and kinsfolk; they desired to
have nothing which appertained to the world; they scarce took things necessary
for the sustenance of life; they grieved to serve their bodies even in
necessity. They were poor in earthly things, but very rich in grace and
virtues. Outwardly they wanted, but inwardly they were refreshed with grace and
divine consolation.

4. They were strangers to the world, but near and familiar friends to God.
They seemed to themselves as nothing, and despicable to this present world; but
they were precious and beloved in the eyes of God. They were grounded in true
humility, lived in simple obedience, walked in love and patience: and therefore
they profited daily in spirit, and obtained great grace in Gods sight. They
were given for an example to all religious Men; and they should more provoke us
to endeavor after spiritual proficiencies, than the number of the lukewarm
livers should prevail to make us remiss.

5. O how great was the fervor of all religious persons in the beginning of
their holy institution! How great was their devotion to prayer! What ambition
to excel others in virtue! How exact discipline then flourished! How great
reverence and obedience, under the rule of their Superiors, observed they in
all things! Their footsteps yet remaining, do testify that they were indeed
holy and perfect Men; who fighting so valiantly trodd the world under their
feet. Now he is greatly accounted of, that transgresses not, and that can with
patience endure that which he has undertaken.

6 O the coldness and negligence of our times! that we so quickly decline from
our first fervor, and are come to that pass, that very sloth and coldness of
spirit makes our own life tedious unto us. Would to God the desire to profit
in virtue did not wholly sleep in thee, who have often seen the many examples
of devout and religious persons.

CHAP. XIX. Of the exercise of a good and religious person.
THe life of a good and religious person ought to be adorned with all virtues;
that he may inwardly be such as outwardly he seems to Men. And with reason
thou ought to be much more within, than is perceived without. For God
beholds us, whom we ought most highly to reverence wheresoever we are, and
walk in purity like Angels in his sight. Daily should we renew our purposes,
and stir up our selves to fervor, as though this were the first day of our
conversion; and to say, Help me my God in this my good purpose, and in thy holy
service; and grant that I may now this day begin perfectly; for that which I
have done hitherto is nothing.

2. According to our purpose shall be the success of our spiritual profiting;
and much diligence is necessary to him that will profit much. And if he that
firmly purposes often fails, what shall he do that seldom purposes any
thing, or with little resolvedness: It may fall our sundry ways that we leave
off our purpose; and the light omission of spiritual exercises seldom passes
without some loss to our souls. The purpose of just Men depends upon Gods
grace, and not upon their own wisdom; upon whom they always rely for whatsoever
they take in hand. For Man does purpose, but God does dispose; neither is the
way of Man in himself.

3. If an accustomed exercise be sometimes omitted, either for some act of
piety, or profit to my brother; it may easily afterward be recovered again.
But if out of a slothful mind, or out of carelessness we lightly forsake the
same, it is a great offense against God, and will be found to be prejudicial to
our selves. Let us do the best we can, we shall easily fail in many things; yet
must we always purpose some certain course, and especially against those vices
which do most of all molest us. We must diligently search into, and set in
order both the outward and the inward Man, because both of them are expedient
to our coming forward in godliness.

4. If thou can not continually recollect thy self, yet do it sometimes, at
the least once a day, to wit, at morning or at night. In the morning fix thy
good purpose; and at night examine thy self what thou have done, how thou have
behaved thy self in thought, word, and deed; for in these perhaps thou have
often offended both God and thy neighbor. Gird thy loins like a Man against the
vile assaults of the Devil; bridle thy riotous appetite, and thou shall be the
better able to keep under all the unruly motions of the flesh. Be thou at no
time idle altogether, but either reading, or writing, or praying, or
meditating, or endeavoring something for the public good. As for bodily
exercises they must be used with great discretion, neither are they to be
practiced of all Men alike.

5. The exercises that are not common are not to be exposed to public view;
for things private are practiced more safely at home. Nevertheless thou must
beware thou neglect not that which is common, and be more ready for what is
private. But having fully and faithfully accomplished all thou art bound and
enjoined to do, if thou have any spare time, betake thee to thy self, as thy
devotion shall require. All cannot use one kind of exercise, but one is more
convenient for this person, another for that; according to the seasonableness
of times also, diverse exercises are fitting. Some suit better with us on
working days, other on holy days; some we have need of in the time of
temptation, and of others in time of peace and quietness. Some we mind when we
are pensive, and other some when we rejoice in the Lord.

9. When chief Festivals draw near, good exercises are to be renewed, and the
prayers of holy Men more fervently to be implored. From feast to feast we
should make some good purpose, as though we were then to depart out of this
world, and to come to the everlasting feast in Heaven. Therefore ought we
carefully to prepare our selves at holy times, and to live more devoutly, and
to keep more exactly all things that we are to observe, as though we were
shortly at Gods hands to receive the reward of our labors.

7. But if it be deferred, let us think with our selves that we are not
sufficiently prepared, and unworthy yet of so great glory which shall be
revealed in us in due time; and let us endeavor to prepare our selves better
for our departure. Blessed is that servant (says St. Luke the Evangelist) whom
when his Lord comes he shall find watching: Verily I say unto you, he shall
make him ruler over all his goods.

CHAP. XX. Of the love of solitude and silence.
SEek a convenient time to retire into thy self, and meditate often upon Gods
benefits. Meddle not with curiosities; but read such things which may rather
yield compunction to thy heart, than busy thy head. If thou will withdraw thy
self from speaking vainly and from gadding idly, as also from harkening after
novelties and rumors, thou shall find leisure sufficient and convenient enough
to meditate on good things. The greatest Saints avoided the society of Men,
when they could conveniently, and did rather choose to serve God, and to live
to God, in secret.

2. One said, As often as I have been among Men, I returned home less a Man than
I was before; and this we find true, when we talk long together. It is easier
not to speak a word at all, than not to speak more words than we should: It is
easier for a Man to keep home than to keep himself well when he is abroad. He
therefore that intends to attain to the more inward and spiritual things of
Religion, must with Jesus depart from the multitude and press of people. No Man
safely does go abroad, but he which gladly can abide at home; no Man speaks
securely, but he that holds his peace willingly. No Man rules safely, but he
that is ruled willingly; no Man securely does command, but he that has learned
readily to obey,

3. No Man rejoices securely, unless he has within him the testimony of a
good conscience; and yet the security of the Saints was always full of the fear
of God. Neither were they less careful and humble in themselves, for that they
shined outwardly with grace and great virtues. But the security of the wicked
rises out of pride and presumption, and in the end it deceives them. Although
thou seem to be a good religious Man, or a devout Hermit, yet promise not thy
self security in this life.

4. Oftentimes those have fallen into greatest danger by overmuch
self-confidence, who have been in greatest esteem and account amongst Men.
Wherefore it is more profitable to many not to be altogether free from
temptations, but to be often assaulted, lest they should be too secure, and so
perhaps be puffed up with pride; or too freely give themselves to worldly
comforts. O how good a conscience should he keep, that would never seek after
transitory joy, nor entangle himself with the things of this world! O how great
peace and quietness should he possess, that would cut off all vain solicitude,
and think only upon divine things, and such as are profitable for his soul, and
would place all his confidence in God!

5. No Man is worthy of heavenly comfort, unless he have diligently exercised
himself in holy compunction. If thou desire true contrition of heart, enter
into thy closet, and shut out the tumults of the world, as it is written, In
your chambers be ye grieved. In thy closet thou shall find what abroad thou
shall often lose; the more thou visitest thy closet, the more thou will like
it; the less thou come thereunto, the more thou will loath it. If in the
beginning of thy amendment thou art content to remain in it, and keep it well,
it will afterward be to thee a dear friend, and a most pleasant comfort.

6. In silence and in stillness a religious soul advantageth her self and
learneth the mysteries of holy Scripture. There she finds rivers of tears,
wherein she may every night wash and cleanse her self; that she may be so much
the more familiar with her Creator, by how much the further off she lives from
all worldly disquiet. Who so therefore withdraws himself from his
acquaintance and friends, God with his holy Angels will draw near unto him. It
is better for a Man to live privately and to have regard to himself, than to
neglect his soul, though he could work wonders in the world. It is very
commendable in a religious person; seldom to go abroad, and to be unwilling to
see others.

7. Why art thou desirous to see that which is unlawful for thee to enjoy? For
the world passes away and the lusts thereof. Our sensual desires draw us to
rove abroad; but when the time is past, what carriest thou home with thee but a
burdened conscience and distracted heart? A merry going out brings commonly a
mournful return home; and a joyful evening makes many times a sad morning. So
all carnal joy enters gently, but in the end it bites and stings to death. What
can thou see elsewhere, which thou can not see here? Behold the Heaven and
the Earth and all the Elements; for of these are all things created.

8. What can thou see any where that can long continue under the Sun? Thou
think perchance to satiate thy self, but thou can never attain it.
Should thou see all things present before thine eyes, what were it but a vain
and unprofitable sight? Lift up thine eyes to God in the highest, and pray him
to pardon all thy sins and negligencies. Leave vain things to the vain, but be
thou intent upon those things which God commands thee. Shut thy door upon
thee, and call unto thee Jesus thy beloved. Stay with him in thy closet; for
thou shall not find so great peace any where else. Had thou not gone abroad
and hearkened to idle rumors, thou might the better have enjoyed quietness.
But since thou delightest sometimes to hear novelties, it is fit thou suffer for
it some unquietness of mind.

CHAP. XXI. Of compunction of heart.
IF thou will make any progress in godliness, keep thy self in the fear of God,
and affect not too much liberty. Keep in aw all thy senses under the severe rod
of discipline, and give not thy self over to foolish mirth. Give thy self to
compunction of heart, and thou shall gain much devotion thereby; compunction
brings much good, which dissoluteness is wont quickly to destroy. It is a
wonder that any Man can ever perfectly rejoice in this life, if he duly
consider his banishment, and thoroughly weigh the many perils wherewith his soul
is environed.

2. The levity of our minds and the little care we have of our faults, makes
us insensible of the sorrows of our souls; but oftentimes we vainly laugh, when
we have just cause to weep. There is no true liberty nor right gladness, but in
the fear of God accompanied with a good conscience. Happy is he that can avoid
all distracting impediments, and bring himself to the union of holy
compunction. Happy is he that can abandon all that may defile or burden his
conscience. Resist manfully; one custom overcomes another. If thou can let
others alone in their matters, they likewise shall not hinder thee in thine.

3. Busy not thy self in matters which appertain to others; neither do thou
trouble thy self with the affairs of thy Betters. Still have an eye to thy self
first, and be sure more especially to instruct thy self before all thy loving
friends. If thou have not the favor of Men, be not grieved at it; but take this
to heart, that thou do not carry thy self so warily and circumspectly as it
becomes the Servant of God, and a devout religious Man. It is better
oftentimes and safer that a Man has not many consolations in this life,
especially such as are agreeable to the flesh. But that we have not at all or
do very seldom taste divine consolations, the fault is ours, because we seek not
after compunction of heart, nor do altogether forsake the vain and outward
comforts of this world.

4. Know that thou art unworthy of divine consolation, and that thou have
rather deserved much tribulation. When a Man has perfect contrition, then is
the whole world grievous and bitter unto him. A good Man finds always
sufficient cause of mourning and weeping; for whether he consider his own or
his neighbors estate, he knows that none lives here without tribulation. And
by how much a Man looks narrowly into himself, by so much the more he
sorroweth. Our sins and wickednesses wherein we are so enwrapt, that we can
seldom apply our selves to heavenly contemplations, do Minister unto us matter
of most just sorrow and inward compunction.

5. Did thou oftener think of thy death, than of thy living long, there is no
question but thou would be more careful to amend. I believe thou would
willingly undergo any labor or sorrow in this world, and not be afraid of the
greatest austerity, if thou did consider within thy self the infernal pains
in the other world. But because these things enter not to the heart, and we
still love those things only that delight us, therefore it is we remain very
dull and cold in religion.

6. It is often our want of spirit which makes our miserable body so easily
complain. Pray therefore unto the Lord with all humility, that he will
vouchsafe to give thee the spirit of compunction. And say with the prophet,
Psalm. 80, Feed me, O Lord, with the bread of tears, and give me plenteousness
of tears to drink.

CHAP. XXII. Of the consideration of humane misery.
MIserable thou art wheresoever thou be, or whithersoever thou turnest, unless
thou turn thy self unto God. Why art thou troubled when things succeed not as
thou would or desire? For who is he that has all things according to his
mind? Neither I nor thou, nor any Man upon earth; there is none in this world,
be he King or Pope, without some tribulation or other. Who is then in the best
case or condition? even he who can suffer something for God.

2. Many weak and infirm ones can say, Behold what an happy life has such an
one, how wealthy, how great he is, in how great power and dignity! But lift up
thine eyes to the riches of heaven, and thou shall see that all the goods of
this life are nothing so to be accounted of. They are very uncertain, rather
burdensome than otherwise, because they are never enjoyed without carefulness
and fear. Man's happiness consists not in having abundance of wealth, but a
mean estate should content him; it is truly misery enough even to live upon the
earth. The more a Man would be spiritual, the more bitter to him is this
present life; because he sees more clearly and perceives more sensibly the
defects of humane corruption. For to eat and to drink, to sleep and to watch,
to labor and to rest, and to be subject to other necessities of nature is
doubtless a great misery and affliction to a religious Man, that would gladly
be free and delivered from all sin.

3. For the inward Man is much oppressed with these outward and corporal
necessities whilst we live in this world. Therefore the holy Prophet prays
with great devotion to be delivered from them, saying, Bring me, O Lord, out of
my necessities. But woe be to them that know not their own misery; and a greater
woe to them that love this miserable and corruptible life. And some there be so
much dote upon it, that although with great labor and pains they can scarce get
mere necessaries, yet could they live here always, they would care nothing at
all for the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. O how foolish are these and faithless in their hearts, who lie so deeply
sunk in the earth, that they can mind or relish nothing but carnal things! But
miserable wretches as they are, they shall in the end feel to their cost how
vile and how nothing that was which they loved: Whereas the Saints of God, and
all the devout friends of Christ respected not those things which pleased the
flesh, and which flourished in this life, but longed for the everlasting riches
with their whole hope and desire. Their whole desire was carried upward to
things durable and invisible, that the desire of things visible might not draw
them to things below. O Brother, lose not thy hope of coming forward in
godliness; there is yet time, the hour is not yet past

5. Why will thou defer thy good purpose from day to day? Arise and begin in
this very instant, and say, Now is the time to be doing, now is the time to be
striving, now is the best time to amend my self. When thou art ill at ease and
much troubled, then is the time of deserving best; thou must pass through fire
and water before thou come to the place of refreshing. Unless thou do
earnestly force thy self, thou shall never get the victory over sin; so long as
we carry about us this frail body of ours, we can never be without sin, or live
without trouble and sorrow. We would gladly be quiet and freed from all misery,
but seeing by sin we have lost our innocence, we have together with that lost
also the true felicity. Therefore it becomes us to have patience, and to wait
for the mercy of God, till this our iniquity be put away, and this mortality of
ours be swallowed up of life.

6. O how great is humane frailty, which is always prone to evil! to day thou
confessest thy sins, and to morrow thou committest the very same thou have
confessed. Now thou art purposed to look well unto thy ways, and within a while
thou so behavest thy self, as though thou had never any such purpose at all.
Good cause have we therefore to humble our selves, and never to have any great
conceit of our selves; because we are so frail and so inconstant. Besides, that
may quickly be lost by our own negligence, which by the grace of God and our
own great pains we have scarce at length obtained.

7. What will become of us in the end, who begin to wax cold so timely? Woe be
unto us, if we will so give our selves unto ease, as if all were in peace and
safety, when as yet there appears no sign of true holiness in our
conversations! We have need like young beginners to be newly instructed again
to good life, if happily there be any hope of our future amendment and
proficiency in spiritual things.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the meditation of Death.
THere will very quickly be an end of thee here, therefore see what will become
of thee hereafter. To day a Man, to morrow none; and out of sight, out of mind.
O the stupidity and hardness of Man's Heart, who thinks only upon the present,
and has no more care of what is to come! Thou should so order thy self in
all thy thoughts and actions, as if to day, yea this very moment, thou were
ready to depart. Had thou a clear conscience, thou would not greatly fear
death. It were better to avoid sin, than to fly death. If thou art not prepared
to day, how will thou be prepared to morrow? To morrow is uncertain, and how
know thou that thou shall live till to morrow?

2. What avails it to live long, when we are so little the better by long
living? Alas! length of days does oftener make our sins the greater, than our
lives the better. O that we had spent but one day well in this world! Many
there are who count how long it is since their conversion; and yet full slender
oftentimes is the fruit of amendment of life. If to die be accounted dreadful,
to live long may perhaps prove more dangerous. Happy is he that always has the
hour of his death before his eyes, and daily prepares himself for to die. If
at any time thou have seen another Man die, make account thou must also pass
the same way.

3. When it is morning, think thou may die before night, and when evening
comes, dare not to promise thy self the next morning. Be thou therefore always
in a readiness, and so lead thy life that death may never take thee unprepared.
Many die suddenly and when they look not for it; for the Son of Man will come
when we think not of his coming. When that last hour shall come, thou will
begin to have a far different opinion of thy whole life that is past, and be
exceeding sorry thou have been so careless and remiss

4. O how wise and happy is he that now laboreth to be such an one in his life,
as he wishes to be found at the hour of his death! A perfect contempt of the
world, a fervent desire to go forward in virtue, the love of discipline, the
painfulness of repentance, the readiness of obedience, the denying of our
selves, and the bearing any affliction for the love of Christ patiently, will
give us great confidence we shall die happily. Whilst thou art in health thou
may do much good, but when thou art sick, I see not what thou art able to
do. Few by sickness grow better and more reformed; as also they who wander much
abroad, seldom thereby become holy.

5. Trust. not to friends and kindred, neither do thou put off the care of thy
souls welfare till hereafter; for Men will sooner forget thee, than thou art
aware of. It is better to look to it betime, and do some good beforehand, than
to trust to other Men's courtesies. If thou be not careful for thy self now,
who will be careful for thee hereafter? The time that is now present is very
precious, now are the days of salvation, now is the acceptable time. But alas!
that thou should spend thy time so idly here, where thou might purchase
to live eternally hereafter. The time will come when thou shall desire one day
or hour to amend in, and I cannot say that it will be granted thee.

6. O beloved, from how great danger might thou deliver thy self! from how
great fear free thy self, if thou would be always mindful of death! Labor now
to live so, that at the hour of death thou may rather rejoice than fear;
learn now to die to the world, that thou may then begin to live with Christ.
Learn now to contemn all earthly things, that thou may freely go to Christ.
Chastise thy body now by repentance, that thou may then have assured
confidence.

7. Ah fool, why do thou think to live long, when thou can not promise to
thy self one day? How many have been deceived and suddenly snatched away? How
often do thou hear these reports, Such a Man is slain, another Man is
drowned, a third breaks his neck with a fall from some high place, this Man
died eating, and that Man playing? One perished by fire, another by the sword,
another of the plague, another was slain by Thieves. Thus death is the end of
all, and Man's life suddenly passes away like a shadow.

8. Who shall remember thee when thou art Dead? Do, do now my beloved,
whatsoever thou art able to do; for thou know not when thou shall die, nor
yet what shall befall thee after thy death. Now whilst thou have time heap unto
thy self everlasting riches, think on nothing but the salvation of thy soul,
care for nothing but the things of God. Make now friends to thy self by
honoring the Saints of God, and imitating their actions, that when thou failest
in this short life, they may receive thee into everlasting habitations.

9. Keep thy self as a stranger and pilgrim upon the earth, and as one to whom
the affairs of this world do nothing appertain. Keep thy heart free, and lifted
up to God, because thou have here no abiding city. Send thither thy daily
prayers and sighs together with thy tears, that after death thy spirit may with
much happiness pass to the Lord.

Amen.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Judgment, and the punishment of Sins.
IN all things have a special aim to thy end, and how thou will be able to
stand before that severe Judge to whom nothing is hid, who is not pacified with
gifts, nor admits any excuses, but will judge according to right and equity.
O wretched and foolish sinner, who sometimes fear the countenance of an
angry Man; what answer will thou make to God who knows all thy wickedness!
Why do thou not provide for thy self against that great day of judgment, when
no Man can excuse or answer for another, but every one shall have enough to
answer for himself? Now are thy pains profitable, thy tears acceptable, thy
groans audible, thy grief pacifieth God, and purges thy soul.

2. The patient Man has a great and wholesome purgatory, who though he receive
injuries, yet grieveth more for the malice of another, than for his own wrong;
who prays willingly for his adversaries, and from his heart forgiveth their
offenses; he delayeth not to ask forgiveness of whomsoever he has offended; he
is sooner moved to compassion than to anger; he often offers an holy violence
to himself, and laboreth to bring the body wholly into subjection to the
spirit. It is better to purge out our sins, and cut off our vices here, than to
keep them to be punished hereafter. Verily we do but deceive our selves through
an inordinate love of the flesh.

3. What is it that that infernal fire feeds upon, but thy sins? The more thou
sparest thy self now and followest the flesh, so much the more hereafter shall
be thy punishment, and thou storest up greater fuel for that flame. In what
thing a Man has sinned, in the same shall he be the more grievously punished.
There shall the slothful be pricked forward with burning goads, and the
gluttons be tormented with great hunger and thirst. There shall the luxurious
and lovers of pleasures be bathed in burning pitch and stinking brimstone, and
the envious like mad Dogs shall howl for very grief.

4. There is no sin but shall have its proper torment. There the proud shall be
filled with all confusion; the covetous shall be pinched with miserable penury;
one hour of pain there shall be more bitter than a Thousand years of the
sharpest penance here! There is no quiet, no comfort for the damned there; yet
here we have some intermission of our labors, and enjoy the comfort of our
friends. Be now sollicitous and sorrowful because of thy sins, that at the day
of judgment thou may be secure with the company of blessed souls. For then
shall the righteous with great boldness stand against such as have vexed and
oppressed them; then shall he stand to judge Men, who does now humbly submit
himself to the censures of Men. Then shall the poor and humble have great
confidence, but the proud Man shall be compassed with fear on every side.

5. Then will it appear that he was wise in this world, who had learned for
Christ to be a fool and despised. Then shall every affliction patiently
undergone delight us, when the mouth of iniquity shall be stopped up. Then
shall the devout rejoice, and the profane shall mourn. Then shall he more
rejoice that has beat down his own flesh, than he that has abounded in all
pleasure and delight. Then shall the poor attire shine gloriously, and the
precious robes seem vile and contemptible. Then shall be more commended the
poor cottage, than the gilded palace. Then will constant patience more avail
us, than all earthly power. Then simple obedience shall be preferred before all
worldly wisdom.

6. Then shall a good and clear conscience more rejoice a Man than the profound
learning of Philosophy. Then shall the contempt of riches weigh more than all
the worldings treasure. Then will thou be more comforted that thou have prayed
devoutly, than that thou have fared daintily. Then will thou be more glad thou
have kept silence, than that thou have talked much. Then will good works avail
more than many goodly words. Then a strict life and severe repentance will be
more pleasing than all earthly delights. Accustom thy self now to suffer a
little, that thou may then be delivered from more grievous pains. Prove
first here what thou can endure hereafter. If now thou can endure so
little, how will thou then be able to endure perpetual torments? If now a
little suffering make thee so impatient, what will hell fire do hereafter?
Assure thy self thou can not have two Paradises, it is impossible to enjoy
delights in this world, and after that to reign with Christ.

7. Suppose thou have hitherto lived always in honors and delights, what would
all this avail thee if thou were to die at this instant? All therefore is
vanity, but to love God and serve him only. For he that loves God with all his
heart, is neither afraid of death nor punishment, nor of judgment, nor of
hell; for perfect love gives secure access to God. But he that takes delight in
sin, what marvel is it if he be afraid, both of death and judgment? Yet it is
good, although love be not yet of force to withhold thee from sin, that at
least the fear of hell should restrain thee. But he that lays aside the fear
of God, can never continue long in good estate, but falls quickly into the
snares of the Devil.

CHAP. XXV. Of the zealous amendment of our whole life.
BE watchful and diligent in the service of God; and often bethink thy self
wherefore thou came hither, and why thou have left the world. Was it not that
thou might live to God, and become a spiritual Man? Be fervent then to come
forward, for shortly thou shall receive a reward of thy Labors; there shall not
be then any fear of sorrow in thy coasts. Labor but now a little, and thou
shall find great rest, yea perpetual joy to thy soul. If thou continuest
faithful and fervent in doing good, no doubt but God will be faithful and
liberal in rewarding thee. Thou ought to have a good hope for getting the
victory; but thou must not be secure lest thou wax either negligent or proud.

2. When one that was in great anxiety of mind, often wavering between fear and
hope, did once, being oppressed with grief, humbly prostrate himself in a
Church in prayer, and said within himself, O, if I knew that I should yet
persevere! he presently heard within him an answer from God, which said, What
if thou did know it, what would thou do? Do now what thou would do
then, and thou shall be secure. And being herewith comforted and strengthened,
he committed himself wholly to the will of God, and that noisome anxiety
ceased; neither had he any mind to search curiously any further, to know what
should befall him; but rather labored to understand what was the perfect and
acceptable will of God for the beginning and accomplishing of every good work.

3. Hope in the Lord, and do good, says the Prophet, and inhabit the land, and
thou shall be fed in the riches thereof. One thing there is that draws many
back from a spiritual progress, and the diligent amendment of their lives; viz.
The horror of the difficulty, or the labor of the combat. But they above others
improve most in virtue, that endeavor most to overcome those things which are
grievous and contrary unto them. For there a Man improveth more and obtains
greater grace, where he more overcomes himself and mortifieth himself in
spirit.

4. But all Men have not alike, to overcome and mortify; yet he that is
zealous and diligent, though he have more passions, shall profit more in
virtue, than another that is of a more temperate disposition, if he be less
fervent in the pursuit of virtue. Two things especially much further our
amendment, to wit, to withdraw our selves violently from that to which nature
is viciously inclined, and to labor earnestly for that virtue which we most
want. Be careful also to avoid with great diligence those things in thy self,
which do commonly displease thee in others.

5. Gather some profit to thy soul wheresoever thou be; so as if thou see or
hear of any good examples, stir up thy self to the imitation thereof. But if
thou see any thing worthy of reproof, beware thou do not the same. And if at
any time thou have done it, labor quickly to amend it. As thine eye observes
others, so art thou also noted again by others. O how sweet and pleasant a
thing it is, to see the Servants of Christ fervent and devout, endued with
virtuous and decent manners! And on the contrary, How pitiful and grievous a
thing it is, to see them that live in a dissolute and disordered sort, not
applying themselves to that for which they are called! O how hurtful a thing it
is, to neglect the good purposes of their vocation, and to busy themselves in
that which is not committed to their care!

6. Be mindful of the profession thou have made, and have always before the
eyes of thy soul the remembrance of thy Savior crucified. Thou have good cause
to be ashamed looking upon the life of Jesus Christ, seeing thou have as yet no
more endeavored to conform thy self unto him, though thou have walked a long
time in the way of God. A religious person that exercises himself seriously,
and devoutly in the most holy life and passion of our Lord, shall there
abundantly find whatsoever is necessary and profitable for him; neither shall
he need to seek any better thing, out of Jesus. O, if Jesus crucified would
come into our hearts, how quickly and fully should we be instructed in all
truth?

7. A fervent religious person takes and bears all well that is commanded
him; but he that is negligent and cold, has tribulation upon tribulation, and
on all sides is afflicted; for he is void of inward consolation, and is
forbidden to seek eternal comforts. A religious person that lives not
according to discipline, lies open to great mischief to the ruin of his soul.
He that seeks liberty and ease, shall ever live in disquiet; for one thing or
other will displease him.

8. O that we had nothing elso to do, but always with our mouth, and whole
heart to praise our Lord God! O that thou might never have need to eat, nor
drink, nor sleep; but might always praise God, and only employ thy self in
spiritual exercises; thou should then be much more happy than now thou art,
when for so many necessities thou art constrained to serve thy body. Would God
these necessities were not at all, but only the spiritual refections of the
soul, which, alas, we taste of too seldom.

9. When a Man comes to that estate, rhat he seeks not his comfort from any
creature, then does he begin perfectly to relish God. Then shall he be
contented with whatsoever does befall him in this world. Then shall he neither
rejoice in great matters, nor be sorrowful for small; but entirely and
confidently commit himself to God, who shall be unto him all in all; to whom,
nothing does perish, nor die, but all things do live unto him, and serve him at
a beck without delay.

10. Remember always thy end, and how that time lost never returns. Without
care and diligence thou shall never get virtue. If thou beginnest to wax cold,
it will be evil with thee; but if thou give thy self to fervor of spirit, thou
shall find much peace, and feel less labor, through the assistance of Gods
grace, and love of virtue. The fervent and diligent Man is prepared for all
things. It is harder to resist vices and passions, than to toil in bodily
labors. He that avoideth not small faults, by little and little falls into
greater. Thou will always rejoice in the evening, if thou spend the day
profitably. Be watchful over thy self, stir up thy self, warn thy self, and
whatsoever becomes of others neglect not thy self. The more holy violence thou
usest against thy self, the more shall be thy spiritual profiting.

Amen.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the inward Life.
THE Kingdom of God is within you, says the Lord. Turn thee with thy whole
heart unto the Lord, and forsake this wretched World, and thy Soul shall find
rest. Learn to despise exterior things, and to give thy self to the interior,
and thou shall perceive the Kingdom of God to come into thee. For the Kingdom
of God is peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, which is not given to the wicked.
Christ will come into thee, and show thee his consolations, if thou prepare for
him a worthy mansion within thee. All his glory and beauty is within, and there
he pleases himself. The inward man he often visits; and has with him sweet
discourses, pleasant solace, much peace, wonderful familiarity.

2. O faithful Soul, make ready thy heart for this Bridegroom, that he may
vouchsafe to come unto thee, and dwell within thee. For he says, If any love
me, he will keep my words, and we will come unto him, and will make our abode
with him. Give therefore admittance unto Christ, and deny entrance to all
others. When thou have Christ, thou art Rich, and he will suffice thee. He will
be thy faithful and provident helper in all things, so as thou shall not need
to trust in men. For men are soon changed, and quickly fail, but Christ
remains for ever, and stands firmly unto the end.

3. There is little trust to be put in frail and mortal man, though he be
profitable and dear unto thee: neither ought thou much to be grieved, if
sometimes he cross and contradict thee. They that to day take thy part, to
morrow may be against thee, and so on the contrary, they often turn like unto
the wind. Put all thy trust in God, let him be thy fear, and thy love: He will
answer for thee, and do in all things what is best. Thou have not here an
abiding City; and wheresoever thou be, thou art a stranger and pilgrim: Neither
shall thou ever have rest, unless thou be most inwardly united unto Christ.

4. Why do thou here gaze about, since this is not the place of thy rest? In
Heaven ought to be thy dwelling, and all Earthly things are to be looked upon as
it were by the way. All things pass away, and thou together with them. Beware
thou cleave not unto them, lest thou be entangled, and so do perish. Let thy
thought be on the Highest, and thy prayer directed unto Christ without ceasing.
If thou can not contemplate high and heavenly things, rest thy self in the
passion of Christ, and dwell willingly in his Holy wounds. For if thou fly
devoutly unto the wounds and precious marks of the Lord Jesus, thou shall feel
great comfort in tribulation: Neither will thou much care for being despised of
men, and wilt easily bear words of detraction.

5. Christ was also in the World despised of men, and in greatest necessity;
forsaken by his acquaintance and Friends in the midst of slanders. Christ would
suffer and be despised; and dare thou complain of any? Christ had Adversaries
and Backbiters; and will thou have all men thy Friends and Benefactors? For
what shall thy patience be crowned, if no adversity happen unto thee? If thou will suffer no adversity, how will thou be the Friend of Christ? Suffer with
Christ and for Christ, if thou desire to Reign with Christ.

6. If thou had but once perfectly entered into the secrets of Jesus, and
tasted a little of his ardent affection; then would thou not weigh thine own
commodity or discommodity, but would rather rejoice at slanders, when they
should chance to be cast upon thee: For the love of Jesus makes a man to
despise himself. A lover of Jesus and of the Truth, and a true inward
Christian, and one free from inordinate affections, can freely turn himself
unto God, and lift himself above himself in Spirit, and with the greatest
enjoyment of his Soul rest in God.

7. He that judges of all things as they are, and not as they are said and
esteemed to be, is truly wise, and taught rather by God than men. He that can
live inwardly, and make small reckoning of outward things, neither requires
places, nor attends times, for performing of Religious exercises. A Spiritual
man quickly recollecteth himself because he never pours out himself wholly to
outward things. He is not hindered by outward labor or business, which may be
necessary for the time: But as things fall out, so he frames himself unto
them. He that has well ordered and disposed all things within, cares not for
the strange and perverse carriages of men. So much is a man hindered and
distracted, by how much he draws external matters unto himself.

8. If all went well with thee, and if thou were all purged, all things would
fall out to thy good and advantage. But many things displease and often trouble
thee, because thou art not yet perfectly dead unto thy self, nor separated from
all earthly things. Nothing so defiles and intangleth the heart of man, as the
impure love to Creatures. If thou refuse outward comfort, thou will be able to
contemplate the things of Heaven, and often receive internal joy.

CHAP. II. Of humble submission.
REspect not much who is with thee, or who is against thee: But endeavor and
take care that God may be with thee in every thing thou do. Have a good
Conscience, and God will defend thee. For whom God will help, no malice of man
can hurt. If thou can hold thy peace and suffer, without doubt thou shall see
that our Lord will help thee. He knows the time and manner how to deliver
thee, and therefore thou ought to resign thy self unto him. It belongs to
God to help, and to deliver from all shame. Oftentimes it is very profitable
for the keeping us more humble, that others know and reprehend our faults.

2. When a man humbles himself for his faults, then he easily pacifieth
others, and quickly satisfies those that are offended with him. God protecteth
and delivers the humble; he loves and comfort the humble, unto the humble
man he enclineth himself; unto the humble he gives great Grace; and after his
humiliation he raises him unto Glory. Unto the humble he reveals his
secrets, and sweetly draws and inviteth him unto himself. The humble person
though he suffer shame, is yet in peace; for that he rests in God, and not in
the World. Do not think that thou have profited any thing, unless thou esteem
thy self inferior to all.

CHAP. III. Of a good and peaceable Man.
FIrst, keep thy self in peace, and then may thou pacify others. A peaceable
man does more good than he that is well Learned. A passionate man turns even
good into evil, and easily believes the worst. A good peaceable man turns
all things into good. He that is well in peace, is not suspicious of any. But
he that is discontented and troubled, is tossed with diverse suspicions: He is
neither quiet himself, nor suffers others to be quiet. He often speaks that
which he ought not to speak; and omitteth that which were more expedient for
him to do. He considers what others are bound to do, and neglects that
which he is bound to himself. First therefore have a careful zeal over thy
self, and then thou may justly show thy self zealous also of thy neighbors
good.

2. Thou know well how to excuse and color thine own deeds, and thou will
not receive the excuses of others. It were more meet that thou did accuse thy
self, and excusest thy Brother. If thou will be born withal, bear also with
another. Behold how far off thou art yet from true charity and humility, which
knows not how to be angry with any, or to be moved with indignation, but only
against himself. It is no great matter to converse with the good, and those
that are of a gentle disposition; for that is naturally pleasing to all, and
every one willingly enjoys peace, and loves those best that agree with him.
But to be able to live peaceably with unquiet, and perverse men, or with the
disorderly, or such as contradict us, is a great grace, and a very commendable
and manly deed.

3. Some there are that keep themselves in peace, and are in peace also with
others. And there are some that neither are in peace themselves, nor suffer
others to be in peace. Some there are who are troublesome to others, but always
more troublesome to themselves. And others there are that keep themselves in
peace, and labor to bring others unto peace. Our whole peace in this miserable
life consists rather in humble suffering, than in not feeling adversities. He
that can best tell how to suffer, will best keep himself in peace. He is a
conqueror of himself, a Lord of the world a friend of Christ, and heir of
Heaven.

CHAP. IV. Of a pure mind, and upright intention.
WIth Two wings, Man is lifted up from earthly vanities, that is, with
simplicity and purity. Simplicity ought to be in our intention: Purity in our
affection. Simplicity does intend God; Purity does apprehend and take him. No
good action will hinder thee, if thou be inwardly free from all inordinate
affection. If thou intend and seek nothing else but the will of God and the
good of thy neighbor, thou shall enjoy internal liberty. If thy heart were
sincere and upright, then every creature would be unto thee a looking glass of
life, and a book of holy doctrine. There is no creature so little and abject
that represents not the goodness of God.

2. If thou were inwardly good and pure, then thou would be well able to see
and understand all things without any impediment. A pure heart penetrateth
Heaven and Hell. Such as every one is inwardly, so he judges outwardly. If
there be joy in the world, surely a Man of a pure heart possesses it. And if
there be any where tribulation and affliction, an evil conscience best feels
it. As Iron put into the fire loses its rust, and becomes all bright like
fire, so he that wholly turns himself unto God, is purged from all fullness
and slothfulness, and is changed into a new Man.

3. When one begins to wax cold, then he is afraid of a small labor, and
willingly receives external comfort. But when he once begins to overcome
himself perfectly, and to walk manfully in the way of God; then he esteems
those things to be light, which before seemed grievous unto him.

CHAP. V Of the consideration of ones self.
WE cannot trust much to our selves, for that grace oftentimes and
understanding is wanting. There is but little light in us, and that which we
have we quickly lose by our negligence, and oftentimes we do not perceive our
own inward blindness. We often do evil, and excuse it worse. We are sometimes
moved with passion, and we think it to be Zeal. We reprehend small things in
others, and pass over greater matters in our selves. We quickly feel and weigh
what we suffer at the hands of others; but we mind not what others suffer from
us. He that does well and rightly considers his own works, will find little
cause to judge hardly of another.

2. The inward Christian prefers the care of himself before all other cares.
And he that diligently attends unto himself, does seldom speak much of
others. Thou will never be so inwardly religious, unless thou pass over other
Men's matters with silence, and look especially to thy self. If thou attend
wholly unto God and thy self, thou will be little moved with whatsoever thou
see abroad. Where art thou, when thou art not with thy self? And when thou
have run over all, what have thou then profited, if thou have neglected thy
self? If thou desire peace of mind and true union, thou must put all things
behind thee, and look only upon thy self.

3. Thou shall therefore profit much, if thou keep thy self free from all
temporal cares. Thou shall greatly decrease, if thou esteem any thing of this
world. Let nothing be greater unto thee, nothing acceptable, but only God
himself, or that which is of God. Esteem all comfort vain which thou receivest
from any creature. A soul that loves God, despises all things that be
inferior unto God. God alone is everlasting, and of infinite greatness, filling
all creatures; the souls solace, and the true joy of the heart.

CHAP. VI. Of the joy of a good conscience.
THe glory of a good Man, is the testimony of a good conscience. Have a good
conscience, and thou shall ever have joy. A good conscience is able to bear
very much, and is very cheerful in adversities. An evil conscience is always
fearful and unquiet. Thou shall rest sweetly, if thy heart do not reprehend
thee. Do thou never rejoice, but when thou have done well. Sinners have never
true mirth, nor feel inward peace; because there is no peace to the wicked,
says the Lord. And if they should say, We are in peace, no evil shall fall
upon us, and who shall dare to hurt us? Believe them not; for upon a sudden
will arise the wrath of God, and their deeds shall be brought to naught, and
their thoughts shall perish.

2. To glory in tribulation is no hard thing for him that loves; for to glory
so, is to glory in the Cross of our Lord. That glory is short, which is given
and received from Men. Sorrow always accompanies the glory of the world. The
glory of the good is in their consciences, and not in the tongues of Men. The
gladness of the just is of God, and in God; and their joy is of the truth. He
that desires true and everlasting glory, cares not for that which passes
away with time. And he that seeks temporal glory, or contemns it not from
his heart; shows himself but little to esteem of the glory of Heaven. He
enjoys great tranquillity and peace of mind, that cares neither for the
praises, nor dispraises of Men.

3. He will easily be content and pacified, whose conscience is pure. He is not
the more holy, though thou commend him; nor the more abject, though thou
dispraise him. What thou art, that thou art; neither can thou be said to be
greater, than what thou art in the sight of God. If thou consider what thou art
within thee, thou will not care what Men say of thee. Man sees in the face,
but God looks into the heart. Man considers the deeds, but God weighs the
intention. To do always well, and to esteem little of himself, is a sign of an
humble soul. To refuse to be comforted by any creature, is a sign of great
purity, and inward confidence.

4, He that seeks to witness for himself from without, does show that he has
wholly committed himself unto God. For not he that commends himself, the same
is approved (says blessed Paul) but whom God commends. To walk inwardly with
God, and not to be possessed with any outward affection, is the state of a
spiritual Man.

CHAP. VII. Of the love of Jesus above all things.
BLessed is he that understands what it is to love Jesus, and to despise
himself for Jesus. Thou ought to leave thy beloved, for thy beloved; for
that Jesus will be beloved alone above all things. The love of things created
is deceitful and unconstant; the love of Jesus is faithful and constant. He
that cleaves unto creatures, shall fall with that which is subject to fall; He
that embraces Jesus, shall stand firmly for ever. Love him, and keep him for
thy friend, who when all go away, will not forsake thee, nor suffer thee to
perish in the end. Thou must once be left of all, whether thou will or no.

2. Keep close to Jesus both in life and death, and commit thy self unto his
trust, who, when all fail, can alone help thee. Thy beloved is of that nature,
that he will not admit of a corrival; but will have thy heart alone, and sit
like a King in his own throne. If thou could purge thy self perfectly of all
creatures, Jesus would willingly dwell with thee. Whatsoever thou reposest in
Men, out of Jesus, is all no better than lost. Trust not nor rely upon a reed
full of wind; for that all flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof shall
wither away as the flower of the field.

3. Thou shall quickly be deceived, if thou look only to the outward show of
Men. And if in them thou seek thy comfort and profit, thou shall often feel
loss. If thou seek Jesus in all things, thou shall surely find Jesus. But if
thou seek thy self, thou shall also find thy self, but to thine own harm.
For Man does more hurt himself if he seek not Jesus, than the whole world and
all his adversaries could annoy him.

CHAP. VIII. Of familiar conversation with Jesus.
WHen Jesus is present, all is well, and nothing seems difficult; but when
Jesus is absent, every thing is hard. When Jesus speaks not inwardly unto us,
our comfort is nothing worth; but if Jesus speak but one word, we feel much
consolation. Did not Mary presently rise from the place where she wept, when
Martha said unto her, The Master is come, and calls for thee? Happy is the
hour when Jesus calls from tears to spiritual Joy. How dry and hard art thou
without Jesus! How foolish and vain, if thou desire any thing out of Jesus! Is
not this a greater loss, than if thou should lose the whole world?

2. What can the world profit thee without Jesus? To be without Jesus is a
grievous Hell; and to be with Jesus is a sweet Paradise. If Jesus be with thee,
no enemy can hurt thee. He that finds Jesus, finds a good treasure, yea a
good above all goods: And he that loses Jesus, loses too much, and more than
the whole world. He is most poor that lives without Jesus; and he is most rich
that is well with Jesus.

3. It is a piece of great skill to know how to converse with Jesus, and great
wisdom to know how to keep Jesus. Be humble and peaceable, and Jesus will be
with thee. Be devout and quiet, and Jesus will stay with thee. Thou may soon
drive away Jesus and lose his grace, if thou turn aside to outward things. And
if thou should drive him from thee, and lose him, unto whom will thou fly,
and what friends will thou then seek? Without a friend thou can not well
live; and if Jesus be not above all a friend unto thee, thou shall be too
sorrowful and desolate. Thou do therefore foolishly, if thou do trust or
rejoice in any other. It is better for thee to have all the world against thee,
than Jesus offended with thee. Amongst all things therefore that be dear unto
thee, let Jesus alone be thy chiefest beloved.

4. Love all for Jesus, but Jesus for himself. Jesus Christ alone is singularly
to be beloved; who alone is found to be good and faithful above all friends.
For him, and in him, let as well friends as foes be dear unto thee, and all
these are to be prayed for, that all may know and love him. Never desire to be
singularly commended or beloved, for that appertains only unto God, who has
none like unto himself. Neither do thou desire that the heart of any should be
set on thee, nor do thou set thy heart on the love of any; but let Jesus be in
thee, and in every good Man

5. Be pure and free within, and entangle not thy heart with any creature. Thou
ought to be as it were naked, and to carry a pure heart to God, if thou
would be free to consider and see how sweet the Lord is. And truly, unless
thou be prevented and drawn by his grace, thou shall never attain to that
happiness to forsake and cast off all, that thou alone may be united to him
alone. For when the grace of God comes unto a Man, then he is made able for
all things. And when it goes away, he is poor and weak, and as it were left
only unto the lash and scourge of every adversary. In this thou ought not to
be dejected, nor despair; but to resign thy self with all indifferency unto the
will of God, and to bear all things that befall thee for the glory of Christ;
for after winter follows summer, after night comes day, and after a tempest,
fair weather.

CHAP. IX. Of the want of all comfort.
IT is no hard matter to despise humane comfort, when we have divine. It is
much and very much, to be able to want both humane and divine comfort; and for
the Glory of God, to be willing to endure desolation of heart; and to seek
himself in nothing, nor to regard his own merit. What great matter is it, if
thou be cheerful and devout at the coming of grace? This hour is wished for of
all Men. He rides easily enough whom the grace of God carries. And what
marvel if he feel not his burden, who is born up by the Almighty, and led by
the sovereign guide?

2. We are always willing to have something for our comfort; and a Man does
hardly put off and forsake himself. The holy martyr St. Laurence overcame the
world with his Prelates because he despised whatsoever seemed delightsom in the
world, and for the love of Christ patiently suffered Sixtus to be taken from
him, whom he most dearly loved. He overcame therefore the love of Man by the
love of the Creator; and he rather chose the divine good pleasure, than humane
comfort. See thou also learn to forsake some necessary thing, and a beloved
friend, for the love of God. Be not grieved when thou art forsaken by a friend,
knowing that we all at length must be separated one from another.

3. A Man must fight long, and mightily with himself, before he get the full
victory over himself, and be able to draw his whole heart in to God. When a Man
trusts in himself, he easily slideth unto humane comforts, but a true lover
of Christ, and a diligent follower of virtue, betakes not himself to humane
comforts, nor seeks such sensible sweetnesses, but rather hard exercises, and
to sustain great labors for Christ.

4. When therefore spiritual comfort is given thee from God, receive it
thankfully; but know that it is the gift of God, not any desert of thine. Be
not puffed up, joy not too much, neither do thou presume vainly; but be rather
the more humble for that gift, and more wary and sollicitous in all thine
actions; for that hour will pass away, and temptation will succeed. When
consolation is taken from thee, despair not presently; but with humility and
patience wait for the Heavenly visitation; for God is able again to give thee
greater consolation. This is not new nor strange unto them that have experience
in the way of God; for the great Saints and ancient prophets had oftentimes
experience of such kind of vicissitudes.

5. For which cause one under the enjoyment of divine favor, said, I said in my
prosperity, I shall never be moved. But in the want of this, he adds what he
found in himself; saying, thou turn'dst thy face from me, and I became
troubled. Yet does he not despair in the midst of these changes, but more
earnestly prays unto the Lord, and says, Unto thee, O Lord, will I cry, and
I will pray unto my God. Lastly, he receives the fruit of his prayer, and
witnesses that he was heard, saying, The Lord has heard me, and taken pity on
me; the Lord is become my helper. But wherein? Thou have turned, says he, my
sorrow into joy, and thou have compassed me about with gladness. If great
Saints have been so dealt withal, we that are weak and poor ought not to
despair, if we be sometimes fervent and sometimes cold; for the Spirit comes
and goes, according to the good pleasure of his will. For which cause blessed
Job says, Thou visitest him early in the morning, and suddenly thou provest
him.

6. Whereupon therefore can I hope, or wherein ought I to trust, but in the
great mercy of God alone, and in the only hope of heavenly grace? For whether I
enjoy the presence of good Men, or religious brethren, or faithful friends, or
holy Books, or excellent treatises, or sweet songs and hymns, all these help
little, and have little savor, when grace forsakes me, and I remain left in
mine own poverty. At such time there is no better remedy than patience, and the
ordering of my self according to the will of God.

7. I never found any so religious and devout, that has not had sometimes a
withdrawing of grace, or felt not some decrease of zeal. There was never Saint
so highly rapt, and illuminated who first or last was not tempted. For he is
not worthy of the high contemplation of God, who has not been exercised with
some tribulation for Gods sake. For temptation going before, is wont to be a
sign of ensuing comfort. And unto those that are proved by temptations,
heavenly comfort is promised. He that shall overcome, says he, I will give him
to eat of the Tree of life.

8. But divine comfort is given, that a Man may be stronger to bear
adversities. There follows also temptation, lest he should wax proud of any
good. The Devil sleeps not, neither is the flesh as yet dead; therefore cease
not to prepare thy self to the battle; For on thy right hand and on thy left
are enemies that never rest.

CHAP. X. Of thankfulness for the grace of God.
WHy seek thou rest, since thou art born to labor? Dispose thy self to
patience rather than to comfort, and to the bearing of the Cross, rather than
to gladness. What secular person is there that would not willingly receive
spiritual joy and comfort, if he could always have it? For spiritual comforts
exceed all the delights of the world, and pleasures of the flesh. All worldly
delights are either vain or unclean; but spiritual delights are only pleasant
and honest, sprung from virtue, and infused by God into pure minds. But no Man
can always enjoy these divine comforts according to his desire; for the time of
temptation is not long away.

2. False freedom of mind, and great trust of our selves is very contrary to
heavenly visitations. God does well in giving the grace of comfort; but Man
does evil in not returning all again unto God with thanksgiving. And therefore
the gifts of grace cannot flow in us, because we are not thankful to the giver,
and return them not wholly to the head-fountain. For grace ever attends him
that is thankful; and from the proud shall be taken that which is wont to be
given to the humble.

3. I desire not that consolation that takes from me compunction; nor do I
affect that contemplation which leads to haughtiness of mind. For all that is
high, is not holy; nor all that is sweet, good; nor every desire, pure; nor
every thing that is dear unto us, is grateful to God. I do willingly accept of
that Grace, whereby I may ever become more humble and affected with an holy
fear, and be made more ready to forsake my self. He that is taught by the gift
of grace, and schooled by the scourge of the withdrawing thereof, will not dare
to attribute any good to himself, but will rather acknowledge himself poor and
naked. Give unto God that which is Gods, and ascribe unto thy self that which
is thine own; that is, give thanks to God for his grace; and acknowledge that
nothing is to be attributed to thee, but only sin and the punishment due
thereunto.

4. Set thy self always in the lowest place and the highest shall be given
thee; for the highest consist not without the lowest. The chiefest Saints
before God, are the least in their own judgments; and how much the more
glorious, so much the humbler within themselves. Those that are full of truth
and Heavenly glory, are not desirous of vain glory. Those that are firmly
settled and grounded in God, can no way be proud. And they that ascribe all unto
God, what good soever they have received, seek not glory one of another, but
would have that glory which is from God alone; and desire above all things to
praise God in himself, and in all the Saints, and always tend unto the same.

5. Be therefore thankful for the least gift, so shall thou be meet to receive
greater. Let the least be unto thee also as the greatest, and the most
contemptible as an especial gift. If thou consider the worth of the giver, no
gift will seem little, or of too mean esteem. For it is not little that is
given by the most high God. Yea, if he should give punishment and stripes, it
ought to be grateful; for that he does it always for our welfare, whatsoever he
permits to happen unto us. He that desires to keep the grace of God, let
him be thankful for the grace given, and patient for the taking away thereof.
Let him pray that it may return. Let him be wary and humble; lest he lose it.

CHAP. XI. How few the lovers of the Cross of Christ are.
JEsus has now many lovers of his Heavenly Kingdom, but few bearers of his
Cross. He has many desirous of comfort, but few of tribulation. He finds
many companions of his table, but few of his abstinence. All desire to rejoice
with him, few will suffer any thing for him, or with him. Many follow Jesus
unto the breaking of Bread; but few to the drinking of the Cup of his passion.
Many reverence his miracles, few follow the ignominy of his Cross. Many love
Jesus as long as adversities happen not. Many praise and bless him, as long as
they receive any comforts from him. But if Jesus hide himself, and leave them
but a while; they fall either into complaint, or into too much dejection of
mind.

2. But they that love Jesus for Jesus, and not for some comfort of their own,
bless him in all tribulation and anguish of heart, as well as in the greatest
comfort. And although he should never give them comfort, they notwithstanding,
would ever praise him, and always give him thanks.

3. O how powerful is the pure love of Jesus, which is mixed with no self-love,
nor proper interest! Are not all those to be called hirelings, that ever seek
comforts? Do they not show themselves to be rather lovers of themselves than of
Christ, that always think of their own commodity and gain? Where may one be
found that will serve God freely?

4. It is hard to find any one so spiritual that is stripped of the love of all
earthly things. For where is any one to be found that is indeed poor in spirit,
and free from all affection of creatures? He Is a Jewel of such price as is
scarce to be met with in these parts. If a Man should give all his wealth, yet
is it nothing. And if he should outwardly express great repentance, yet it is
little. And if he should attain to all knowledge, he is yet afar off. And if he
should be of great virtue, and very fervent devotion, yet there is much
wanting; to wit, one thing, which is most necessary for him. What is that? that
leaving all, he forsake himself, and go wholly from himself, and retain nothing
of self-love; And when he has done all that he knows to be done, let him
think that he has done nothing.

5. Let him not weigh that much which might be much esteemed; but according to
truth let him affirm himself to be an unprofitable servant, as our Savior has
said, when you shall have done all things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants. Then may he be truly poor and naked in spirit, and say
with the Prophet, I am alone and poor; yet no man richer, no Man more powerful,
no Man more free than he that can leave himself and all things, and set himself
in the lowest place.

CHAP. XII. Of the high way of the holy Cross.
UNto many this speech seems hard, Deny thy self, take up thy Cross, and
follow Jesus. But it will be much harder to hear that last word. Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire. For they that now willingly hear and follow
the word of the Cross, shall not then fear to hear the sentence of everlasting
damnation. This sign of the Cross shall be in Heaven; when our Lord shall come
to judgment. Then all the servants of the Cross, who in their lifetime
conformed themselves unto Christ crucified, shall draw near unto Christ the
Judge with great confidence.

2. Why therefore fear thou to take up the Cross which leads thee to a
Kingdom? In the Cross is salvation, in the Cross is life, in the Cross is
protection against our enemies, in the Cross is infusion of Heavenly sweetness,
in the Cross is strength of mind, in the Cross is joy of spirit, in the Cross
is the height of virtue, in the Cross is the perfection of sanctity. There is
no salvation of the soul, nor hope of everlasting life but in the Cross. Take
up therefore thy Cross and follow Jesus, and thou shall go into life
everlasting. He is gone before, bearing his Cross, and is dead for thee on the
Cross; that thou may also bear thy Cross and desire to die on the Cross with
him. For if thou die with him, thou shall also live with him. And if thou be
his companion in pain, thou shall be partaker ith him also in glory.

3. Behold in the Cross all does consist and all lies in our dying upon it;
for there is no other way unto life, and unto true inward peace, but the way of
the Holy Cross, and of daily mortification. Go where thou will, seek whatsoever
thou will, thou shall not find a higher way above, nor a safer way below, than
the way of the Holy Cross. Dispose and order all things according to thy will
and judgment; yet thou shall ever find, that of necessity thou must suffer
somewhat either willingly or against thy will, and so thou shall ever find the
Cross. For either thou shall feel pain in thy body, or in thy soul thou shall
suffer tribulation of spirit.

4. Sometimes thou shall be forsaken of God, sometimes thou shall be troubled
by thy neighbors; and which is more, oftentimes thou shall be irksome to thy
self; neither can thou be delivered or eased by any remedy or comfort; but so
long as pleases God, thou ought to bear it. For God will have thee learn to
suffer tribulation without comfort; and that thou subject thy self wholly to
him, and become more humble by tribulation. No Man has so cordial a feeling of
the passion of Christ, as he who has suffered the like himself. The Cross
therefore is always ready, and every where waits for thee. Thou can not
escape it whithersoever thou runnest; for wheresoever thou go, thou carriest
thy self with thee, and shall ever find thy self; both above and below, without
and within, which way soever thou do turn thee, every where thou shall find
the Cross; and every where of necessity thou must have patience, if thou will
have inward peace, and enjoy an everlasting Crown.

5. If thou bear the Cross willingly, it will bear thee, and lead thee to thy
desired end, to wit, where there shall be an end of suffering, though here
there shall not. If thou bear it unwillingly, thou make for thy self a new
burden, and encreasest thy load, and yet notwithstanding thou must bear it. If
thou cast away one Cross, without doubt thou shall find another, and that
perhaps a more heavy one.

6. Think thou to escape that which no Man could ever avoid? Which of the
Saints in the world was without crosses, and tribulation? Verily Jesus Christ
our Lord was never one hour without pain of suffering, so long as he lived,
Christ (says he) ought to suffer, and arise again from the dead, and so to
enter into his glory, Luke 24. and how do thou seek any other way than this
high way which is the way of the Holy Cross?

7. The whole life of Christ was a Cross and Martyrdom; and do thou seek rest
and joy? Thou art deceived, thou art deceived if thou seek any other thing
than to suffer tribulations; for this whole mortal life is full of miseries,
and environed on every side with Crosses. And how much the more one has
profited in spirit, so much the heavier crosses he oftentimes finds, for the
love he bears to God increases the grief which he endures for his
banishment.

8. But yet this Man, though so many ways afflicted, is not without some
refreshing comfort, for that he perceives much benefit to accrue unto him by
the bearing of his Cross. For whilst he willingly puts himself under it,
all the burden of tribulation is turned into the confidence of divine comfort.
And how much the more the flesh is wasted by affliction, so much the more is
the spirit strengthened by inward grace. And sometimes he is so comforted with
the desire of tribulation and adversity, for the love of conforming himself to
the Cross of Christ, that he would not wish at any time to be without sorrow
and tribulation; because he believes that so much the more acceptable he shall
be unto God, how much the more, and more grievous things he can suffer for him.
This is not the power of Man, but it is the grace of Christ, that can, and does
so much in frail flesh; that what naturally it always abhors and flies,
that by fervor of spirit, it encounters with delight.

9. It is not according to Man's inclination to bear the Cross, to chastise and
subdue the body, to fly honors, to suffer contumelies with a willing heart, to
despise himself and to wish to be despised, to bear all adversities and
damages, and to desire no prosperity in this world. If thou considerest thy
self, thou shall be able to perform no such matter of thy self. But if thou
trustest in the Lord, strength shall be given thee from Heaven, and the world
and flesh shall be made subject to thy command. Neither shall thou fear thy
enemy the Devil, if thou be armed with faith, and bear the Cross of Christ.

10. Set therefore thy self, like a good and faithful servant of Christ to bear
manfully the Cross of thy Lord, who was crucified for thee out of love. Prepare
thy self to bear many adversities and diverse kinds of troubles in this
miserable life; for so it will be with thee, wheresoever thou be, and so surely
thou will find it, wheresoever thou hide thy self. So it must be, and there is
no remedy or means to avoid tribulation and sorrow, but to bear them. Drink of
the Cup of our Lord heartily, if thou will be his friend; and desire to have
part with him. As for comforts, leave them to God; let him do therein as shall
best please him. Set thou thy self to suffer tribulations, and account them the
greatest comforts; for that the sufferings of this life are not worthy of the
glory which is to come, although thou alone could suffer them all.

11. When thou shall come to this estate, that tribulation shall seem sweet and
savory unto thee for Christ; then thou may think it is well with thee, for
thou have found a Paradise upon earth. As long as it is grievous to thee to
suffer, and that thou desire to fly it; so long shall thou be ill at ease;
and the tribulation thou flyest will follow thee every where.

12. If thou do set thy self to that thou ought, to wit, to suffer, and to
die to thy self, it will quickly be better with thee, and thou shall find
peace. Although thou should have been rapt even unto the third Heaven with
Paul, thou art not for this secured that thou shall suffer no adversity. I
(says Jesus) will show him how great things he must suffer for my name. It
remains therefore, that thou suffer, if thou will love Jesus, and perpetually
serve him.

13. O that thou were worthy to suffer something for the name of Jesus! how
great glory would it be unto thee, what joy to all the Saints of God, how great
edification also to thy neighbor! For all do commend patience; though few
desire to suffer. With great reason thou ought to be willing to suffer a
little for Christ; since many suffer far greater things for the world.

14. Know for certain that thou ought to lead a dying life. And how much the
more every one dies to himself, so much the more does he begin to live to God.
No Man is fit to attain unto Heavenly things, unless he submit himself to the
bearing of adversities for Christ. Nothing is more grateful unto God, nothing
more wholesome to thee in this world, than to suffer willingly for Christ. And
if it were in thy choice, thou should rather wish to suffer Adversities for
Christ, than to enjoy the delight of many comforts; because hereby thou
should be more like unto Christ, and more conformable to all the Saints. For
our worthiness, and the proficiency of our spiritual estate consists not in
many sweetnesses and comforts, but rather in suffering great afflictions and
tribulation.

15. If there had been any better thing, and more profitable to the health of
Man than suffering, surely Christ would have showed it by word and example. But
he plainly exhorts all the Disciples that followed him, and all that desire
to follow him, to the bearing of the Cross, and says, If any will come after
me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross, and follow me. So that when we
have read and searched all, let this be the last conclusion, That by many
tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. 1. Of the inward Speech of Christ unto a Faithful Soul.
I Will hear what the Lord God will speak in me. Blessed is the soul that
hears the Lord speaking in her, and receives from his mouth the word of
comfort. Blessed are those ears that receive the sound of the divine voice, and
listen not to the whisperings of the world. Blessed indeed are those ears that
hearken not to the voice which sounds outwardly, but unto the truth which
teaches inwardly. Blessed are the eyes that are shut to outward things, but
open to those things that are internal. Blessed are they that enter into the
inward things, and endeavor to prepare themselves more and more by daily
exercises to the attaining of Heavenly secrets. Blessed be they that delight to
converse with God, and rid themselves of all worldly impediments.

2. Consider these things, my soul, and shut up the door of thy sensual
desires, that thou may hear what thy Lord God speaks in thee. Thus says
thy beloved, I am thy safety, thy peace, and thy life; Keep thy self with me,
and thou shall find peace. Leave all transitory things, and seek those that be
everlasting. What are all temporal things, but deceiving snares? And what do
all creatures avail thee, if thou be forsaken by the Creator? Forsake therefore
all earthly things and labor to please thy Creator, and be Faithful unto him,
that thou may attain unto the true happiness.

CHAP. II. That truth speaks inwardly without noise of words.
CHristian. Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: I am thy servant, grant me
unsterstanding, that I may know thy testimonies. Incline my heart to the words
of thy mouth. Let thy speech distill as the dew upon my soul. The Children of
Israel in times past said unto Moses, Speak thou unto us, and we will hear
thee: Let not the Lord speak unto us, lest we die. Not so Lord, not so, I
beseech thee. But rather with the Prophet Samuel, I humbly and earnestly
entreat, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. Let not Moses speak unto me, nor
any of the prophets, but do thou rather speak, my Lord God, the inspirer and
enlightner of all the Prophets; for thou alone without them can perfectly
instruct me, but they without thee can profit nothing.

2. They indeed may sound forth words, but they cannot give spirit and life;
they speak mavelous well, but if thou be silent, they inflame not the heart.
They may teach the letter, but thou openest the sense. They bring forth
mysteries, but thou unlockest the meaning of sealed things. They declare thy
commandments, but thou helpest to fulfill them. They show the way, but thou
give strength to walk in it. They work only exteriorly, but thou instructest
and enlightnest the heart. They water outwardly, but thou give fruitfulness.
They make a noise with words, but thou give understanding to the hearing.

3. Let not therefore Moses speak unto me, but thou my Lord God, the
everlasting Truth; lest I die; and prove unfruitful, if I be warned outwardly
only, and not inflamed within; lest the word heard and not fulfilled, known and
not loved, believed and not observed, turn to my condemnation. Speak therefore
Lord, for thy servant hears, for thou have the words of everlasting life.
Speak unto me to the comfort of my soul, and to the amendment of my whole life,
and to thy praise and glory, and everlasting honor.

CHAP. III. That the words of God are to be heard with humility, and that many
weigh them not.
CHrist. Son, hear my words, words of greatest sweetness, excelling all the
knowledge of the Philosophers and wise Men of this world. My words are spirit
and life, not to be weighed by the understanding of Man. They are not to be
drawn to vain liking, but to be heard with silence, and to be received with all
humility and great affection.

Christian. And I said, Blessed is the Man whom thou shall instruct; O Lord,
and shall teach thy law, that thou may give him rest from the evil days, and
that he be not destroyed upon earth.

2. Christ. I ( says our Lord) have taught the Prophets from the beginning,
and cease not in these days to speak to every one; but many are hardened and
deaf to my speech. The greater number do more willingly listen to the world,
than to God; and follow sooner the desires of their flesh, than the will of
God. The world promises temporal and small things, and is served with great
eagerness: I promise most high and eternal things, and the hearts of Men are
nothing moved therewith. Who is he that serves and obeys me with equal care
to that with which the world and the Lords thereof are served? Blush O Sidon,
says the Sea. And if thou ask the cause, hear wherefore: For a little Prebend
a long journey is undertaken; for everlasting life many will scarce once lift a
foot from the ground. A thing of small value is sought after greedily; for a
penny sometimes there is foul contention; sor a vain thing and slight promise,
Men cease not to toil day and night.

3. But alas for an unchangeable good, for an inestimable reward, for the
highest honor and glory without end, they are loath to take the least pains.
Blush therefore slothful and complaining Servant, that they are found to be
more ready to destruction, than thou to life. They rejoice more in vanity than
thou in the truth. And yet they are sometimes frustrated of their hope; but my
promise deceives none, nor sends him away empty that trusts in me. I will
give that which I have promised, I will fulfill that which I have said; but to
him that remains faithful in my love to the end. I am the rewarder of all that
are good, and do try my devout servants with strong trials.

4. Write my words in thy heart and think diligently of them; for they will be
very necessary in time of temptation. What thou understandest not when thou
read, thou shall know in the day of visitation. I am wont to visit my elect
two several ways, to wit, with temptation, and comfort. And I daily read two
lessons unto them, one reprehending their vices, another exhorting them to the
increase of virtues. He that has my words and despises them, has within
himself that shall judge him at the last day.

A prayer to implore the grace of devotion.
5. O Lord my God, thou art to me whatsoever is good. Who am I, that dare speak
unto thee? I am thy poorest servant and a most vile worm, much more poor and
contemptible than I can or dare express. Remember yet O Lord, that I am
nothing, and can do nothing. Thou alone art good, just, and holy; thou can do
all things, thou do all things, thou fillest all things, only the sinner
thou sendest empty away. Remember thy mercies, and fill my heart with thy
grace, who will not that thy works be void and in vain.

6. How can I bear up my self in this miserable life, unless thou strengthen me
with thy mercy and grace? Turn not thy face from me; delay not thy visitation;
draw not away thy comfort, lest my soul become as the thirsty land unto thee.
Lord, teach me to fulfill thy will, teach me to live worthily, and humbly in thy
sight, for thou art my wisdom, thou do truly know me, and did know me
before the world was made, and before I was born in the world.

CHAP. IV. That we ought to live in truth and humility before God.
CHrist. Son, walk before me in sincerity and truth, and ever seek me in
simplicity of heart. He that walks before me in truth, shall be defended from
evil incursions, and the Truth shall deliver him from seducers, and from the
detractions of the wicked. If the Truth shall have made thee free, thou shall
be truly free, and shall not care for the vain speeches of Men.

Christian. Lord, it is true. According as thou said, so I beseech thee let
it be with me, let thy Truth teach me, and keep me, and bring me safe to an
happy end. Let it deliver me from all evil affection and inordinate love; and I
shall walk with thee in great freedom of heart.

2. Christ. I will teach thee (says the Truth) these things that are right and
pleasing in my sight. Think of thy sins with great displeasure and grief, and
never esteem thy self any thing for thy good works. Thou art in very deed a
sinner, thou art subject to, and encumbred with, may passions. Of thy self thou
always tendest to nothing; thou art quickly cast down, quickly overcome,
quickly troubled, quickly dissolved. Thou have nothing wherein thou can
glory, but many things for which thou ought to despise thy self; for thou
art much weaker than thou art able to comprehend.

3. And therefore let nothing seem much unto thee whatsoever thou do. Let
nothing seem great, nothing precious and wonderful; let nothing seem worthy of
estimation, nothing high, nothing truly and commendable to be desired, but that
which is everlasting. Let the eternal Truth above all things please thee. Let
thy own great unworthiness always displease thee. Fear nothing, blame and fly
nothing so much as thy vices and sins; which ought to displease more than the
losses of any thing whatsoever. Some walk not sincerely in my sight, but led by
a certain curiosity and pride, will know my secrets, and understand the high
things of God, neglecting themselves and their own salvation. These oftentimes,
for that I resist them, do fall into great temptations and sins, for their
pride and curiosity.

4. Fear the judgments of God, dread the wrath of the Almighty. But discuss not
the works of the highest. Search thine own iniquities, in how much thou have
offended, and how much good thou have neglected. Some carry their religion only
in Books, some in pictures, some in outward signs and figures. Some have me in
their mouths, but little in their hearts. There are others that being
illuminated in their understandings, and purged in their affection do always
breath after things eternal, and are unwilling to hear of the things of this
world, and do serve the necessities of nature with grief; and these perceive
what the Spirit of Truth speaks in them; because it teaches them to despise
Earthly, and love Heavenly things; to neglect the world, and all the day and
night to desire Heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the wonderful effect of divine Love.
CHristian, I praise thee, O Heavenly Father, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ
for that thou have vouchsafed to remember me a poor Creature. O Father of
mercies and God of all comfort, thanks be unto thee, who sometimes with thy
comfort refreshest me unworthy of all comfort. I ever bless and glorify thee
with thy only begotten Son, and the holy Ghost, for ever and ever. O Lord God,
the holy lover of my soul, when thou shall come into my heart, all that is
within me will rejoice. Thou art my glory and the exultation of my heart. Thou
art my hope and refuge in the day of my tribulation.

2. But for that I am yet weak in love, and imperfect in virtue, I have need
therefore to be strengthened and comforted by thee; visit me therefore often,
and instruct me with thy holy discipline. Deliver me from evil passions, and
heal my heart of all inordinate affections; that being cured within and well
purged, I may be made fit to Love, strong to suffer, and constant to persevere.

3. Love is a great thing, in very truth a great good; which alone makes every
thing that is heavy, light; and bears equally that which is unequal. For it
carries a Burden without a Burden, and makes every thing that is bitter,
sweet and savoury. The noble Love of Jesus inforceth Man to do great things,
and stirs him up to desire always what is most perfect. Love will be aloft,
and not kept down with any base thing. Love will be free and loose from all
worldly affection, to the end its inward sight be not prejudiced, that it be
not either entangled by any temporal prosperity, or subdued by adversity.
Nothing is sweeter than Love, nothing stronger, nothing higher, nothing more
large, nothing more pleasant, nothing fuller nor better in Heaven or in Earth:
Because Love is born of God, and cannot rest but in God, above all Creatures.

4. He that loves; flies, runs, and rejoices; he is free and not held in.
He gives all for all, and has all in all, for that he rests in one Highest
above all, from whence all good flows and proceeds. He respects not the
gifts, but turns himself above all goods unto the giver. Love oftentimes
knows no measure, but is inflamed above all measure. Love feels no burden,
weighs no pains, desires above its strength, complains not of
impossibility, for that it thinks all things lawful and possible. It is
therefore able to undertake all things, and performs and brings many things
to pass; whereas he that does not Love, faints and lies down.

5. Love watches, and sleeping sleeps not: Being wearied, is not tired;
straightened, is not pressed; frightened, is not troubled: But like a lively flame
and burning Torch, breaking upwards, and securely passes through all. If any
one loves; he knows what this voice cries: A loud cry in the ears of God is
the ardent affection of the Soul, which says, My God, my Love, thou art wholly
mine, and I wholly thine.

6. Enlarge me in Love, that with the inward mouth of my heart I may taste how
sweet it is to Love, and to be melted, and swim in thy Love. Let me be
possessed by Love, mounting above my self with excessive fervor and admiration.
Let me Sing the Song of Love, let me follow thee on high my Beloved; let my
Soul rejoicing through Love, spend it self in thy Praise. Let me Love thee more
than my self, and not my self but for thee, and all in thee that truly Love
thee, as the law of Love commands which shines out from thee.

7. Love is swift, sincere, pious, pleasant and delightful, strong, patient,
faithful, prudent, long-suffering, manly, and never seeking it self. For where
one seeks himself, there he falls from Love. Love is circumspect, humble,
and upright: not softly, nor light, not attending unto vain things, sober,
chaste, constant, quiet, and guarded in all the senses. Love is subject and
obedient to Superiors, mean and abject to it self, devout and thankful unto
God, trusting and hoping always in him, even then when God imparteth no
sweetness unto it: For without sorrow none lives in Love.

8. He that is not ready to suffer all things, and stand to the will of his
beloved, is not worthy to be called a Lover. A Lover ought to embrace willingly
all that is hard and distasteful for his Beloved; and not to turn away from him
for any contrary accidents.

CHAP: VI. Of the proof of a true Lover.
CHrist. Son, thou art not yet a strong and prudent Lover. Christian. Wherefore
Lord? Christ. Because thou give over for a small adversity, and too greedily
seek comfort. A strong Lover stands firmly in temptations, and gives not
credit to the crafty persuasions of the enemy. As I please him in prosperity,
so I am not unpleasant to him in adversity.

2. A prudent Lover considers not so much the gift of his Lover, as the Love
of the giver. He rather esteems the good will than the value, and places all
gifts under his Beloved. A noble Lover rests not in the gift, but in me above
every gift. All therefore is not lost, if sometimes thou have less taste of me
than thou would. That good and sweet affection which thou sometimes feel,
is the effect of present grace, and a certain fore-taste of the heavenly
Country; whereon thou may not rely too much, for it goes and comes. But to
fight against evil motions of the mind which may happen unto thee, and to
despise the suggestions of the Devil, is a notable sign of virtue and shall
have great reward.

3. Let not therefore strange fancies forced into thee, of any matter
whatsoever, trouble thee. Retain a strong purpose and an upright intention to
God. Neither is it an illusion that sometimes thou art suddenly rapt on high,
and presently returnest again unto the accustomed vanities of thy heart. For
thou do rather unwillingly suffer them, than commit them: and as long as they
displease thee, and thou strivest against them, it is matter of reward, and no
loss.

4. Know that thy ancient enemy does ever strive to hinder thy desire to good,
and to deliver thee from all religious exercise; to wit, from the devout memory
of my passion, from the profitable remembrance of thy sins, from the guard of
thine own heart, and from the firm purpose of profiting in virtue. He injecteth
many evil thoughts into thy mind, that he may cause a wearisomness and horror
in thee, to draw thee from Prayer and Holy reading. Humble confession is
displeasing unto him; and if he could, he would cause thee to cease from
receiving the Sacrament. Trust him not, nor care for him, although he should
often set snares of deceit to entrap thee. Charge him with it when he
suggesteth evil and unclean thoughts unto thee; Say unto him, Away unclean
Spirit, blush miserable wretch; thou art very unclean that bring such things
unto mine ears. Away from me wicked deceiver, thou shall have no part in me:
But Jesus shall be with me as a strong Warrior, and thou shall stand
confounded. I had rather die, and undergo any torment, than consent unto thee.
Hold thy peace and be silent; I will hear thee no more, though thou should
work me many troubles. The Lord is my light and my Salvation, whom shall I
fear? If whole Armies should stand together against me, my heart shall not
fear. The Lord is my helper and my redeemer.

5. Fight like a good Soldier: and if thou sometimes fall through frailty, take
greater strength than before, trusting in my more abundant grace: and take
great heed of vain pleasing of thy self and of pride. This brings many into
error, and makes them sometimes fall into almost incurable blindness. Let the
fall of the proud foolishly presuming of themselves serve thee for a warning,
and keep thee perpetually humble.

CHAP. VII. That grace is to be hid under the veil of Humility.
CHrist. Son, it is more profitable and safe for thee to hide the grace of
devotion; not to extol thy self, nor to speak much, nor to esteem much thereof,
but rather to despise thy self, and fear it, as given to one unworthy thereof.
This affection is not to be cleaved unto, which may be quickly changed unto the
contrary. Think when thou art in grace, how miserable and needy thou art wont
to be without grace. Neither does therein only consist, the proficiency of a
spiritual life, when thou have the grace of comfort; but when thou humbly,
self-denyingly and patiently suffer the withdrawing thereof, so that thou be
not then less diligent in the exercise of prayer, nor suffer the rest of thy
accustomed duties to be neglected; but that thou willingly perform what lies
in thee, according to the best of thy power and understanding, not neglecting
thy self wholly for the dryness and trouble of mind which thou feel.

2. There are many that when it succeeds not well with them, presently they
become impatient or slothful. The way of Man is not always in his power, but it
belongs to God to give and to comfort when he will, and how much he will, and
whom he will; as it shall please him, and no more. Some unadvised persons have
overthrown themselves for the greedy desire which they had of the grace of
devotion; attempting more than they were able to perform, not weighing the
measure of their weakness, but following rather the desire of their heart, than
the judgment of reason. And because they presumed on greater matters than was
pleasing to God, they quickly lost his grace. They became needy, and left in a
dejected estate, that built themselves nests in Heaven; to the end that being
humbled and impoverished, they might learn not to fly with their own wings,
but to trust under my wings. They that are yet but novices and unacquainted in
the way of the Lord, unless they govern themselves by the counsel of discreet
Persons, may easily be deceived and overthrown.

3. And if they will rather follow their own judgment, than give credit to
others that are experienced, their end will be dangerous, if they will not be
drawn from their own conceit. Seldom those that are selfwise suffer themselves
humbly to be governed by others. A little knowledge with Humility, and a slender
understanding, is better than great measures of learning with a vain
self-liking. It is better for thee to have little than much of that whereof
thou may be proud. He does not discreetly, that wholly gives himself over
to mirth, forgetting his former poverty, and the chaste fear of God, which
fears to lose the grace which he has obtained. Neither is he virtuously
wise, that in time of adversity or any tribulation whatsoever, yields to
despairing thoughts and thinks and imagines of me less confidently than he
ought.

4. He that will be over secure in time of peace, shall be often found in time
of war too dejected and fearful. If thou could always continue humble and
lowly within thy self, and order and govern thy spirit well, thou should not
so soon fall into danger and offense. It is good counsel, that when fervor of
spirit is kindled within thee, thou should think what will become of thee,
when that light shall leave thee. And when that does happen, remember the light
may return again, which for thy instruction and my glory I have withdrawn for a
time.

5. Such proof is often more profitable, than if thou should always enjoy
prosperity according to thy desire. For a Man's worthiness is not to be judged
by the number of visions and comforts which he has, or by his knowledge in
Scripture, or by his being placed in high degree; but in that he is grounded in
true humility, and filled with divine love; if he always purely and entirely
seek the honor of God, if he esteem himself nothing, and unfriendly despise
himself, and rejoice more to be despised and humbled by others, than to be
honored.

CHAP. VIII. Of a mean conceit of our selves in the sight of God.
CHristian. Shall I speak unto my Lord since I am Dust and Ashes? If I esteem
better of my self, behold thou stand against me, and my iniquities bear true
witness against me: Neither can I speak against it. But if I abase and esteem
nothing of my self, and cast off all self-esteem, and (as I am) account my self
to be Dust, thy grace will be favorable unto me, and thy light will be near
unto my heart; and all self-esteem, how little soever shall be swallowed up in
the deep Valley of my nothingness, and perish everlastingly. There thou show
my self unto me, what I am, what I have been, and whither I am come; for I am
nothing, and I knew it not. And if I be left to my self, behold I become
nothing but mere weakness. But if thou suddenly look upon me, I am presently
made strong, and filled with new joy. And it is a great marvel, that I am so
suddenly lifted up, and so graciously embraced by thee, that of mine own weight
always sink downward.

2. Thy Love is cause hereof, freely preventing me, and relieving me in so many
necessities, preserving me also from grievous dangers, and delivering me (as I
may truly say) from innumerable evils. For surely by inordinate loving my self,
I lost my self and by seeking thee alone, and purely loving thee, I have found
both my self and thee, and by that Love have more deeply brought my self to
nothing. For that thou, O most sweet Lord, dealest with me above all desert,
and above all that I dare hope and request.

3. Blessed be thou my God; for although I be unworthy of any benefits, yet the
nobleness of thy bounty and thy infinite goodness never cease to do good even
to the ungrateful, and to them that be turned away far from thee. Turn us unto
thee, O Lord, that we may be thankful, humble, and holy; for thou art our
safety, our power, and our strength.

CHAP. IX. That all things are to be referred unto God, as unto the last end.
CHrist. Son, I ought to be thy chiefest and last end, if thou desire to be
truly blessed. With this intention thy affection shall be purified which is
oftentimes inclined inordinately to it self and unto Creatures. For if in any
thing thou seek thy self, thou presently faintest and driest up within thy
self. Refer therefore all things chiefly unto me, for I am he that have given
all. Consider every thing as flowing from the Highest good; and therefore all
things are to be reduced unto me as unto their Original.

2. Out of me, as out of a living Fountain, the little and the great, the poor
and the rich, to draw the water of life: and they that willingly and freely
serve me, shall receive grace for grace. But he that will glory out of me, or
be delighted in any particular good, shall not be grounded in true joy, nor
enlarged in his heart, but shall be many ways encumbred and straightened. Thou
ought therefore to ascribe nothing of good unto thy self, nor attribute
goodness unto any Man; but give all unto God, without whom Man has nothing. I
have bestowed all, and will that all be returned unto me again; and with great
strictness I require thanks.

3. This is the truth that puts to flight vain Glory, and if heavenly grace
and true Love enter in, there shall be no envy nor straitness of heart, neither
shall there be any place for self-love. For Divine Love overcomes all, and
enlarges all the powers of the Soul. If thou be truly wise, in me alone
thou will rejoice, in me alone thou will hope: For none is good, but God alone,
who is to be praised above all things, and to be blessed in all.

CHAP. X. That the World being despised, it is a sweet thing to serve God.
CHristian. Now I will speak again, O Lord, and will not be silent, I will say
in the ears of my God, my Lord, and my King that is on High, Psalm. 31. O how
great is the abundance of thy goodness, O Lord, which thou have laid up for
those that fear thee! But what art thou to them that Love thee? What to them
that serve thee with their whole heart? Truly unspeakable is the sweetness of
contemplating thee, which thou bestowest on them that Love thee. In this
chiefly thou have showed me the sweetness of thy Love: For that when I was not,
thou made me; and when I went astray far off from thee, thou broughtest me
back again, that I might serve thee, and have commanded me to Love thee.

2. O Fountain of everlasting Love, what shall I say of thee? How can I forget
thee, that have vouchsafed to remember me, even when I wasted away, and
perished? Thou have showed mercy to thy Servant beyond all my expectation: And
have exhibited thy favor and friendship beyond all merit. What shall I return
unto thee for this grace. For it is not granted to every one to forsake all
things, to renounce the World, and to undertake a life of Religious
retiredness. It is much that I should serve thee, whom all Creatures are bound
to serve. It ought not to seem much unto me to serve thee; but this rather
seems much and mavelous unto me that thou vouchsafest to receive into thy
service one so poor and unworthy, and to join him with thy beloved Servants.

3. Behold, all is thine which I have, and whereby I serve thee. And yet
contrariwise thou rather servest me than I thee. Behold, Heaven and Earth,
which thou have created for the service of Man are ready at hand, and do daily
perform whatsoever thou do command; and this is little; yea, thou have also
appointed the Angels to the service of Man. But that which excels all this
is, that thou thy self have vouchsafed to serve Man, and have promised to give
thy self unto him.

4. What shall I give thee for all these thousands of benefits? I would I could
serve thee all the days of my life. I would I were able at least for one day,
to do thee some worthy service! Thou art truly worthy of all service, of all
honor, and everlasting praise. Thou art truly my Lord, and I thy poor Servant,
that am bound to serve thee with all my might, neither ought I ever to be weary
of praising thee. And this I wish to do, this I desire; and whatsoever is
wanting unto me, vouchsafe I beseech thee to supply.

5. It is great honor, a great glory to serve thee, and despise all things for
thee. For great grace shall be given to them that shall willingly subject
themselves to thy most holy service, They shall receive the most sweet comfort
of the holy Ghost, that for thy love shall renounce all carnal delights, they
shall attain great freedom of mind, that for thy names sake shall enter into
the narrow way, and shall have left off all worldly care.

6. O sweet and delightful service of God, by which Man is truly made free and
holy! O sacred state of religious employment, which makes Man equal to Angels,
pleasing to God, terrible to Devils, grateful and of great esteem to all the
faithful! O service to be embraced and always wished for by which we obtain the
greatest good, and attain to that joy which never shall have end!

CHAP. XI. That the desires of our heart are to be examined and moderated.
CHrist. Son, thou ought to learn many things more, which thou have not well
learned.

Christian. What are those Lord?

Christ. That thou frame thy desires wholly according to my pleasure; and be
not a lover of thy self, but an affectionate follower of my will. Thy desires
oftentimes inflame thee, and drive thee forwards with violence: But consider
whether thou art moved rather for my honor, than for thine own profit. If I be
the cause, thou will be well content with whatsoever I shall ordain: But if
there lurk in thee any self-seeking, behold this is it that hinders thee and
weighs thee down.

2. Beware therefore thou lean not too much upon thy own preconceived desire,
without asking my counsel, lest perhaps afterward it repent thee, and thou
begin now to dislike that which before did please thee, and which thou
earnestly desiredst as the best. For every affection that seems good is not
presently to be followed; nor every contrary affection at the first to be
avoided. It is expedient sometimes to use a restraint even in good desires and
endeavors, lest by importunity thou incur distraction of mind, and by thy
want of self-government beget a scandal unto others; or being gainsaid by
others thou be suddenly troubled and fall.

3. Yet sometimes thou ought to use violence, and resist manfully thy
sensual appetites, and respect not what the flesh would, or would not; but
rather to labor that even perforce it be subject to the spirit. And it is to be
chastised so long, and to be forced under servitude, until it readily obey in
all things, and learn to be content with a little, and to be pleased with plain
things, and not to murmr against any inconvenience.

CHAP. XII. Of patience, and of striving against conoupiscence.
CHristian. Lord God, I perceive patience is very necessary unto me, for that
many adversities do happen in this life. For howsoever I shall dispose of my
peace, my life cannot be without war and affliction.

Christ. So it is Son. And my will is not that thou seek after that peace which
is void of temptations, or that which feels no contrariety; but then think
that thou have found peace, when thou art exercised with sundry tribulations,
and tried in many adversities.

2. If thou say, that thou art not able to suffer much, how then will thou
endure the Fire hereafter? Of two evils the less is always to be chosen. That
thou may therefore avoid everlasting punishment in the next World, endeavor
to suffer patiently for God the present evils of this. Do thou think that the
Men of this World suffer little or nothing? Look into the life even of them
that live in greatest delicacies, and thou shall find it otherwise. But thou will say, they have many delights, and follow their own wills, and therefore
they make small account of their tribulations: Be it so, that they have
whatsoever they will; but how long do thou think it will last?

3. Behold, the wealthy of this World vanish away like smoke, and there shall
be no memory of their joys past. Yea, even while they live also, they rest not
in them without bitterness, irksomeness and fear. For the self same thing in
which they take their delight, is oftentimes unto them the cause of sorrow.
They have their desert, who for that they inordinately seek and follow
delights, they do not enjoy them but with shame and sorrow.

4. O how short and false, how inordinate and filthy are all those pleasures!
Yet so Drunken and Blind are Men that they understand it not: But like Dumb
beasts, for a little pleasure of a corruptible life, they incur the Eternal
death of their Soul. Do not thou therefore my Son, go after thy Lusts, but
forsake thine own will, Psalm. 37. Delight in the Lord, and he will give thee
the desires of thy heart.

5. For if thou desire true delight, and to be more plentifully comforted by
me, behold, in the contempt of all wordly things, and in the cutting off all
base delights shall be thy blessing, and abundant comforts shall be given thee.
And how much the more thou withdrawest thy self from all comfort of Creatures,
so much the sweeter and more powerful consolations shall thou find in me. But
at first thou can not attain unto them without foam sorrow, nor without a
laborious conflict. Thy old custom will make resistance, and thou must overcome
it with another custom that is better. Thy flesh will murmur; but thou must
bridle it with fervor of Spirit. The old Serpent will sting and trouble thee;
but by Prayer he shall be put to flight, and by profitable industry thou shall
stop the way against him.

CHAP. XIII. Of the humble obedience of a Subject, according to the example of
Christ.
CHrist. Son, he that endeavoreth to withdraw himself from obedience,
withdraws himself from grace. And he that seeks things private, shall lose
the public. He that does not willingly and freely submit himself to his
Superior, it is a sign that his flesh is not as yet perfectly obedient unto
him, but oftentimes kicketh, and murmureth against him. Learn therefore readily
to submit thy self to thy Superior, if thou desire to subdue thine own flesh.
For the outward enemy is sooner overcome, if the inward Man be not wasted.
There is no worse enemy, nor more troublesome to the Soul, than thou art unto
thy self, not agreeing well with the Spirit. Thou must of necessity have a true
contempt of thy self, if thou will prevail against flesh and blood.

2. Because thou love thy self as yet too inordinately, therefore thou art
afraid to resign thy self wholly to the will of others. But what great matter
is it, if thou, that art Dust and nothing, submit thy self to a Man for God,
when I the Almighty and highest Sovereign who created all things of nothing,
humbly submitted my self unto Man for thee? I became the most humble and abject
of all Men, that thou might overcome thy pride with my humility. Learn to
obey thou that art Dust. Learn to humble thy self thou Earth and Clay, and put
thy self under the Feet of all Men. Learn to break thine own will, and to yield
thy self to all Subjection.

3. Be vehement against thy self, and suffer not pride to live in thee: But so
humble and submit thy self to all, that every one may go over thee, and tread
thee as dirt of the Streets under their Feet. Vain Man, what can thou
complain of? What can thou answer, foul sinner, to them that reprove thee,
who have so often offended God, and so many times deserved Hell? But mine eye
has spared thee, because thy Soul was precious in my sight; that thou might
know my Love, and always remain thankful for my benefits; and that thou
might continually give thy self to true subjection and humility, and
might bear patiently the contempt of thy self.

CHAP. XIV. Of the secret Judgments of God to be considered, lest we be exalted
in our good deeds.
Christian. Thou thunderest forth thy Judgments over me, O Lord, and shakest
all my bones with fear and trembling, and my Soul is fore afraid. I stand
astonished, when I consider that the Heavens are not pure in thy sight. If thou
have found wickedness in Angels, and have not pardoned them, what shall become
of me? Stars fell from Heaven, and what do I presume that am Dust? They whose
works seemed commendable, fell into the lowest misery: And I have seen them,
that did eat the Bread of Angels, to be delighted with the husks of Swine.

2. There is therefore no sanctity, if thou, O Lord, withdrawest thy hand. No
wisdom avails, if thou ceasest to Govern. No strength helps, if thou
leavest to defend. No chastity is secure, if thou do not protect it. No
custody of our own profitable, if thy sacred watchfulness be not present. For,
if we be left of thee, we sink and perish; but if thou vouchsafest to visit us,
we are raised up and live. We are inconstant, but by thee we are established:
we wax cold, but by thee we are enflamed.

3. O how meanly and humbly ought I to think of my self! how little, yea
nothing ought I to esteem it, if I seem to have any good! O Lord, with what
profound Humility ought I to submit my self to thy bottomless judgments; where
I find my self to be nothing else, but nothing, and nothing! O unmeasurable
weight! O sea that can never be passed over, where I find my self only and
wholly nothing! Where then is the lurking hole of glory? Where is the
confidence conceived of virtue? All vain glorying is swallowed up in the deep
of thy judgments over me.

4. What is all flesh in thy sight? Shall the clay glory against him that
frames it? How can he be lifted up with vain words, whose heart is truly
subject to God? All the world cannot lift him up, whom the Truth has subjected
unto it self. Neither shall he be moved with the Tongues of all his praisers,
that has settled his whole hope in God. For as for them that speak behold, they
all are nothing; they shall pass away with the sound of their words, but the
truth of the Lord remains for ever.

CHAP. XV. How we are to stand affected, and what we are to say, in every thing
which we desire.
CHrist. Son, say thus in every thing, Lord, if it be pleasing unto thee, let
this be done in this sort; Lord, if it be to thy honor, let this be done in thy
Name; Lord, if thou see it expedient for me, and allowest it to be
profitable, then grant unto me, that I may use this unto thine honor. But if
thou know it will be hurtful unto me, and not profitable to the health of my
soul, take away this desire from me. For every desire proceeds not from the
holy Ghost, though it seem unto Man right and good. It is hard to judge rightly
whether a good Spirit or the contrary drive thee to desire this or that; or
whether also by thine own spirit thou be moved thereunto. Many are deceived in
the end, who at the first seemed to be led by a good Spirit.

2. Always therefore, whatsoever occurreth unto thy mind to be desired, let it
be desired and prayed for in the fear of God and with Humility of heart; and
above all thou ought to commit the whole unto me with resignation of thy
self, and thou ought to say, Lord thou know what is best, let this or
that be done as thou please. Give what thou will, and how much thou will, and
when thou will. Deal with me as thou think good, and as best pleases thee,
and is most for thy honor. Set me, where thou will, and deal with me in all
things according to thy will. I am in thy hand; turn me, and turn me again
which way soever thou please. Behold I am thy Servant, prepared for all things;
for I desire not to live unto my self, but unto thee; and O that I could do it
worthily and perfectly!

A Prayer for the fulfilling of the will of God.
3. Grant me thy Grace O most gracious Jesus, that it may be with me, and labor
with me, and persevere with me until the end. Grant me always to desire and
will that which is most acceptable unto thee, and best pleases thee. Let thy
will be mine, and let my will ever follow thine, and agree perfectly with it.
Let my will and nill be all one with thine, and let me not will or nill any
thing else, but what thou willest or nillest.

4. Grant that I may die to all things that are in the World, and to love to be
contemned for thy sake and not to be known in this world. Grant that above all
things that can be desired, I may rest in thee, and may quiet my heart in thee.
Thou art the true peace of the heart, thou art the only rest; out of thee all
things are troublesome and unquiet. In this very peace, that is, in thee, the
one chiefest eternal Good, I will sleep and rest.

Amen.
CHAP. XVI. That true comfort is to be sought in God alone.
WHatsoever I can desire or imagine for my comfort, I look not for it here, but
hereafter. For if I should alone have all the comforts of the world, and might
enjoy all the delights thereof, it is certain that they could not long endure.
Wherefore my soul, thou can not be fully comforted, nor have perfect delight
but in God, the comforter of the poor, and the helper of the humble. Expect a
while, O my soul, expect the divine promise and thou shall have abundance of
all good things in Heaven. If thou desire inordinately the things that are
present, thou shall lose the celestial and eternal. Use temporal things, and
desire eternal. Thou can not be filled with any temporal goods, because thou
art not created to enjoy them.

2. Although thou should enjoy all created good, yet could thou not be
happy thereby nor blessed; but in God, that has created all things, thy whole
beatitude and happiness consists; not such as is seen, and commended by the
foolish lovers of the world, but such as the good and faithful Servants of
Christ expect, and the spiritual and pure in heart, whose conversation is in
Heaven, sometimes have a foretast of. Vain and short is all humane comfort.
Blessed and true is the comfort which is received inwardly from the Truth. A
Religious Man every where carries with him Jesus his comforter, and says unto
him, Be present with me Lord Jesus in every place and time. Let this be my
comfort, to be willing to want all humane comfort. And if thy comfort be
wanting, let thy will and just proving of me be unto me as the greatest
comfort; for thou will not be angry always, neither will thou threaten for ever.

CHAP. XVII. That all our care is to be placed in God.
CHrist. Son, suffer me to do with thee what I please. I know what is expedient
for thee. Thou think as Man; thou judge in many things as humane affection
persuades thee.

Christian. Lord, what thou say is true. Thy care for me is greater than all
the care that I can take for my self. For he stands very totteringly, that
casts not his whole care upon thee. Lord so that my will may remain right and
firm toward thee, do with me whatsoever it shall please thee. For it cannot be
but good whatsoever thou do with me.

2. If it be thy will I should be in darkness, be thou blessed; and if it be
thy will I should be in light, be thou again Blessed. If thou vouchsafest to
comfort me, be thou Blessed; and if thou will afflict me, be thou ever equally
blessed.

Christ. Son, Thus thou ought to be minded, if thou will walk with me. Thou
must be as ready to suffer, as to rejoice. Thou ought to be as willing to be
poor and needy, as full and rich.

3. Christian. Lord, I will willingly suffer for thee, whatsoever thy pleasure
is shall befall me. I will receive indifferently from thy hand good and evil,
sweet and sour, delightful and sorrowful, and give thee thanks for all that
befalls me. Keep me from all sin, and I will neither fear death nor Hell; so
as thou do not for ever cast me from thee, nor blot me out of the Book of
life, what tribulation soever befall me shall not hurt me.

CHAP. XVIII. That temporal miseries after the example of Christ, must be born
patiently.
CHrist. Son, I descended from Heaven for thy Salvation; I took upon me thy
miseries, my own love and not any necessity drawing me thereunto; that thou
might learn patience, and not grudgingly bear temporal miseries. For from
the hour of my birth, until my death on the Cross, I was not without suffering
of grief. I suffered great want of temporal things; I often heard many
complaints against me; I bore patiently shame and reproaches; for benefits I
received ingratitude; for miracles, blasphemies; for Heavenly Doctrine,
reprehensions.

2. Christian. Lord, for that thou were patient in thy lifetime, chiefly
fulfilling herein the commandment of thy Father, it is reason that I a
miserable sinner should show my self patient according to thy will, and for my
souls welfare bear the burden of this corruptible life as long as thou will.
For although this present life be burdensome, yet notwithstanding it is now by
thy grace made very gainful; and by thy example and the footsteps of thy
Saints, more plain and tolerable to the weak. Yea, much more comfortable also
than it was in times past in the old Law, when the gate of Heaven remained
shut, and the way also to Heaven seemed darker, when so few took care to seek
after thy Kingdom. Neither they also that then were just and such as should be
saved, could enter into the Heavenly Kingdom, before the satisfaction of thy
holy passion and death.

3. O how many and great thanks am I bound to render unto thee, that thou have
vouchsafed to show unto me and to all the faithful a direct and sure way to thy
everlasting Kingdom! For thy life is our way, and by holy patience we go unto
thee that art our Crown. If thou had not gone before us and taught us, who
would have taken care to follow? Alas! How many would stay behind and remain
far off, if they beheld not thy noble example? Behold we are yet cold, although
we have heard of so many of thy wonders, and thy Heavenly documents; what would
become of us, if we had not so great a light given us to follow thee?

CHAP. XIX. Of suffering of injuries: and who is proved to be truly patient.
CHrist. What is it thou say, Son? Cease to complain, considering my
passion, and that of my other Saints. Thou have not yet made resistance unto
blood. It is but little thou suffer, in comparison of them that have
suffered so much, were so strongly tempted, so grievously afflicted, so many
ways tried and exercised. Thou ought therefore to call to mind the more
heavy sufferings of others, that thou may the easier bear the little
adversities which thou suffer. And if they seem not little unto thee, beware
lest thy impatience be cause thereof. Yet whether they be little or great,
endeavor to bear all patiently.

2. How much the better thou disposest thy self to suffering, so much the more
wisely thou do, and so much the greater reward shall thou receive; thou
shall more easily also endure it, if both in mind and by exercise thou art well
prepared thereunto. Do not say, I cannot suffer these things at the hands of
such a person, nor such things are not to be suffered by me: for he has done
me great wrong, and upbraided me with those things which I never thought of;
but of another I will willingly suffer, and as I shall see cause. Such a
thought is foolish; it considers not the virtue of patience, nor by whom it
shall be crowned; but rather weighs the persons, and the injuries offered.

3. He is not truly patient, that will not suffer but as much as he thinks
good, and by whom he lists. But the true patient Man minds not by whom he
is exercised, whether by his Superiors, or some of his equals, or by his
inferiors; whether by a good and holy Man, or by a perverse and unworthy
person. But indifferently from all creatures, how much soever, or how often
soever any adversity befalls him, he takes all this thankfully as from the
hands of God, and esteems it a great gain; for that nothing before God, how
little soever, so it be suffered for God, shall pass without its reward.

4. Be thou therefore always prepared for the fight, if thou will have the
victory. Without a combat thou can not attain unto the crown of patience. If
thou will not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned. But if thou desire to be
crowned, fight manfully, and endure patiently. Without labor there is no coming
to rest, nor without fighting can the victory be obtained.

Christian. Lord, let that be made possible to me by thy grace, which seems
impossible to me by nature. Thou know that I can suffer but little, and that
I am quickly dismayed, when a small adversity arises. Let every exercise of
tribulation be made amiable unto me, and be welcome for thy name; for to suffer
and to be troubled for thy sake, is very profitable for my soul.

CHAP. XX. Of the acknowledging of our own infirmities: and of the miseries of
this life.
CHristian. I will confess against me my unrighteousness, I will confess unto
thee, O Lord, my infirmities. Oftentimes it is a small matter that dejecteth
and grieveth me. I purpose to act with courage, but when a small temptation
comes, it brings me into very narrow straits. It is sometimes a very trifle,
from whence great temptations do proceed. And whilst I think my self somewhat
safe, when I least expect it I find my self sometimes overcome with a small
blast.

2. Behold, therefore, Lord, my lowness and frailty every way known unto thee.
Have mercy on me and deliver me out of the mire that I stick not fast therein,
and that I may not for ever remain dejected. This is that which oftentimes
strikes me at the very heart, and confounds me in thy sight, for that I am so
subject to fall, and weak in resisting of my passions. And although though I do
not altogether consent, yet their continual assaults are troublesome and
grievous unto me; and it is a very irksom thing to live thus daily in conflict.
Hereby my infirmity is made known unto me, for that wicked fancies do always
much more easily invade than forsake me.

3. O mighty God of Israel, the zealous lover of faithful souls, let it please
thee to consider the labor and sorrow of thy Servant, and assist him in all
whatsoever he undertaketh. Strengthen me with Heavenly strength, lest the old
Man, the miserable flesh, not fully as yet subject to the spirit, prevail and
get the upper hand; against which I ought to fight as long as I breath in this
miserable life. Alas, what a kind of life is this, where tribulation and
miseries are never wanting! where all is full of snares, and enemies! For when
one tribulation or temptation goes away, another first comes; yea and during
the first conflict also, many others come unlooked for one after another.

4. And how can a life be loved that has so many embitterments, and is subject
to so many calamities and miseries? How is it called a life that begets so
many deaths and plagues? And yet it is loved, and many seek to delight
themselves therein. The world is oftentimes blamed that it is deceitful and
vain, and yet it is not easily forsaken, because the desires of the flesh bear
so great a sway.

5. Some things draw us to love it, others to contemn it. To the love of the
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life do
draw us; but the pains and miseries that do justly follow them cause a hatred
and loathsomness thereof.

6. But alas! vile pleasure overcomes the mind which is addicted to the world;
and she esteems it a delight to be even under thorns, because she has
neither seen nor tasted the sweetness of God, and the inward pleasantness of
virtue. But they that perfectly contemn the world, and endeavor to live to God
under holy discipline, these are not ignorant of the divine sweetness promised
to the true forsakers of the world, and do more clearly see how grievously the
world erreth, and how it is many ways deceived.

CHAP. XXI. That we are to rest in God above all his gifts, and benefits.
CHristian. Above all things, and in all things, O my soul, thou shall ever
rest in the Lord, for he is the everlasting rest of the Saints. Grant me, O
most sweet and loving Jesus, to rest in thee above all creatures, above all
health and beauty, above all glory and honor, above all power and dignity,
above all knowledge and subtilty, above all riches and arts, above all joy and
gladness, above all fame and praise, above all sweetness and comfort, above all
hope and promise, above all desert and desire, above all gifts and presents
that thou can give and impart unto us, above all mirth and jubilee that the
mind of Man can receive and feel; lastly, above Angels and Archangels and above
all the Heavenly host, above all visible and invisible things, and above all
that thou art not, O my God.

2. For that thou, my Lord God, art best of all; thou alone art most high, thou
alone most powerful, thou alone most full and sufficient, thou alone most sweet
and solacing, thou alone most lovely and loving, thou alone most noble and
glorious above all things, in whom all good things together both perfectly are,
and ever have been, and shall be: and therefore it is too little and not
sufficient, whatsoever thou bestowest on me besides thy self, or revealest unto
me of thy self, or promisest, whilst thou art not seen, and not fully
obtained; for surely my heart cannot truly rest nor be fully contented, unless
it rest in thee, and surmount all gifts and creatures whatsoever.

3. O my most beloved Bridegroom Jesus Christ, the most pure lover, the
governor of all creatures; O that I had the wings of true liberty that I might
fly and rest in thee! O when shall it be fully granted me to consider in
quietness of mind and see how sweet thou art, my Lord God! When shall I fully
gather up my self into thee, that by reason of my love to thee I may not feel
my self, but thee alone, above all sense and feeling, in a manner not known
unto every one! but now I oftentimes sigh, and bear my infelicity with grief,
for that many evils occurr in this vale of miseries, which do often trouble,
grieve, and overcloud me; often hinder and distract me, allure and entangle me,
for that I can have no free access unto thee, nor enjoy thy sweet embracings
wherewith thou ever favorest the blessed Spirits. O let my sighs and manifold
desolations on Earth affect thee.

4. O Jesus, the brightness of eternal glory, and comfort of the pilgrim soul,
with thee is my tongue without voice, and my very silence speaks unto thee.
How long does my Lord delay to come? Let him come unto me his poor Servant, and
make me glad. Let him put forth his hand and deliver miserable me from all
anguish. Come, O come; for without thee I shall have no joyful day nor hour;
for thou art my joy, and without thee my table is empty. A wretched creature I
am, and in a manner imprisoned and laden with Irons, until thou comfortest me
with the light of thy presence, and set me at liberty, and show a
friendly countenance unto me.

5. Let others seek what they please instead of thee: but for me, nothing else
does nor shall delight me, but thou only my God, my hope, my everlasting
salvation. I will not hold my peace, nor cease to pray, until thy grace return
again, and thou speak inwardly unto me.

Christ. Behold I am here; behold I come unto thee, because thou have called
upon me. Thy tears and the desire of thy soul, thy humiliation and the
contrition of thy heart, have inclined and brought me unto thee.

Christian. And I said, Lord, I have called thee, and have desired to enjoy
thee, being ready to refuse all things for thee. For thou first have stirred me
up that I might seek thee. Blessed be thou therefore, O Lord, that have showed
this goodness to thy Servant, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

6. What has thy servant more to say before thee, but that he do greatly
humble himself in thy sight, always mindful of his own iniquity, and vileness?
For there is none like unto thee in all whatsoever is wonderful in Heaven and
Earth. Thy works are very good, thy judgments true, and by thy providence all
things are governed. Praise therefore and glory be unto thee, O wisdom of the
Father: let my mouth, my soul, and all creatures together praise and bless thee.

CHAP. XXII. Of the remembrance of the manifold benefits of God.
CHristian. Open, O Lord, my heart in thy Law, and teach me to walk in thy
Commandments. Grant me to understand thy will, and to remember thy benefits as
well in general, as in particular, with great reverence and diligent
consideration; that henceforward I may be able worthily to give thee thanks.
But I know, and confess, that I am not able in the least point to give thee,
due thanks, for the favors which thou bestowest upon me. I am less than the
least of all thy benefits; and when I consider thy noble bounty, the greatness
thereof makes my spirit to faint.

2. All that we have in our soul and body and whatsoever we possess outwardly
or inwardly, naturally or supernaturally, are thy benefits, and do speak thee
bountiful, merciful, and good, from whom we have received all good things.
Although one have received more, another less; all notwithstanding are thine,
and without thee even the least cannot be had. He that has received greater
cannot glory of his own desert, nor extol himself above others, nor insult over
the lesser; for he is greater and better that ascribes least unto himself, and
is more humble and religious in rendering thanks. And he that esteems himself
vilest of all Men, and judges himself most unworthy, is fittest to receive
great blessings.

3. And he that has received fewer, ought not to be sorry nor take it
grievously, nor envy them that are enriched with greater store; but attend
rather unto thee, and highly praise thy goodness, for that thou bestowest thy
gifts so bountifully, so freely, and so willingly without respect of persons.
All things proceed from thee, and therefore in all things thou art to be
praised. Thou know what is fit to be given to every one; and why this Man
has less, and he more, it is not ours, but thine to judge, who do exactly
know what is meet for every one.

4. Wherefore, my Lord God, I esteem it as a great mercy, not to have much of
that which outwardly and in the opinion of Men, might seem worthy of glory and
applause: so that he who considers the poverty and unworthiness of his
person, ought not therefore to conceive grief or sorrow, or to be therefore
troubled, but rather to take great comfort, and to be glad: for that thou O God
have chosen the poor and humble and the despised of this world for thy self,
and for thy familiar and domestic attendants. Witnesses are thy Apostles
themselves, whom thou have made Princes in all the Earth. And yet they lived
without complaint in the world, so humble and simple, without all malice and
deceit, that they also rejoiced to suffer reproach for thy Name, and what the
world abhors, they embraced with great affection.

5. Nothing therefore ought so to rejoice him that loves thee and
acknowledges thy benefits, as thy will in him, and the good pleasure of thy
eternal appointment; wherewith he ought to be so contented and comforted, that
he would as willingly be the least, as any would wish to be the greatest, and
as peaceable and contented in the last as in the first place; and as willing to
be despised and contemned and to be of no esteem or account, as to be preferred
in honor before all others and to be greater in the world. For thy will and the
love of thy glory ought to be preferred before all things, and to comfort him
more, and please him better, than all the benefits which either he has
received or may receive.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Four things that bring much peace.
CHrist. Son, now I will teach thee the way of peace, and true liberty.
Christian, Do Lord, I beseech thee, as thou say, for I shall be very glad to
hear it.

Christ. Endeavor, my Son, to do rather the will of another, than thine own.
Ever choose rather to have less than more. Always seek the lowest place, and to
be inferior to every one. Wish always and pray, that the will of God may be
wholly fulfilled filled in thee. Behold such a Man enters into the bounds of
peace and quietness.

2. Christian. Lord, this thy short speech contains much perfection. It is
little in words, but full in sense and abundant in fruit. For if it could
faithfully be kept by me, then should I not so easily be troubled. For as often
as I feel my self unquiet and afflicted, I find that I have strayed from this
Doctrine. But thou that can do all things, and ever love the profiting of
my soul, increase in me thy grace, that I may fulfill thy words, and work out
mine own salvation.

A Prayer against evil thoughts.
3. My Lord God, be not far from me; my God, have regard to help me; for sundry
thoughts have risen up against me, and great fears, afflicting my soul. How
shall I pass through them without hurt? How shall I utterly break them?

Christ. I, says he, will go before thee, and will humble the great ones of
the earth, I will open the Doors of the Prison, and reveal unto thee hidden
secrets.

Christian. Do Lord as thou say, and let all my evil thoughts fly from
before thy face. This is my hope, my only comfort, to fly unto thee in every
tribulation, to trust in thee, to call upon thee from my heart, and to expect
patiently thy comfort.

A Prayer for enlightening of the Mind.
4. Enlighten me O good Jesus, with a clear-shining inward light, and drive
away all darkness from the habitation of my heart. Repress my many wandering
thoughts, and utterly break in pieces those temptations which violently assault
me. Fight strongly for me, and vanquish those evil beasts, I mean those
enticing desires of the flesh, that so peace may be obtained, by thy power, and
that abundance of thy praise may sound in the holy Court of a pure conscience.
Command the Winds and Tempests; say unto the Sea, Be still; and to the North
Wind, Blow not; and a great calm shall ensue.

5. Send forth thy light and thy truth, that they may shine upon the earth; for
I am as the earth without form and void, until thou enlighten me. Pour out thy
grace from above, let thy Heavenly dew distill upon my heart, supply fresh
streams of grace, to water the face of the Earth, that it may bring forth good
and excellent fruit. Lift up my mind which is pressed down by the weight of
sins. Draw up my whole desire to Heavenly things; that having tasted the
sweetness of supernal happiness, it may be irksome to me even to think of
earthly vanities.

6. Pluck me and deliver me from all the unlasting comfort of creatures; for no
created thing can fully comfort and quiet my desire. Join me unto thee with an
unseparable band of love; for thou even alone do satisfy him that loves
thee, and without thee all things are vain.

CHAP. XXIV. Of flying curious inquiry of the life of others.
CHrist. Son, be not curious, trouble not thy self with idle cares. What is
this or that to thee? do thou follow me. For what is it to thee, whether that
Man be such or no, or whether this Man do, or speak this or that? Thou shall
not need to answer for others, but shall give account of thy self. Why
therefore do thou trouble thy self? Behold I know every one, and do see all
things that are under the Sun, and do understand how it is with every one; what
he thinks, what he would, and at what his intention aims. All things therefore
are to be committed unto me; but do thou keep thy self in good peace, and let
the unquiet be as unquiet as they will. Whatsoever they shall have done, or
said, shall fall upon themselves, for they cannot deceive me.

2. Be not careful for the shadow of a great name, or for the familiarity of
many; nor for the private affection of Men: for these things both distract and
greatly darken the heart. I would willingly utter my words, and reveal my
secrets unto thee, if thou did diligently observe my coming, and did open
the Door of thy heart unto me. Be careful and watch in prayer, and humble thy
self in all things.

CHAP. XXV. Wherein the firm peace of the heart, and true spiritual profiting
consists?
CHrist. Son, I have said, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give to you: not
as the world gives, give I unto you. All do desire peace, but all care not for
those things that appertain unto true peace. My peace is with the humble and
meek of heart. Thy peace does consist in much patience. If thou will hear me
and follow my voice, thou may enjoy much peace.

Christian. What then shall I do, Lord?

Christ. In every thing attend unto thy self what thou do, and what thou
say; and direct thy whole intention unto this, that thou may please me
alone, and desire or seek nothing besides me. Of the sayings and doings of
others judge nothing rashly: neither do thou entangle thy self with things not
committed unto thee: and doing thus, thou shall be little or seldom troubled.

2. But never to feel any trouble at all, nor to suffer any grief of heart or
body, is not the state of this life, but everlasting rest. Think not therefore
that thou have found true peace, if thou feel no sorrow; nor that then all
is well, if thou have no adversary; nor that all is perfect, if all things be
done according to thy desire. Neither do thou then esteem highly of thy self,
or account thy self to be specially beloved, if thou be in great devotion and
sweetness; for by these things a true lover of virtue is not known, neither
does the profiting and perfection of a Man consist in these things.

3. Christian. Wherein then Lord?

Christ. In offering thy self with all thy heart unto the will of God, not
seeking thine own interest, neither in great nor little, neither for a time nor
for ever, so that thou keep one and the same countenance with thanksgiving,
both in prosperity and in adversity, weighing all things with an equal balance.
If thou be of such courage and so patient in hope, that when inward comfort is
withdrawn from thee, thou preparest thy heart to suffer greater things; and
do not justify thy self, as though thou ought not to suffer these and so
great afflictions, but justifiest me in whatsoever I appoint, and praisest my
Holy name: Then thou walk in the true and right way of peace: And thou shall
have undoubted hope to see my face again with great joy. And if thou attain to
the full contempt of thy self; then shall thou enjoy as great abundance of
peace, as this thy state of sojourning in this World is capable of.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the excellency of a free mind, which humble Prayer sooner
gains than Reading.
CHristian. Lord, it is the work of a perfect Man, never to slack his mind from
the attentive thought of heavenly things, and as it were to pass without care
amongst many cares; not like a dull sluggard; but by the privilege of a free
mind, adhering to no creature with inordinate affection.

2. I beseech thee, my most gracious God, preserve me from the cares of this
Life, lest I should be too much entangled thereby: And for the many necessities
of the body, lest I should be caught by pleasure: And from whatsoever is an
obstacle to the Soul, lest broken with troubles I should be overthrown. I say
not from those things that worldly vanity so greatly desires: But from those
miseries, that as punishments and as the common curse of mortality, do weigh
down and hinder the Soul of thy Servant, that it cannot enter into freedom of
Spirit, as often as it would.

3. O my God, the ineffable sweetness, embitter unto me all carnal comfort,
which may draw me away from the love of eternal things, and may wickedly allure
me to it self by the beholding of some present delightsome good. Let me not be
overcome, O Lord, let me not be overcome by flesh and blood. Let not the World
and the short glory thereof deceive me. Let not the Devil and his subtle fraud
supplant me. Give me strength to resist, patience to suffer, and constancy to
persevere. Give me instead of all the comforts of the World, the most sweet
unction of thy Spirit, and in lieu of carnal Love, pour into my Soul the Love
of thy name.

4. Behold, Meat, Drink, Clothes, and other necessaries for the maintenance of
the body, are burdensome unto a fervent Spirit. Grant me to use such
refreshments moderately, and not to be entangled with an over great desire of
them. It is not lawful to cast away all things, for that nature is to be
sustained: But to desire superfluities, and those things that are rather
pleasurable, thy holy Law forbids: For otherwise the flesh would Rebel
against the Spirit. Herein, I beseech thee, let thy hand govern me, and teach
me, that I may not exceed.

CHAP. XXVII. That private Love most hinders from the chiefest Good.
CHrist. Son, thou ought to give all for all, and to retain nothing of thy
self. Know, that the Love of thy self does hurt thee more than any thing in the
World. According to the Love and affection thou bear them, so does every
thing cleave unto thee more or less. If thy love be pure, simple, and well
ordered, thou shall be free from the bondage of things. Covet not that which
thou may not have. Be not willing to have that which may hinder thee and
deprive thee of inward liberty. It is strange that thou committest not thy self
wholly unto me, from the bottom of thy heart, with all things that thou can
desire or have.

2. Why do thou consume thy self with vain grief? Why art thou tired with
needless cares? stand to my good will, and thou shall suffer no detriment at
all. If thou seek this or that, and would be here or there, to enjoy
thine own commodity and pleasure; thou shall never be at quiet, nor free from
trouble of mind; for in every thing somewhat will be wanting, and in every
place there will be some that will cross thee.

3. Not every external thing therefore attained and heaped together helps
thee, but it rather avails, if thou despise it, and do utterly root it out
from thy heart; which thou must not understand only of thy revenues and wealth,
but of thy seeking after honor also, and thy desire of vain praise, all which
do pass away with this world. The place avails little if the spirit of fervor
be wanting; neither shall that peace which is sought abroad long continue, if
the state of thy heart be destitute of a true foundation; that is, unless thou
stand steadfast in me, thou may change, but not better thy self. For when
occasion does happen, thou shall find not only those things which thou
soughtest to fly, but a great deal more.

A Prayer for purging the heart, and obtaining of Heavenly wisdom.
4. Christian. Strengthen me, O God, by the grace of thy holy Spirit. Give me
to be strengthened in my inward Man, and to empty my heart of all unprofitable
care and anguish; not to be drawn away with the sundry desires of any thing
either mean or precious, but to look upon all things as passing away, and that
my self do also pass away together with them, for nothing is permanent under
the Sun, where all things are vanity and vexation of spirit. O how wise is he
that so considers them!

5. Grant me, Lord, Heavenly wisdom, that I may learn above all things to seek
and find thee, above all things to relish thee, and to love thee, and to think
of all other things as they are, according to the disposal of thy wisdom. Grant
me prudently to avoid him that flatters me, and to suffer patiently him that
contradicts me. For it is a great part of wisdom not to be moved with every
blast of words; nor to give ear to an ill flattering Siren; for so we shall go
on securely in the way which we have begun.

CHAP. XXVIII. Against the Tongues of Slanderers.
CHrist. Son, take it not grievously if some think evil of thee, and speak that
which thou would not willingly hear. Thou ought to judge the worst of thy
self, and to think no Man weaker than thy self. If thou do walk spiritually,
thou will not much esteem of flying words. It is no small wisdom to keep
silence in an evil time, and inwardly to run to me, and not to be troubled with
the judgment of Men.

2. Let not thy peace be in the Tongues of Men; For whether they interpret well
or evil, thou art not therefore another Man. Where is true peace, and true
glory? Is it not in me? And he that coveteth not to please Men, nor fears to
displease them, shall enjoy much peace. From inordinate love and vain fear
arises all disquietness of heart and distraction of the mind.

CHAP. XXIX. How we ought to call upon God, and bless him when tribulation
draws near.
CHristian. Blessed (O Lord) be thy name for ever; since it pleases thee that
this temptation and tribulation should come upon me. I cannot fly it; but have
need to fly to thee that thou may help me, and turn it to my good. Lord I
am now afflicted, and it is not well with me. I am much troubled with this
present suffering. And now dear Father, what shall I say? I am caught amidst
straits, save me from this hour. Yet therefore came I into this hour, that thou
may be glorified, when I shall be greatly humbled, and by thee delivered.
Let it please thee Lord, to deliver me; for, poor wretch that I am, what can I
do, and whither shall I go without thee? Grant patience Lord, even this time
also. Help me my God, and then I will not fear how grievously soever I be
afflicted.

2. And now in these my troubles what shall I say? Lord, thy will be done; I
have well deserved to be afflicted and grieved. Surely I ought to bear it; and
O that I could bear it with patience, until the tempest be passed over, and it
become calm! But thy omnipotent hand is able to take even this temptation from
me, and to assuage the violence thereof, that I utterly sink not under it, as
oftentimes heretofore thou have done unto me, O my God, my mercy. And how much
the more hard it is to me, so much the more easy is this change of the right
hand of the most High.

CHAP. XXX. Of craving the divine aid, and confidence of recovering grace.
CHrist. Son, I am the Lord that gives strength in the day of tribulation.
Come unto me when it is not well with thee. This is that which most of all
hinders Heavenly consolation, that thou art slow in turning thy self unto
Prayer. For before thou do earnestly pray unto me, thou seek in the mean
while many comforts, and delightest thy self in outward things. And hence it
comes to pass that all does little profit thee, until thou consider that I am
he that delivers those that trust in me, and that out of me there is neither
powerful help, nor profitable counsel, nor lasting remedy. But now thou having
recovered breath after the tempest; gather strength again in the light of my
mercies; for I am at hand, says the Lord, to repair all, not only entirely,
but also abundantly and in a very plentiful measure.

2. Is there any thing hard to me? Or am I like unto him that promises and
performs not? Where is thy faith? Be firm and constant. Take courage and be
patient; comfort will come to thee in due time. Wait, wait for me, I will come
and heal thee. It is a temptation that vexes thee, and a vain fear that
affrighteth thee. What else does the care for future contingencies bring thee,
but sorrow upon sorrow? Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. It is a
vain and unprofitable thing to be grieved, or to rejoice for future things,
that perhaps will never come to pass.

3. But it is incident to Man, to be deluded with such imaginations; and a sign
of a weak mind to be so easily drawn away by the suggestion of the enemy. For
he cares not so he delude and deceive thee, whether it be true or false which
he proposes; whether he overthrow thee with the love of present, or the fear
of future things. Let not therefore thy heart be troubled, neither let it fear.
Believe in me, and put thy trust in my mercy. When thou think thy self
furthest off from me, oftentimes I am nearest unto thee. When thou judge that
almost all his lost, then oftentimes the greatest advantage of gaining is at
hand. All is not lost when any thing falls out contrary. Thou must not judge
according to that which thou feel for the present; nor so take, or give thy
self over to any grief, from whence soever it comes, as though all hope of
delivery were quite gone.

4. Think not thy self wholly left, although for a time I have sent thee some
tribulation, or withdrawn thy desired comfort; for this is the way to the
Kingdom of Heaven. And without doubt it is more expedient for thee and the rest
of my Servants, that ye be exercised with adversities, than that ye should have
all things according to your desires. I know the secret thoughts of thy heart,
and that it is very expedient for thy welfare, that thou be left sometimes
without taste of spiritual sweetness, and in a dry condition lest perhaps thou
should be puffed up with thy prosperous estate, and should please thy
self in that which thou art not. That which I have given I can take away; and
restore it again when I please.

5. When I give it, it is mine, when I withdraw it, I take not any thing that
is thine; for mine is every good and every perfect gift. If I send thee
affliction, or any Cross whatsoever, repine not, nor let thy heart fail thee; I
can quickly succor thee; and turn all thy heaviness into joy. Nevertheless I am
righteous, and greatly to be praised when I deal thus with thee.

6. If thou be wise, and considerest this rightly, thou will never mourn so
dejectedly for any adversity that befalls thee, but rather rejoice and give
thanks, yea, account this thy only joy that afflicting thee with sorrows, I do
not spare thee. As my Father has loved me, I also love you, said I unto my
beloved Disciples; whom certainly I sent not out to temporal joys, but to
great conflicts; not to honors, but to contempts; not to idleness, but to
labors; not to rest, but to bring forth much fruit with patience. My Son,
remember these words.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the contempt of all creatures, to find out the Creator.
CHristian. Lord, I stand in need of yet greater grace, that I may reach to
that pitch, as that nor Man nor any creature may be a let unto me. For as long
as any thing detains me, I cannot freely take my flight unto thee. He desired
to fly freely that said, Who will give me wings like a Dove, and I will fly and
be at rest? What thing more quiet than the single eye? And what more free, than
he that desires nothing upon Earth? Man ought therefore to pass over all
creatures, and perfectly to forsake himself, and to remain in excess of mind,
and to see that thou the Creator of all things, have nothing amongst creatures
like unto thee. And unless a Man be freed from the affection of all creatures,
he cannot with freedom of mind attend unto divine things. And for this cause
there are so few contemplative Men to be found, for that few can wholly
withdraw themselves from things created and perishing.

2. But to do this there is need of much grace which may raise up the soul, and
enravish it above it self. And unless a Man be raised up in spirit, and freed
from all creatures, and wholly united unto God; whatsoever he knows, and
whatsoever he has, is of little account. A long while shall he be little, and
lie grovelling below, that esteems any thing great, but the one only infinite
and eternal Good. For whatsoever is not God, is nothing, and ought to be
accounted as nothing. There is great difference between the wisdom of an
illuminated and religious Man, and the knowledge of a learned and studious
Clerk. For more noble is that learning which flows from above from the divine
influence, than that which is painfully gotten by the wit of Man.

3. There are many that desire contemplation, but they endeavor not to practice
those things that are required thereunto. Another great let is this, that we
rest in signs and sensible things, and take little care about the perfect
mortification of our selves. I know not what it is, nor by what spirit we are
led, nor what we pretend, we that seem to be called spiritual, that we take so
much pains and so great care for transitory and low things, and fearce or
seldom think of our own inward concernments, with the full recollection of our
minds.

4. Alas, presently after a slight recollection, we break out again, and weigh
not our words with diligent examination. We mind not where our affections lie;
nor be wail the impurity that is in all our actions. For all flesh had
corrupted his way, and therefore did that general flood ensue. Since our inward
affection then is much corrupted, it must needs be that our actions proceeding
thence be corrupted, as a sign of the want of inward vigor. From a pure heart
proceeds the fruit of a good life.

5. We ask how much one has done, but how virtuously or vigorously it was
done, is not so diligently considered. We inquire whether he be strong, rich,
beautiful, handsome, a good writer, a good singer, or a good laborer, but how
poor he is in spirit, how patient and meek, how religious and spiritual, is
seldom spoken of. Nature respects the outward things of Man, Grace turns it
self to the inward. That is often deceived; This has her trust in God, to the
end she be not deceived.

CHAP. XXXII. Of denial of our selves, and forsaking all inordinate desires.
CHrist. Son, thou can not possess perfect liberty, unless thou wholly deny
thy self. All such are fettered and in bondage as seek their proper interest
wholly, and are lovers of themselves, covetous, curious, wanderers, always
seeking pleasure, and not the things of Jesus Christ; but oftentimes devising
and framing that which will not continue; for all that is not of God shall
perish: Keep this short and complete saying: Forsake all, and thou shall find
all. Leave thy inordinate desires, and thou shall find rest. Consider this
well; and when thou have fulfilled it, thou shall understand all.

2. Christian. Lord, this is not one days work, nor Childrens sport; yea, in
this short word all the perfection of religious persons is included.

Christ. Son, thou must not go back, nor straightways be dejected, when thou
hear of the way of the perfect; but rather be stirred up to higher things,
or at least in desire sigh after them. I would it were so well with thee, and
thou were come up to this pitch, that thou were no longer a lover of thy self,
but did stand merely at my beck, and at his whom I have appointed a Father
over thee; then thou should exceedingly please me, and all thy life would
pass away in joy and peace, Thou have yet many things to forsake, which unless
thou wholly resign up unto me, thou shall not attain to that which thou
desire. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may
become rich, that is Heavenly wisdom, which treads under foot all base and
earthly things. Set little by earthly wisdom, and care not fondly to please
others or thy self.

3. I said, that the mean things must be bought with precious things and such
as were with Men of great esteem. For the true Heavenly wisdom seems mean and
of small account, and is scarce thought of by Men; for that esteems not
highly of it self, nor seeks to be magnified upon Earth; many praise it from
the teeth outward, but in their life they are far from it; yet is it the
precious Pearl which is hidden from many.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of inconstancy of heart, and of directing our final intentions
unto God.
Christ. Son, trust not to thy present affection; for it will quickly be
changed into another thing. As long as thou live, thou art subject to
mutability, even against thy will; so that now thou art merry, now sad; now
quiet, now troubled; now devout, now undevout; now diligent, now slow; now
grave, now light. But he that is wise and well instructed in the spirit,
stands fast upon these mutable things; not heeding what he feels in
himself, or which way the wind of instability blows; but that the whole
intention of his mind may tend to the right and best end. For thus he may
continue one, and the self same, and unshaken in the midst of so many various
events, directing continually the single eye of his intention unto me.

2. And how much purer the eye of the intention is, with so much the more
constancy does he pass through the several kinds of storms. But in many things
the eye of a pure intention waxes dimsighted, for it quickly looks upon some
delightsom object that it meets withal; And it is rare to find one that is
wholly free from all blemish of self-seeking. So the Jews in times past came
into Bethany to Martha and Mary, not for Jesus alone, but to see Lazarus also.
The eye of our intention therefore is to be purged, that it may be single and
right, and to be directed unto me, beyond the manifold diversity of all
mediums. and whatsoever earthly objects come between.

CHAP. XXXIV. That God is sweet, above all things, and in all things, to him
that loves.
CHristian. Behold, my God, and all things. What would I have more, and what
more happy thing can I desire? O sweet and savory word! but to him that loves
the Word, not the world nor those things that are in the world, My God, and all
things. Enough is said to him, that understands; and to him that loves it is
pleasant to repeat it often. For when thou art present, all things do yield
delight; but when thou are absent, every thing becomes irksom. Thou give
quiet of heart and much peace, and pleasant joy. Thou make us think well of
all things, and praise thee in all things; neither can any thing please long
without thee; but if it be pleasant and grateful, thy grace must be present,
and it must be seasoned with the sweetness of thy wisdom.

2. What is not savory unto him to whom thou art pleasing? And whom thou
delightest not, what can be pleasant to him? But the wise of this world, and
they that relish the things of the flesh, come short of thy wisdom; for in the
world is much vanity, and in the flesh is death. But they that follow thee by
the contempt of worldly things, and mortification of the flesh, are proved to
be truly wise; For they are changed from vanity to truth, from the flesh to the
spirit. These relish God; and what good soever is found in creatures, they
wholly refer unto the praise of their Maker. Notwithstanding great yea very
great is the difference between the sweetness of the creator and of the
creature, of eternity and of time, of light uncreated and of light enlightened.

3. O thou everlasting light, surpassing all created lights, dart the beams of
thy brightness from above, which may pierce all the most inward parts of my
heart; purify, rejoice, enlighten and enliven my spirit, with all the powers
thereof, that I may cleave unto thee with abundance of joy and triumph. O when
will that blessed and desired hour come, that I may be filled with thy
presence, and thou may be unto me all in all! As long as this is not granted
me, I shall not have full joy. Alas! the old Man yet lives in me, he is not
wholly crucified, he is not perfectly dead. He does as yet lust strongly
against the spirit, and stirs up inward wars, and suffers not the Kingdom
of my soul to be in peace.

4. But thou that rulest the power of the Sea, and stillest the rising of the
Waves thereof, arise and help me; scatter the People that desire war, destroy
them in thy might, display thy greatness, and let thy right hand be glorified,
for there is no hope nor refuge for me, but in thee my Lord God.

CHAP. XXXV That there is no security from temptation in this life.
CHrist. Son, there is no security in this life; as long as thou live, thou
shall always have need of spiritual armor. Thou live among enemies, and art
assaulted on the right hand and on the left. If therefore thou defendest not
thy self on every side with the shield of patience, thou can not be long
unwounded. Moreover, if thou fix not thy heart on me with a sincere will to
suffer all things for me, thou can not bear the heat of this battle, nor
obtain the triumphant reward of the Saints in bliss. Thou ought therefore
manfully to go through all, and to use a strong hand against whatsoever
withstandeth thee. For to him that overcomes is manna given; but for the
negligent there remains much misery.

2. If thou seek rest in this world, how will thou then attain to
everlasting rest? Dispose not thy self to much ease, but to much patience. Seek
true peace, not in Earth, but in Heaven; not in Men nor in any other creature,
but in God alone. Thou ought for the love of God willingly to undergo all
things, even labors, griefs, temptations, vexations, anxieties, necessities,
infirmities, injuries, detractions, reprehensions, humblings, shame,
corrections, and contempts; these help to virtue: these try a Novice of Christ;
these make the Heavenly Crown. I will give an everlasting reward for a short
labor, and infinite glory for transitory shame.

3. Think thou that thou shall always have spiritual consolations at will?
My Saints had not so, but they had many afflictions, and sundry temptations,
and many discomforts; in all which they did bear up themselves patiently, and
trusted rather in God than in themselves, knowing that the sufferings of this
time are not condign to the deserving of future glory. Will thou have that
straightways, which many after many tears and great labors have hardly
obtained? Wait upon the Lord, do manfully, be of good courage; do not despair,
do not fly, but with constancy expose both body and soul for the glory of God.
I will reward thee in most plentiful manner, and I will be with thee in all thy
tribulations.

CHAP. XXXVI. Against the vain judgments of Men.
CHrist. Son, cast thy heart constantly upon God, and fear not the judgment of
Men, when thy conscience gives testimony of thy piety and innocence. It is a
good and happy thing to suffer in such a way; neither will it be burdensome to
an humble heart, nor to him that trusts rather in God than in himself. The
most part of Men are given to talk much, and therefore little heed is to be
given them; neither is it possible to satisfy all. Although Paul endeavored to
please all in the Lord, and made himself all things unto all, yet with him it
was a very small thing that he should be judged of Man's judgment.

2. He did for the edification and salvation of others as much as he could, and
lay in him; yet could he not hinder but that he was sometimes judged and
despised by others. Therefore he committed all to God, who knew all, and he
defended himself with patience and humility against evil tongues; and such as
thought vanities and lies, and spoke what they listed: Yet sometimes
notwithstanding he answered, lest the weak should be offended by his silence.

3. Who art thou that fear a mortal Man? To day he is, and to morrow he is
not seen. Fear God, and thou shall not need to fear the terrors of Men. What
harm can the words or injuries of any do thee? He rather hurts himself than
thee; neither can he avoid the judgment of God, whosoever he be. Have thou God
before thine eyes, and contend not with complaining words. And if for the
present thou seem to be worsted, and to suffer shame without desert; do not
therefore repine, neither do thou lessen thy crown by thy impatience; but
rather lift up thy eyes to me in Heaven, who am able to deliver thee from all
shame and wrong, and to render to every one according to their works.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a full and pure resignation of our selves, for the obtaining
freedom of heart.
CHrist. Son, forsake thy self, and thou shall find me. Make no self respecting
choice of any thing, appropriate nothing to thy self, and thou shall ever be a
gainer. For greater grace shall be given thee, when thou do perfectly resign
thy self, and not turn back to take thy self again.

Christian. Lord, how often shall I resign my self; and wherein shall I forsake
my self?

Christ. Always, and every hour, as well in little things as in great. I do
except nothing, but do require that thou be naked and void of all things.
Otherwise how can thou be mine, and I thine, unless both within and without
thou be free from all self will? And how much the sooner thou do this, so
much the better it will be with thee; and how much the more fully and sincerely
thou do it, so much the more shall thou please me, and so much the more
shall thou gain.

2. Some there are that resign themselves, but with some exception; for they
put not their whole trust in God, and therefore they study how to provide for
themselves. Some also at the first do offer all, but afterward being assailed
with temptations, do return again to that which they had left, and therefore
they go not forward in the way of virtue. These shall not attain to the true
liberty of the pure heart, nor to the favor of my sweetest familiarity, unless
they first make an entire resignation and a daily oblation of themselves unto
me. For without this there neither is nor can be the fruitive union with me.

3. I have often said unto thee, and now again I say the same, Forsake thy
self, resign thy self, and thou shall enjoy much inward peace. Give all for
all; seek nothing, require back nothing, abide purely and with a firm
confidence in me, and thou shall enjoy me; thou shall be free in heart, and
darkness shall not have power over thee. Let this be thy whole endeavor, let
this be thy Prayer, let this be thy desire; that being stripped of all selfness,
thou may even nakedly follow naked Jesus, and dying to thy self, may live
eternally to me. Then shall all vain imaginations, evil perturbations, and
superfluous cares fly away! then shall immoderate fear leave thee, and
inordinate love shall die.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of good government in outward things, and of recourse to God in
dangers.
CHrist. Son, thou ought with all diligence to procure, that in every place
and action or external business, thou be inwardly free and Master of thy self,
and that all things be under thee, and thou not under them; that thou may be
Lord and Master of thy actions; not a servant or a hireling, but rather a
Freeman and a true Hebrew, passing into the lot and freedom of the Sons of
God, who standing upon the things that are present, view the things which are
eternal; who look on transitory things with the left eye, and with the right do
behold the things of Heaven; whom temporal things cannot draw to cleave unto
them, but they rather draw temporal things to serve them, and to be disposed by
them in such a way as they are ordained by God, and appointed by the Creator of
all, who has left nothing in his creatures without due order.

2. If thou remain steadfast in all events, and do not weigh by the outward
appearance, nor with a carnal eye, the things which thou see and hear; but
presently in every affair do enter with Moses into the Tabernacle to ask
council of the Lord; thou shall sometimes hear the divine Oracle, and shall
return instructed concerning many things both present and to come. For Moses
had always recourse to the Tabernacle for the deciding of doubts and
controversies, and fled to the help of Prayer, for a defense against the
iniquity and dangers of Men. So ought thou in like manner to fly to the
closet of thy heart, earnestly craving the Divine favor. For the Scripture
testifies, that therefore was Ioshuah and the Children of Israel deceived by
the Gibeonites, because they asked not council at the Mouth of the Lord, but
giving too lightly credit to their fair words, were deluded with their
counterfeit piety.

CHAP. XXXIX. That a Man be not over-earnest in his affairs.
CHrist. Son, always commit thy cause to me, I will dispose well of it in due
time; wait for my ordering of it, and thou shall find it will be for thy good.

Christian. Lord, I do most willingly commit all unto thee, for my care can
avail little. O that I cleaved not too much to future events, but offered my
self with all readiness of mind to thy good pleasure!

2. Christ, Son, oftentimes a Man does earnestly labor for that which he
desires, and when he has gotten it, he begins to be of another mind; for
Man's affections do not long continue fixed on one thing, but do pass from one
to another. It is therefore no small thing for a Man to forsake himself even in
the smallest things.

3. The true spiritual profiting of a Man consists in the denying of himself;
and he that is thus resigned, lives in great freedom and security. But the old
enemy, who always sets himself against all that are good, cease at no time
from tempting, but day and night lies grievously in wait, to cast the unwary,
if he can, into the snare of deceit. Therefore Watch and Pray, says our Lord,
that ye enter not into temptation.

CHAP. XL. That Man has no good of himself nor any thing whereof he can glory.
CHristian. Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man,
that thou visitest him! What has Man deserved that thou should favor him?
Lord, what cause have I to complain, if thou forsake me? Or if thou do not
that which I desire, what can I justly say against it? Surely, this I may truly
think and say, Lord, I am nothing, I can do nothing, I have nothing that is
good of my self; but in all things I am defective, and do ever tend to nothing;
and unless thou help me, and do inwardly instruct me, I become altogether
cold, and am dissolved.

2. But thou, O Lord, art always the same, and endurest for ever; always good,
just, and holy, doing all things well, justly and holily, and disposing all
things with wisdom. But I that am more ready to go backward than forward, do
not ever continue in one estate, for Seven times are passed over me; yet does
it soon turn to the better, when it so pleases thee, and when thou vouchsafest
to stretch forth thy helping hand. For thou alone can help me without the aid
of Man, and so strengthen me, that my countenance shall be no more changed, but
my heart shall be turned to thee alone, and there shall rest.

3. Wherefore if I could once perfectly forsake all humane comfort, either for
the attaining of devotion, or for mine own necessity, which inforceth me to
seek after thee, (for none else can comfort me) then might I well hope in thy
grace, and rejoice for the gift of new consolation.

4. Thanks be unto thee, from whence all proceeds, as often as it goes well
with me; but I am mere vanity and nothing in thy sight, and unconstant and weak
Man. Whereof then can I glory? Or for what do I desire to be esteemed of? Is it
not even for nothing? But this is most vain. Truly vain glory is an evil plague
and a very great vanity; because it draws Man from true glory, and robs
him of Heavenly grace. For whilst a Man pleases himself, he displeases thee;
whilst he gapeth after the praise of Men, he is deprived of true virtues.

5. But the true glory and holy rejoicing is for a Man to glory in thee, and
not in himself; to rejoice in thy Name, and not in his own virtue or strength,
nor to delight in any creature, but for thee. Praised be thy Name, not mine;
magnified be thy work, not mine. Let the holy Name be blessed, but to me let no
part of Men's praises be given. Thou art my glory, thou art the joy of my heart.
In thee will I glory and rejoice all the day; but as for my self I will not
glory, but in my infirmities.

6. Let the Jews seek honor one of another; I will desire this which is from
God alone. For all humane glory, all temporal honor, all worldly highness,
compared to thy eternal glory, is vanity and folly. O my Truth, my mercy, my
God, most blessed Trinity, to thee alone be praise, honor, power and glory for
evermore.

CHAP. XLI. Of the contempt of all temporal honors.
CHrist. Son, trouble not thy self, if thou see others honored and advanced,
and thy self contemned and debased. Lift up thy heart unto me in Heaven, and
the contempt of Men on Earth will not grieve thee.

Christian. Lord, we are blind, and quickly seduced with vanity. If I look well
into my self, I cannot say that any creature has done me wrong; and therefore
I cannot justly complain of thee.

2. But because I have often and grievously sinned against thee, all creatures
do justly take arms against me; for shame and contempt is due unto me, but unto
thee praise, honor and glory. And unless I frame my self with a very good will
to be despised and forsaken of all creatures, and to be esteemed nothing at
all; I cannot obtain inward peace and strength nor be spiritually enlightened,
nor fully united unto thee.

CHAP. XLII. That our peace is not to be placed in Men.
CHrist. Son, if the peace thou have with any be grounded upon the opinion
which thou have of him, or upon the account of thine acquaintance with him,
thou shall ever be in an unconstant and enthralled condition; but if thou have
recourse unto the everliving and eternal Truth, a friend going from thee or
dying shall not grieve thee. The love of thy friend ought to be grounded in me;
and for me is he to be beloved, whosoever he be whom thou think well of, and
is very dear unto thee in this life. No friendship can avail, or continue
without me; neither is that love true and pure, which is not knit by me. Thou
ought to be so dead to such affections of beloved friends, that (forasmuch
as appertains unto thee) thou should wish to be without all company of
Men. Man approaches so much the nearer unto God, by how much the further off
he departs from all Earthly comfort; so much the higher also he ascends
unto God by how much lower he descends into himself, and how much the meaner
he is in his own sight.

2. But he that attributes any good unto himself, hinders the coming of Gods
grace unto him; for the grace of the holy Ghost ever seeks an humble heart.
If thou could perfectly annihilate thy self, and empty thy self of all
created love; then should I flow into thee with great abundance of grace. When
thou castest thy eyes on creatures, the sight of thy Creator is taken from
thee. Learn to overcome thy self in all things, for the love of thy Creator;
and then shall thou be able to attain to divine knowledge. How little soever
the thing be, if it be inordinately loved and regarded; it defiles the soul,
and hinders the enjoying of the chiefest good.

CHAP. XLIII. Against vain and secular knowledge.
CHrist. Son, let not the fair speeches and subtle sayings of Men move thee.
For the Kingdom of God consists not in word, but in power. Observe well my
words; for they inflame hearts, and enlighten minds, they cause compunction,
and bring sundry comforts. Do thou never read to show thy self learned or wise;
but labor to mortify thy sins; for that will profit thee more than the knowledge
of many difficult questions.

2. When thou shall have read and known many things; thou ought ever to
return to one beginning and Principle. I am he, that teaches Man knowledge, and
give unto babes a more clear understanding, that can be taught by Man. He
therefore, to whom I speak, shall quickly be wise, and shall profit much in the
spirit. Woe be to them that enquire many curious things of Men, and do little
mind the way how to serve me. The time will come, when the Master of Masters
shall appear, Christ the Lord of Angels, to hear the lessons of all, that is,
to examine the consciences of every one; and then he will search Jerusalem with
a candle, and the hidden things of darkness shall be laid open, and the
arguings of Men's Tongues shall be silent.

3. I am he that in an instant do raise up the humble mind to understand more
of the eternal truth, than can be gotten by Ten years study in the Schools: I
teach without the noise of words, without the confounding of opinions, without
ambition of honor, without the scuffling of arguments. I am he that teaches to
despise Earthly things, to loath things present, to seek the everlasting, to
relish the things that are eternal, to flee honors, to suffer injuries, to
place all hope in me, to desire nothing out of me, and above all things
ardently to love me.

4. For a certain person by loving me entirely, learned divine things, and
spoke that which was admirable; he profited more by forsaking all things, than
in studying subtilties. To some I speak common things, to others more special
things; to some I appear sweetly by signs and figures, but to some I reveal
mysteries with much light. The voice of books is indeed one, but it teaches
not all Men alike. For I am the inward teacher, I am the Truth, I am the
searcher of the heart, the discerner of the thoughts, the setter forwards of
what is good, distributing to every one as I judge meet.

CHAP. XLIV. Of not drawing outward things to our selves.
CHrist. Son, in many things thou ought to be ignorant, and esteem thy self
as dead upon Earth, and as one to whom the whole world is crucified. Thou must
also pass by many things with a deaf ear, and rather think of that which
appertains to thy peace. It is better for thee to turn thine eyes from what
does mislike thee, and to leave unto every one his own opinion, than to strive
with contentious words. If all stand well betwixt thee and God, and if thou
have his judgment in thy mind, thou shall the more easily bear if thou be
overcome.

2. Christian. O Lord, to what a pass are we come! Behold, we bewail a temporal
loss, for a little gain we toil and run; and the spiritual damage of our soul
is forgotten, and hardly at length called to mind. That which little or nothing
profits, is minded; and that which is chiefly necessary, is slightly passed
over, because the whole Man does slide down into eternal things; and unless he
speedily repent, he lies immerst in them, and that willingly.

CHAP. XLV. That credit is not to be given to all Men: and how prone Man is to
offend in words.
CHristian. Help me, O Lord, in my tribulation, for vain is the help of Man.
How often have I been deceived, finding want of faith where I thought it sure?
And how often have I found faith where I least expected it? It is vain
therefore to trust in Men; but the salvation of the just, O Lord, is in thee.
Blessed be thou my Lord God, in all things that befall us. We are weak and
inconstant, quickly deceived, and soon changed.

2. Who is he, that in all things so warily and circumspectly keeps himself,
that he never falls into any deceit or perplexity? But he that trusts in
thee, O Lord, and seeks thee with a single heart, does not so easily fail;
and if he fall into any tribulation, be he never so much enthralled, yet he
shall quickly be either delivered or comforted by thee. For thou will not
forsake him for ever that trusts in thee. A friend is rare to be found, that
continues faithful in all his friends distress; but thou, O Lord, thou alone
art most faithful at all times, and there is none like unto thee.

3. O how wise was that holy soul that said, My mind is firmly settled and
grounded in Christ! If it were so with me, then would not humane fear so easily
trouble me, nor the darts of words move me. Who can foresee all things? Who is
able to beware beforehand of future evils? If things even foreseen do
oftentimes hurt us, how can things unlooked for choose but wound us grievously?
But why did I not provide better for my self, miserable Wretch? Why also have I
so easily given credit to others? But we are Men, nothing but frail Men,
although by many we are reputed and called Angles. To whom shall I give credit,
Lord? to whom but to thee? Thou art the Truth that neither do deceive, nor
can be deceived. And on the other side, Every Man is a liar, weak, unconstant,
and subject to fall, especially in words; and therefore we must not easily give
credit even to that, which in outward show seems at the first to be right.

4. O with what wisdom have thou warned us to beware of Men! And because a Man's
foes are they of his own household, not to give credit, if one should say, Lo
here, or Lo there. I am taught to my cost, and O that I might thereby increase
my care, and not my folly. Be wary says one, be wary, keep to thy self what I
tell thee; and whilst I hold my peace, and think it is secret, he cannot keep
that secret which he desired should be secret, but presently discloseth me and
himself, and goes his way. From such tales and such indiscreet persons protect
me, O Lord, that I fall not into their hands, nor ever commit such things. Give
me to observe truth and constancy in my words, and remove far from me a
deceitful Tongue. What I am not willing to suffer, I ought by all means to
avoid.

5. O how good is it and tending to peace, to be silent of others, nor to
believe promiscuously all that is said, nor easily to report what we have
heard; to lay ones self open to few; always to seek after thee who art the
beholder of the heart; not to be carried about with every wind of words, but to
desire that all things both within and without, be accomplished according to
the pleasure of thy will. How safe is it for the keeping of Heavenly grace, to
fly the sight of Men, and not to seek those things that seem to cause
admiration abroad, but to follow that will all diligence, which brings
amendment of life and zeal of godliness.

6. To how many has virtue known and over hastily commended, been hurtful? How
profitable has grace been kept with silence in this mortal life, which is
nothing but a temptation and a warfare?

CHAP. XLVI. Of putting our trust in God when evil words arise.
CHrist. Son, be constant, and put thy trust in me. For what are words but
words? They fly through the Air, but hurt not so much as a stone. If thou be
guilty, see that thou be not unwilling to amend thy self; if thou be innocent,
resolve to suffer this willingly for the sake of God. It is but a small matter
to suffer sometimes a few words, if thou have not yet the courage to endure
hard stripes. And why do small matters go to thy heart, but for that thou art
yet carnal, and regardest Men more than thou ought? Because thou art afraid
to be despised, therefore thou will not be reprehended for thy faults, but
seek the shades of excuses.

2. But look better into thy self, and thou shall see that the world is yet
alive in thee, and a vain affection to please Men. For when thou shunnest to be
humbled and reproved for thy faults, it is evident that thou art neither truly
humble, nor truly dead to the world, nor the world crucified to thee. But give
diligent ear to my words, and thou shall little regard Ten thousand words
spoken by Men. Behold, if all should be spoken against thee that could be most
maliciously invented, what would it hurt thee, if thou sufferedst it to pass
and made no more reckoning of it than of a mote? could all those words pluck
as much as one hair from thy head?

3. But he that has no heart in him, nor has God before his eyes, is easily
moved with a word of dispraise; when as he that trusts in me, and affects not
to confide in his own judgment, shall be free from humane fears. For I am the
Judge and the discerner of all secrets: I know how the matter passed; I know
him that offers the injury, and him that suffers it. From me has this
proceeded; this has happened by my permission, that the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed. I shall judge the guilty, and the innocent; but by a secret
judgment I would before hand try them both.

4. The Testimony of Men oftentimes deceives; but my judgment is true, it
shall stand and not be overthrown. It is commonly hidden, and not known in
every thing, but to few notwithstanding it never erreth, neither can it err,
although to the eyes of the foolish it seems not right. Men ought therefore to
have recourse to me in every judgment, and not to leave to their own opinions.
For the just Man will not be troubled, whatsoever befalls him from God; and
if any thing be wrongfully brought forth against him, he will not much care;
neither will he vainly be glad, if by others he be with reason excused. For he
considers that I am he that searches the heart and reins, and do judge not
according to the outward face, nor humane appearance. For that is oftentimes
found culpable in my sight, that in the Judgment of Men is thought to be
commendable.

5. Christian. O Lord God, the just judge, strong and patient, thou who know
the frailty and pravity of Man, be thou my strength, and all my trust, for mine
own conscience suffices me not. Thou know that which I know not, and
therefore in every reproof I ought to have humbled my self, and to have born
meekly; vouchsafe mercifully to pardon me, as often as I have failed herein,
and give me again grace of greater sufferance. For thy abundant mercy is more
available to me for the obtaining of pardon, than my conceived justice for the
defense of my hidden conscience. Although I know nothing by my self, yet I
cannot hereby justify my self; for without thy mercy no Man living shall be
justified in thy sight.

CHAP. XLVII. That all grievous things are to be endured for life everlasting.
CHrist. Son, be not dismayed with the painful labors which thou have
undertaken for me, neither be thou wholly discomforted for the tribulations
which do befall thee; but let my promise strengthen and comfort thee in all
events. I am able to reward thee infinitely and above all measure. Thou shall
not long toil here, nor always be pressed with griefs. Wait a while and thou
shall see a speedy end of thy evils. There will come an hour when all labor and
trouble shall cease. Little and short is all that which passes away with time.

2. Do what thou do; labor faithfully in my Vineyard, I will be thy reward.
Write, read, sing, mourn, keep silence, pray, suffer crosses manfully; life
everlasting is worthy of all these yea and greater combats. Peace shall come in
the day which is known unto the Lord, and there shall be neither day nor night,
to wit, of this time, but everlasting light, infinite brightness, steadfast
peace, and secure rest. Then thou shall not say, Who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? Nor cry, Woe is me, that my sojourning is prolonged! For
death shall be thrown down, and salvation shall appear which never shall have
end, there shall be no anxiety; but blessed joy, sweet and lovely company.

3. O, if thou had seen the everlasting Crowns of the Saints in Heaven, and
with how great glory they now rejoice who in times past were contemptible to
this world, and esteemed unworthy of life it self; truly thou would
presently humble thy self even unto the Earth; and would rather seek to be
under the feet of all, than to have command so much as over one; neither
would thou desire the pleasant days of this life, but rather rejoice to
suffer affliction for God, and esteem it thy greatest gain to be reputed as
nothing amongst Men.

4. O if thou had a relishing of these things, and did suffer them to sink
into the bottom of thy heart, how durst thou so much as once to complain? Are
not all painful labors to be endured for everlasting life? It is no small
matter, to lose or to gain the Kingdom of Heaven. Lift up thy face therefore
unto Heaven; behold I, and all my Saints with me, who in this world had great
conflicts, do now rejoice, now are comforted, now are secure, now are at rest,
and shall remain with me everlastingly in the Kingdom of my Father.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the everlasting day, and shortness of this life.
CHristian. O most blessed mansion of the Heavenly City! O most clear day of
Eternity, which night obscureth not, but the highest Truth ever enlightneth; a
day of continual joy, of perpetual quietness, and never changing into a
contrary state! O that that day would once appear, and all these temporal
things were at an end! To the Saints it shines glistering with evelasting
brightness, but to those that are Pilgrims upon Earth, it appears only afar
off, and as it were through a glass.

2. The Citizens of Heaven do know how joyful that day is; but the banished
Children of Eve bewail the bitterness and tediousness of this. The days of
this life are short and evil, full of sorrow and anguish; where Man is defiled
with many sins, encumbered with many passions, disquieted with many fears,
filled with many cares, distracted with many curiosities, entangled with many
vanities, compassed about with many errors, worn away with many labors, vexed
with temptations, weakened with pleasures, tormented with want.

3. O, when shall these evils be at an end! when shall I be delivered from the
miserable bondage of sin! When shall I think, O Lord, of thee alone! When shall
I fully rejoice in thee! When shall I enjoy true liberty without all
impediments whatsoever, without all trouble of mind and body! When shall I have
solid peace, secure and undisturbed peace, peace within and without, peace
every way assured! O good Jesus when shall I stand to behold thee! When shall I
contemplate the glory of thy Kingdom! When will thou be unto me All in all! O
when shall I be with thee in thy Kingdom, which thou have prepared for thy
beloved from all eternity! I am left a poor and banished Man in the land of
mine enemies, where there are daily wars and great calamities.

4. Comfort my banishment, assuage my sorrow; for my whole desire fights
after thee. For all is burdensome to me whatsoever this world offers for my
comfort. I long to enjoy thee most inwardly but I cannot attain unto it. My
desire is that I may be wholly given up to Heavenly things, but temporal things
and unmortified passions weigh me down. With the mind I would be above all
things, but with the flesh I am enforced to be subject against my will. Thus
unhappy Man that I am, I fight against my self, and am become grievous to my
self, whilst my spirit seeks to be above, and my flesh to be below.

5. O what do I inwardly suffer, when in my mind I consider Heavenly things,
and presently in my prayers a multitude of carnal imaginations present
themselves before me! My God, be not far from me, depart not in thy wrath from
thy Servant. Cast forth thy lightning, and disperse them; send out thy darts,
and break all the imaginations which my enemy casts in. Gather in, call home my
senses unto thee, make me forget all the things of this world: grant me to cast
away speedily the imaginations of wickedness. Succor me, O thou the everlasting
Truth, that no vanity may move me. Come Heavenly sweetness and let all impurity
fly from before thee. Pardon me also, and mercifully forgive me as often as I
think upon any thing else besides thee in prayer. I do truly confess, that I am
wont to be subject to many distractions; for oftentimes I am not there, where I
do corporally stand, or sit, but I am rather there, whither my thoughts do
carry me. Where my thought is, there am I: there is oftentimes my thought,
where my affection is. That quickly offers it self unto me, which is
naturally delightsom, or by custom is pleasing.

6. And for this cause, thou that art Truth it self have plainly said. Where
thy treasure is, there is also thy heart. If I love Heaven, I willingly think
of Heavenly things. If I love the world, I rejoice at the felicity of the
world, and grieve for the adversity thereof. If I love the flesh, I shall fancy
oftentimes those things that are pleasing to the flesh; If I love the spirit, I
delight to think of spiritual things. For whatsoever I love, thereof do I
willingly speak, and hear, and carry home with me the forms, the Ideas and
representations thereof. But blessed is that Man, that for thee, O Lord,
dismisseth all creatures, that violently resists nature, and through fervor
of spirit crucifieth the lusts of the flesh, that so with a serene conscience
he may offer pure prayer unto thee, and be meet to be admitted into the
Angelical quire, all earthly things both outwardly and inwardly being excluded.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the desire of everlasting life, and how great rewards are
promised to those that fight valiantly.
CHrist. Son, when thou perceivest the desire of everlasting bliss to be given
thee from above, and desire to depart out of the Tabernacle of this body,
that thou may behold my brightness without shadow of turning; open thy
heart wide, and receive this holy inspiration with thy whole desire. Give
greatest thanks to the Heavenly goodness, that deals with thee so favorably,
visits thee mercifully, stirs thee up fervently, holds thee up
powerfully, lest through thine own weight thou fall down to the things of
Earth. Neither do thou obtain this by thy own thought or endeavor, but by the
mere dignation of Heavenly grace and divine favor; to the end that thou may
make a further progress in holiness, and obtain greater humility, and prepare
thy self for future battles, and endeavor to cleave unto me with the whole
affection of thy heart, and serve me with a fervent desire.

2. Son, the fire burns many times, but the flame ascends not up without
smoke; so likewise the desires of some Men burn toward Heavenly things, and
yet they are not free from temptation of carnal affection; and therefore it is
not altogether purely for the honor of God that which they so exactly request
of him. Such is also oftentimes thy desire, which thou have pretended to be so
serious. For that is not pure and perfect, which is tinctured with the love of
thine own proper commodity and interest.

3. Ask not that which is delightful and profitable to thee, but that which is
acceptable to me, and appertains to my honor; for if thou judge aright,
thou ought to prefer and follow my appointment, rather than thine own
desire, or any desired thing. I know thy desire, and have heard thy frequent
groans. Now thou would enjoy the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; now
does the everlasting habitation, and the Heavenly Country replenished with all
joy, delight thee; but that hour is not yet come; as yet there is another time,
to wit, a time of war, a time of labor and trial. Thou desire to be filled
with the chiefest good, but thou can not attain it for the present. I am he,
says the Lord whom thou must patiently wait for, until the Kingdom of God does
come.

4. Thou art yet to be tried upon Earth, and to be exercised in many things.
Comfort shall be sometimes given thee, but the abundant fullness thereof shall
not be granted. Take courage therefore, and be valiant as well in doing as in
suffering things contrary to nature. Thou ought to put on the new Man, and
to be changed into another Man. Thou must oftentimes do that which thou
would not, and leave undone that thou would do. That which is pleasing to
others, shall go well forward; that which thou wishest, shall not speed. That
which others say, shall be heard; what thou say, shall be nothing regarded.
Others shall ask and shall receive: Thou shall ask and not obtain.

5. Others shall be great in the praise of Men, but of thee there shall be no
speech. To others this or that shall be committed, but thou shall be accounted
fit for nothing. At this nature will sometimes be troubled, and it is much if
thou bear it with silence. In these and many such like, a faithful Servant
of the Lord is wont to be tried how he can deny and break himself in all
things. There is scarce any thing, wherein thou have had such need to dye to
thy self, as in seeing and suffering those things that are contrary to thy
will; especially when that is commanded, which seems unto thee inconvenient,
or less profitable. And for that thou being placed under authority dare not
resist higher power, therefore it seems hard to thee to walk at the beck of
another, and to leave all thine own opinion.

6. But consider, Son, the fruit of these labors, the end near at hand, and the
reward exceeding great; and thou shall be so far from sustaining them
grievously, that thou will take great comfort of thy patience. For in regard of
that little of thy will, which now thou willingly forsakest, thou shall always
have thy will in Heaven. There thou shall find all that thou will or can
desire; there thou shall enjoy all good without fear of losing it; there shall
thy will be ever one with me; it shall not covet any outward or private thing.
There no Man shall withstand thee, no Man complain of thee, no Man hinder thee,
nothing come against thee; but all things desired shall be there together
present, and refresh thy whole affection, and fill it up to the brim. There I
will give thee glory for the reproach which here thou sufferedst; the garment
of praise for heaviness; for the lowest place a kingly Throne for ever; there
shall the fruit of obedience appear, the labor of repentance rejoice, and
humble subjection shall be gloriously crowned.

7. Now therefore be humbly obedient unto all, and regard not who said or
commanded this; but take great heed, that whether thy Superior, or thy
inferior, or thine equal, require any thing of thee, or do insinuate their
desire; thou take it all in good part, and endeavor to fulfill it with a sincere
will. Let one seek this, another that; let him 'glory in this, the other in
that, and be praised a thousand thousand times; but do thou neither rejoice in
this, nor in that, but in the contempt of thy self, and only in my good
pleasure and honor. This art thou to wish, that whether it be thy life or
death, God may be always glorified in thee.

CHAP. L. How a disconsolate person ought to offer himself into the hands of
God.
CHristian. Lord God, Holy Father be thou blessed both now and for evermore,
because as thou will, so is it done, and what thou do, is good. Let thy
Servant rejoice in thee, not in himself nor in any thing else; for thou alone
art the true gladness, thou art my hope and my crown, thou art my joy and my
honor. O Lord. What has thy Servant, but what he has received from thee, even
without any merit of his? Thine is all that thou have given, and whatsoever
thou have made. I am poor, and in labors from my youth; and sometimes my soul
is sorrowful even unto tears; sometimes also it is troubled in it self by
reason of evils which hang over mine head.

2. I long after the joy of peace, I earnestly crave the peace of thy Children
that are fed by thee in the light of thy comfort. If thou give peace, if thou
pour into my heart holy joy; the soul of thy Servant shall be full of gladness,
and shall become devout in thy praise; but if thou withdraw thy self, (as many
times thou do) he will not be able to run the ways of thy commandments, but
rather he will bow his knees, and knock his breast, for it is not now with him
as it was heretofore, when thy candle shined upon his Head, and he was
protected under the shadow of thy wings, from the temptations which violently
assaulted him.

3. O righteous Father, and ever to be praised, the hour is come, that thy
Servant is to be tried! Behold dear Father, meet it is that in this hour thy
Servant suffer something for thy sake. O Father, evermore to be honored, the
hour is come, which from all eternity thou did foreknow should come; that for
a short time thy Servant should outwardly be oppressed, but inwardly live for
ever with thee; that he should be a little despised, humbled, and made as an
abject in the sight of Men, and much afflicted with passions and infirmities;
that he may rise again with thee in the morning of the new light, and be
glorified in Heaven. Holy Father, thou have so appointed it and wilt have it
so; and this is fulfilled which thy self have commanded.

4. It is a favor to thy friend that he may suffer, and be afflicted in the
world for love of thee, how often soever, and by whom soever, thou permittest
it to fall upon him. For in the world nothing comes to pass, without thy
council, without thy providence, or without a cause why. It is good for me,
Lord, that thou have afflicted me, that I may learn thy righteous judgments,
and cast away all haughtiness of heart, and presumption. It is profitable to
me, that shame has covered my face that I may rather seek to thee for comfort
than to Men. I have learned also hereby to dread thy unsearchable judgments,
who afflictest the just with the wicked, but not without equity and justice.

5. I give thee thanks, for that thou have not spared my sins, but have worn me
away with bitter stripes, inflicting sorrows, and sending griefs within and
without. There is none under Heaven that can comfort me, but thou my Lord God,
the Heavenly Physician of souls, that strikest and healest, bring down to
Hell and bring back again; let thy correction be upon me, and let thy rod
instruct me.

6. Behold dear Father, I am in thy hands. I bow my self under the rod of thy
correction; strike my back and my neck too, that my crookedness may be
conformed to thy will. Make me an holy and humble disciple of thine, (as thou
art wont well to do) that I may be ready at every beck of thy divine pleasure.
I commend my self and all mine unto thee to be corrected. It is better to be
corrected here, than hereafter. Thou know all and every thing, and there is
nothing in the conscience of Man which can be hidden from thee. Before things
are done, thou know that they will come to pass, and have no need that any
should teach thee, or admonish thee of those things which are done on Earth.
Thou know what is expedient for my profiting, and how much tribulation is
fit to scour off the rust of my sins. Do with me according to thy desired good
pleasure, and disdain me not for my sinful life, better and more clearly known
to none than to thee alone.

7. Grant me, O Lord, to know that which is to be known, to love that which is
to be loved, to praise that which pleases thee most, to esteem that which is
precious unto thee, to despise that which is contemptible in thy sight; suffer
me not to judge according to the sight of the outward eyes, nor to give
sentence according to the hearing of the ears of ignorant Men; but to discern
of visible and spiritual things with a true judgment, and above all things
ever to search after thy good will and pleasure.

8. The minds of Men are often deceived in their judging; the lovers of the
world are also deceived in loving only visible things. What is a Man the
better, for that he is esteemed great by Man? The deceitful in exalting the
deceitful, the vain Man in Extolling the vain, the blind in commending the
blind, the weak in magnifying the weak, deceives him and does verily more
shame him, while he does vainly praise him. For how much every one is in thy
sight, so much he is, and no more.

CHAP. LI. That a Man ought to employ himself in works of humility, when
strength is wanting for higher employments.
CHrist. Son, thou art not able always to continue in the more fervent desire
of virtue, nor to persist in the higher pitch of contemplation; but thou must
sometimes of necessity by reason of original corruption descend to inferior
things, and bear the burden of this corruptible life though against thy will,
and with grief. As long as thou carriest a mortal body, thou shall feel trouble
and heaviness of heart. Thou ought therefore in the flesh oftentimes to
bewail the burden of the flesh; for that thou can not always continue in
spiritual exercises and divine contemplation.

2. It is then expedient for thee to fly to humble and exterior works, and to
refresh thy self with good actions; to expect with a firm confidence my coming
and Heavenly visitation, to bear patiently thy banishment and the dryness of
thy mind, till I visit thee again, and deliver thee from all anxieties. For I
will make thee forget thy former pains, and enjoy inward quietness. I will lay
open before thee the pleasant fields of Holy Scripture, that with an enlarged
heart thou may begin to run the way of my commandments. And thou shall say,
That the sufferings of this present time are not worthy of the glory to come,
that shall be revealed in us.

CHAP. LII. That a Man ought to esteem himself not worthy of comfort, but
rather to deserve stripes.
CHristian. Lord, I am not worthy of thy comfort, nor of any spiritual
visitation; and therefore thou dealest justly with me, when thou leavest me
poor and desolate. For though I could shed a Sea of tears, yet I were not
worthy of thy comfort. For (alas) I deserve nothing, but to be scourged and
punished, in that I have grievously and often offended thee, and have sinned
greatly in many things. All things therefore duly considered, I am not worthy
even of the least comfort. But thou O gracious and merciful God, who wilt not
that thy works should perish, to show the riches of thy goodness upon the
vessels of mercy, even beyond his desert vouchsafest to comfort thy Servant
above the manner of Men. For thy comforts are not like to the words of Men.

2. What have I done, O Lord, that thou should bestow any Heavenly comfort
upon me? I remember not that I have done any good, but have been always prone
to sin, and slow to amendment. This is true, and I cannot deny it. If I should
say otherwise, thou would stand against me, and there would be none to
defend me. What have I deserved for my sins, but Hell and everlasting fire? I
confess in very truth that I am worthy of all scorn and contempt, and it is not
fit that I should be remembered amongst thy holy ones. And although I be
unwilling to hear this, yet notwithstanding for the truths sake I will lay open
my sins against my self, that so the sooner I may obtain mercy at thy hand.

3. What shall I say being guilty and full of all confusion? I have nothing to
say but this, I have sinned. Lord, I have sinned; have mercy on me, pardon me;
suffer me a little, that I may bewail my grief, before I go unto the land of
darkness, a land covered with the shadow of death; What do thou so much
require of a guilty and miserable sinner, as that he be contrite, and humble
himself for his offenses? Of true contrition and humbling of the heart, arises
hope of forgiveness; the troubled conscience is reconciled to God, the favor of
God, which was lost, is recovered; Man is preserved from the wrath to come, and
God and the penitent soul meet together with an holy kiss.

4. Humble contrition for sins is an acceptable sacrifice unto thee, O Lord,
savoring much sweeter in thy presence than the perfume of frankincense. This is
also the pleasant ointment, which thou would should be poured upon thy
sacred feet; for thou never despisest a contrite and humbled heart. There is
the place of refuge, from the angry face of the enemy; there is amended and
washed away, whatsoever defilement elsewhere was contracted, and whatsoever is
polluted.

CHAP. LIII. That the grace of God does not join it self with those that savor
of Earthly things.
CHrist. Son, my grace is precious, it suffers not it self to be mingled with
external things, nor earthly comforts. Thou ought therefore to cast away all
hindrances of grace, if thou desire to receive the infusion thereof. Choose
therefore a secret place to thy self, love to live alone with thy self, desire
the conversation of none; but rather pour out devout Prayers unto God, that
thou may keep thy mind in compunction, and thy conscience pure. Esteem the
whole world as nothing; prefer attendance upon God before all outward things;
for thou can not attend upou me, and be delighted also in transitory
vanities. Thou ought to sequester thy self from thy acquaintance and
friends, and to keep thy mind void of all temporal comfort. So the blessed
Apostle Peter required, that the faithful of Christ should keep themselves as
strangers and pilgrims in this world.

2. O how great a confidence shall he have at the hour of death, whom no
affection to any Earthly thing detaineth in the world! but the sickly mind is
not yet capable of so retired a heart; neither does the carnal Man understand
the liberty of him who is inwardly recollected. Notwithstanding if he will be
truly spiritual, he ought to renounce as well those which are strangers, as
those which are near unto him; and to beware of no Man more than of himself. If
thou perfectly overcome thy self, thou shall with more ease subdue the rest. It
is a perfect victory to triumph over our selves. For he that keeps himself
subject in such sort that his sensuality be subdued to reason, and reason in
all things be obedient to me; he is truly a conqueror of himself, and Lord of
the world.

3. If thou desire to mount unto this height, thou must set out courageously,
and lay the Ax to the root; that thou may pluck up and destroy that hidden
inordinate inclination to thy self, and unto all private and Earthly good. Of
this sin (that Man too inordinately loves himself) almost all depends,
whatsoever is thoroughly to be overcome; which evil being once overcome, and
subdued, there will presently ensue great peace and tranquillity. But for that
few endeavor perfectly to die unto themselves, and altogether to go out of
themselves, therefore they remain entangled in themselves, and cannot be lifted
up in spirit above themselves. But he that desires to walk freely with me, it
is necessary that he mortify all evil and inordinate affections, and that he
should not earnestly adhere unto any creature by private love.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the different motions of Nature and Grace.
CHrist. Son, mark diligently the motions of Nature and Grace; for in a very
contrary and subtle manner these are moved, and can hardly be discerned but by
him that is spiritually and inwardly enlightened. All Men indeed desire that
which is good, and pretend some good in their words and deeds; and therefore
uuder the show of good, many are deceived. Nature is crafty, and seduceth,
intangleth, and deceives many, and always proposes her self for her end; but
Grace walks in simplicity, and avoideth all show of evil, pretends not
deceits, and does all things purely for Gods sake, in whom also she finally
rests.

2. Nature will not willingly die, nor be kept down, nor be overcome, nor be
subject to any, nor be subdued; but Grace minds self mortification, resists
sensuality, seeks to be subject, is willing to be kept under, and will not
use her own liberty; she loves to be kept under discipline, and desires not
to rule any, but always to live and remain wholly subject unto God, and for God
is ready humbly to bow unto all Men. Nature striveth for her own commodity; and
considers what profit she may reap by another; but Grace considers not what
is profitable and commodious unto her self, but rather what is profitable to
many. Nature willingly receives honor and reverence; but Grace faithfully
attributes all honor and glory unto God.

3. Nature fears shame and contempt; but Grace rejoices to suffer reproach
for the Name of Jesus. Nature loves idleness and bodily rest; but Grace cannot
be idle, but willingly imbraceth labor. Nature seeks to have those things
that be curious and glorious, abhors that which is mean and course; but
Grace delights in plain and humble things, despises not rough things, nor
refuses to wear that which is old and torn. Nature respects temporal things,
rejoices at Earthly gain, sorroweth for loss, is moved with every little
injurious word; but Grace thinks on that which is everlasting, and cleaves
not to temporal things, she is not troubled with losses, nor disquieted with
hard words; for that she has placed her treasure and joy in Heaven, where
nothing perishes.

4. Nature is covetous, and does more willingly receive than give, she loves
proper and private things; but Grace is bountiful and liberal to all; shunneth
private interest, is content with a little, thinks that it is more blessed to
give than to receive. Nature is bent to the creatures, to her own flesh, to
vanities, and to many vagaries; but Grace draws unto God and unto goodness
renounceth creatures, flies the world, hates the desires of the flesh,
restrains wanderings abroad, blusheth to be seen in public; Nature is willing
to have some outward comfort, wherein she may be sensibly delighted; but Grace
seeks comfort in God alone, and delights above all visible things in the
highest good.

5. Nature works all for her own gain and profit, she can do nothing freely,
but for bestowed benefits she hops to obtain either that which is equal, or
better, either praise or favor, and coveteth to have her works and gifts much
esteemed; but Grace seeks no temporal thing, nor desires any other reward
than God alone; nor asks more of temporal necessaries, than what may serve
her for the obtaining of things eternal.

3. Nature rejoices to have many friends and kinsfolks, she glories of noble
place and birth; pleases the powerful, fawneth upon the rich, applaudeth those
that are like her self; but Grace loves even her enemies, and is not puffed up
with multitude of friends; nor esteems place or birth, but where it is joined
with greater virtue; she rather favoreth the poor than the rich; has more
compassion of the innocent than the powerful; rejoices in the true, not in the
deceitful; always exhorts good Men to labor for the better gifts; and by
goodness to resemble the Son of God. Nature quickly complains of want and
trouble; Grace constantly endures need.

7. Nature refers all things to her self, striveth and contendeth for her
self; but Grace reduces all to God, from whence originally they proceed; she
ascribes no good to her self, neither does she arrogantly presume; she
contendeth not, nor prefers her opinion before others; but in every
apprehension and opinion submits her self unto the eternal wisdom and to the
divine judgment. Nature coveteth to know secrets, and to hear news; she will
appear abroad, and make proof of many things by her own senses; she desires to
be known, and to do those things, for which she may be praised and admired; but
Grace cares not for hearing news, nor to understand curious matters; for that
all this springs from the old corruption of Man, seeing here is nothing new
and durable upon Earth. She teaches therefore to restrain the senses, to avoid
vain pleasing and ostentation, humbly to hide those things that are worthy of
praise and admiration; and of every thing and every knowledge to seek profitable
fruit, and the praise and honor of God; she will not have her self nor hers
publicly praised, but desires that God should be blessed in his gifts, who of
mere love bestows all things.

8. This Grace is a supernatural light, and a certain special gift of God, and
the proper mark of the elect, and pledge of everlasting salvation; which raises
up a Man from Earthly things to love the things of Heaven, and of a carnal
makes him a spiritual Man. How much the more therefore Nature is depressed and
subdued, so much the greater Grace is infused, and the inward Man daily by new
visitations more reformed according to the image of God.

CHAP. LV. Of the corruption of Nature, and efficacy of divine Grace.
CHristian. O Lord my God, who have created me after thy Image and likeness,
grant me this grace which thou have showed to be so great and so necessary to
salvation, that I may overcome my wicked nature, which draws me to sin and to
perdition. For I feel in my flesh the Law of sin, contradicting the Law of my
mind, and leading me captive to the obeying of sensuality in many things;
neither can I resist the passions thereof, unless thy most holy grace fervently
infused into my heart, do assist me.

2. Thy grace, O Lord, and great grace is needful, that nature may be overcome,
which is ever prone to evil from her youth. For by Adam the first Man, nature
being fallen and corrupted by sin, the penalty of this stain has descended
upon all Mankind, in such sort, that nature it self which by thee was created
good and upright, is now accounted for the sin and for the infirmity of
corrupted nature; for that the motion thereof left unto it self draws to evil
and to inferior things. For the little power which remains, is like a certain
spark lying hidden in ashes. This is natural reason it self, encompassed about
with great darkness, yet still retaining power to discern good and evil, and
the difference between true and false; although it be unable to fulfill all that
it approves; and enjoys not now the full light of truth, nor the soundness
of her affections.

3. Hence it is, my God, that after the inward Man I delight in thy Law,
knowing thy commandments to be good, just, and holy, reproving also all evil
and sin, teaching that it is to be avoided. But with the flesh I serve the law
of sin, whilst I rather obey sensuality than reason. Hence it is that to will
to do good is present with me, but how to perform it I find not. For this cause
I often purpose many good things, but because I want grace to help my weakness,
upon a light resistance I go back and faint. Hence it is that I know the way of
perfection, and see clearly enough what I ought to do; but pressed down with
the weight of mine own corruption, I rise not unto what is more perfect.

4. O Lord, how exceeding needful is thy grace for me, to begin any good work,
to go forward, and to accomplish it; For without it I can do nothing, but in
thee I can do all things, when thy grace does strengthen me. O Heavenly grace
indeed, without which our most worthy actions are nothing, and no gifts of
nature are to be esteemed. Arts, riches, beauty or strength, wit or eloquence,
are of no value with thee, O Lord, without thy grace. For gifts of nature are
common to good and bad, but the peculiar gift of the elect is grace and love;
and they that bear this honorable mark, are esteemed worthy of everlasting
life. This grace is so eminent, that neither the gift of prophecy, nor the
working of miracles; nor any speculation (how high soever) is of any esteem
without it. Neither faith nor hope, nor other virtues are acceptable unto thee
without love and grace.

5. O most blessed Grace, that make the poor in spirit rich in virtues, and
make the rich in many blessings to be humble in heart; come, come down unto
me, replenish me early with thy comfort, lest my soul should faint for
weariness and dryness of mind. I beseech thee, O Lord, that I may find grace in
thy sight; for thy grace is sufficient for me, though other things that nature
desires be wanting. If I be tempted and vexed with many tribulations, I will
not fear any evils, whilst thy grace is with me; that is my strength; that
gives advice and help; that is stronger than all enemies, and wiser than all
the wise.

6. Thy grace is the mistress of truth, the teacher of discipline, the light of
the heart, the solace in affliction, the driver away of sorrow, the expeller of
fear, the nurse of devotion, the mother of tears. What am I without it, but a
withered piece of wood, and an unprofitable stalk only meet to be cast away?
Let thy grace therefore, O Lord, always prevent me and follow me, and make me
ever diligent in good works, through Jesus Christ thy Son.

Amen.
CHAP. LVI. That we ought to deny our selves, and imitate Christ by the Cross.
CHrist. Son, look how much thou go out of thy self, so much may thou
enter into me. As to be void of all desire of external things, makes inward
peace; so the forsaking of our selves inwardly, joyneth unto God. I will have
thee learn the perfect leaving of thy self to my will, without contradiction
and complaint. Follow me, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Without the
way there is no going aright, without truth there is no knowledge, without life
there is no living. I am the way which thou ought to follow; the truth which
thou ought to trust; the life for which thou ought to hope. I am the way
inviolable, the truth infallible, the life which cannot end. I am the most
straight way, the supreme truth, the true life, yea the blessed life, the
uncreated life. If thou remain in my way thou shall keep the truth, and the
truth shall make thee free, and thou shall lay hold on everlasting life.

2. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. If thou will know the
truth, believe me. If thou will be perfect, sell all. If thou will be my
Disciple, deny thy self. If thou will possess a blessed life, despise this
present life. If thou will be exalted in Heaven, humble thy self upon Earth. If
thou will reign with me, bear the Cross with me. For only the Servants of the
Cross find the way of bliss and true light.

3. Christian. Lord Jesus, forasmuch as thy way is narrow and contemptible unto
the world, grant me grace to imitate thee in suffering worldly contempt. For
the Servant is not greater than his Lord, nor the Disciple above his Master.
Let thy Servant be exercised in thy holy life, for therein my salvation and the
true holiness does consist; whatsoever I read or hear besides it, does not
recreate or delight me fully.

4. Christ. Son, now that thou know and have read these things, happy shall
thou be, if thou do them. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it
is that loves me; and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him, and
will make him sit with me in the Kingdom of my Father.

Christian. Lord Jesus, as thou have said and promised, so let it come to pass,
and grant that I may not wholly undeserve this favor. I have received the
Cross, I have received it from thy hand; I will bear it, and bear it till
death, as thou have laid it upon me. Truly the life of a good retired person is
the Cross, but yet it is a guide to Paradise. It is now begun, it is not lawful
to go back, neither is it fit to leave that which I have undertaken.

5. Let us then take courage, my Brethren, and go forwards together, Jesus will
be with us. For Jesus's sake we have undertaken this Cross, for Jesus's sake
let us persevere in the Cross. He will be our helper, who is our guide and
forerunner. Behold our King goes before us, who also will fight for us; let us
follow him manfully, let none be dismayed; but be we ready to die valiantly in
the battle, and let us not blemish our glory by flying from the Cross.

CHAP. LVII. That a Man be not too much dejected, when he falls into some
defects.
CHrist. Son, patience and humility in adversities are more pleasing to me,
than much comfort and devotion in prosperities. Why art thou grieved for every
little trifle spoken and done against thee? Although it had been much more thou
ought not to have been moved. But now let it pass; it is not the first that
has happened, nor is it any new thing, neither shall it be the last, if thou
live long. Thou art manly enough, as long as no adversity happens. Thou can
give good counsel also, and can strengthen others with thy words; but when
any tribulation suddenly comes to thy door, thou art destitute of counsel and
strength. See therefore thy great frailty which thou often have experience of
in every small occurrence. It is notwithstanding intended for thy good, when
these and such like things befall thee.

2. Put it out of thy heart the best thou can, and if it touch thee yet let
it not deject thee, nor trouble thee long; bear it at least patiently, if thou
can not joyfully. Although thou be unwilling to hear it, and conceivest
indignation thereat, yet restrain thy self, and suffer no inordinate word to
pass out of thy mouth, whereby the little ones may be offended. The storm which
now is raised shall quickly be appeased, and inward grief shall be sweetened by
the return of grace. I yet live, says the Lord, and am ready to help thee, and
to give thee greater comfort than before, if thou put thy trust in me and
call devoutly upon me.

3. Be more patient, and prepare thy self to greater suffering. All is not
lost, if thou feel thy self often afflicted or grievously tempted. Thou art a
Man, and not God; thou art flesh, not an Angel. How can thou look to continue
ever in the same state of virtue, when an Angel in Heaven has fallen, as also
the first Man in Paradise? I am he who will strengthen with health them that
mourn, and do raise up unto divine glory those that know their own infirmity.

4. Christian. Lord, blessed be thy word, more sweet unto my mouth than the
honey and the honeycomb. What should I do in these my so great tribulations and
straits, unless thou did comfort me with thy holy words? What matter is it,
how much, and what I suffer, so as I may at length attain to the port of
salvation? Grant me a good end, grant me a happy passage out of this world. Be
mindful of me, O my God, and direct me the right way to thy Kingdom,

Amen.
CHAP. LVIII. Of not searching into high matters and into the secret judgments
of God.
CHrist. Son beware thou dispute not of high matters, nor of the secret
judgments of God, why this Man is left, and that Man taken into so great favor;
why also this Man is so much afflicted, and that Man so greatly advanced, these
things are beyond the reach of Man, neither can any reason or disputation
search out the judgment of God. When the enemy therefore suggesteth these
things unto thee, or some curious people enquire of thee, answer that of the
Prophet, Thou art just, O Lord, and thy judgment is right. And again, The
judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. My judgments are to be
feared, not to be discussed; for they are such as cannot be comprehended by the
understanding of Man.

2. In like manner I advise thee not to enquire, nor dispute of the merits of
the Saints, which of them is holier than the other, and which is greater in the
Kingdom of Heaven, These things oftentimes breed strife and unprofitable
contentions, they nourish also pride and vain glory; from whence do spring envy
and dissentions, whilst one will proudly prefer this, and the other, another.
To desire to know and search out such things, is to no purpose; nor would it
please the Saints; for I am not the God of dissension, but of peace; which
peace consists rather in true humility, than in self exaltation.

3. Some are carried with zeal of affection, to love these or those most; but
this love is rather humane than divine. I am He who made all the Saints, and
have given them grace; I have given them glory, I know what every one has
deserved; I have prevented them with the blessings of my goodness. I foreknew
my beloved before the beginning of the world. I chose them out of the world,
they chose not me first, I called them by grace, I drew them by mercy, I led
them through sundry temptations. I have poured into them glorious comforts, I
have given them perseverance, I have crowned their patience.

4. I know both the first and the last; I embrace all with inestimable love. I
am to be praised in all my Saints; I am to be blessed above all things, and to
be honored in every one; whom I have thus gloriously exalted and predestined
without any precedent merits of their own. He therefore that contemns one of
the least of my Saints, honoreth not the greatest; for that I made both the
less and the greater; and he that dispraifeth any of my Saints, dispraiseth
also me, and all the rest in the Kingdom of Heaven. There all are one through
the bond of love; they think the same, they will the same, and they all love
one another.

5. But yet (which is much more high) they love me more than themselves, and
are drawn out of all themselves or any merits of their own. For being ravished
above self-love, they are wholly carried out to love me, in whom also they do
fruitively rest. Nothing can turn them back, nothing can press them down; for
being full of the eternal Truth, they burn with the fire of unquenchable love.
Let therefore carnal and natural Men who can affect no other but their private
joys, forbear to dispute of the state of Saints. They add and take away
according to their own fancies, not as it pleases the eternal Truth.

6. Many are ignorant, but specially those that be slenderly enlightened; and
these can seldom love any with a perfect spiritual love. They are as yet much
drawn by a natural affection and humane friendship to this Man or to that; and
according to the experience they have of themselves in their Earthly
affections, so they frame an imagination of Heavenly things. But there is an
incomparable distance between the things which the imperfect ones imagine in
their conceits, and those which the illuminated ones do see by revelation from
above.

7. Beware therefore, my Son, that thou treat not curiously of these things,
which exceed thy knowledge; but rather so apply thy endeavors, that thou may
at least have the meanest place in the Kingdom of Heaven. And if any one did
know which of the Saints exceed others in sanctity, or were greater in the
Kingdom of Heaven; what would this knowledge avail him, unless he should thereby
humble himself the more in my sight, and should rise up into the greater
praising of my name? He pleases God much better that thinks of the greatness
of his sins, and the smalness of his graces, and how far off he is from the
perfection of the Saints; than he that disputes of their greatness or
littleness.

8. They are well and right well contented, if Men could content themselves,
and refrain from these vain discourses. They glory not of their own merits, for
they ascribe no good unto themselves, but attribute all to me, who of my
infinite love have given them all things. They are filled with so great love of
the Divinity, and with such an overflowing joy, that there is no glory nor
happiness, that is or can be wanting unto them. All the Saints, how much the
higher they be in glory, so much the more humble they are in themselves, and
nearer and dearer unto me; And therefore it is written, That they did cast
their Crowns before God, and fell down upon their face before the Lamb, and
adored him that lives for ever and ever.

9. Many inquire who is greatest in the Kingdom of God, that know not whether
they shall ever be numbered there amongst the least. It is a great thing to be
even the least in Heaven, where all are great; for that all there shall be
called, and shall be indeed, the Sons of God. The least shall become a
Thousand; and the sinner of an Hundred years shall die. For when the Disciples
asked who should be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, they received this
answer, Unless you be converted, and be come as little Children, you shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as
this little Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

10. Woe be unto them that disdain to humble themselves willingly with little
Children. For the low gate of the Kingdom of Heaven will not give them
entrance. And woe be to the rich, that have their comforts here; for whilst the
poor enter into the Kingdom of God, they shall stand lamenting without. Rejoice
you that be humble, and you that be poor be you glad, for yours is the Kingdom
of God, if you walk according to the truth.

CHAP. LIX. That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone.
CHristian. Lord, what trust have I in this life? Or what is the greatest
comfort, that all things under Heaven do yield me? Is it not thou, my Lord God,
whose mercies are without number? Where has it been well with me without thee?
Or when could it be ill with me, when thou were present? I had rather be poor
for thee, than rich without thee. I rather choose to be a pilgrim on Earth with
thee, than to possess Heaven without thee. Where thou art, there is Heaven; and
there is death and Hell, where thou art not, Thou art my desire, and therefore
it behooves me to sigh and cry and pray unto thee. For I have none fully to
trust in, none that can seasonably help me in my necessities, but thee alone,
my God. Thou art my hope, thou art my trust; thou art my comforter, and most
faithful unto me in all things.

2. All Men seek their own gain; thou only seek my salvation and my profit,
and turnest all things to my good. Although thou exposest me to diverse
temptations and adversities, yet thou orderest all this to my advantage, who
art wont to try thy beloved ones a Thousand ways. In which trial thou ought
no less to be loved and praised, then if thou did fill me with Heavenly
comforts.

3. In thee therefore, O Lord God, I put my whole hope and refuge; in thee I
place my tribulation and anguish; for I find all to be weak and unconstant,
whatsoever I behold out of thee. For neither can many friends avail, nor strong
helpers aid, nor wise counselors give any profitable answer, nor the Books of
the learned comfort, nor any wealth deliver, nor any secret or pleasant place
defend; if thou thy self do not assist, help, strengthen, comfort, instruct,
and keep us.

4. For all things that seem to belong to the attainment of peace and felicity,
without thee are nothing, and do bring indeed no felicity at all. Thou
therefore art the end of all that is good, the height of life, the depth of
wisdom, and the strongest comfort of thy servants is to trust in thee above all
things. To thee therefore do I lift up mine eyes, in thee O my God, the Father
of mercies, I put my trust. Bless and sanctify my soul with thy Heavenly
blessings, that it may be made thy holy habitation, and the seat of thy eternal
glory; and that nothing may be found in the Temple of thy glory, that may
offend the eyes of thy Majesty. According to the greatness of thy goodness, and
multitude of thy mercies look upon me, and hear the prayer of thy poor Servant,
who is far exiled from thee in the land of the shadow of death. Protect and
keep the soul of thy Servant, amidst so many dangers of this corruptible life,
and by thy grace accompanying me direct it by the way of peace, to the country
of everlasting light,

Amen.
THE FOURTH BOOK. A devout Exhortation unto the holy Communion.
The voice of Christ.

COme unto me, all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you,
says the Lord. The bread which I will give, is my flesh, for the life of the
world. Take ye and eat, that is my body that is given for you. Do this in
remembrance of me. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me and I in him. The words which I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life.

CHAP. I. With how great reverence Christ ought to be received.
The voice of the disciple.

THese are thy words, O Christ the everlasting Truth, though not spoken all at
one time, nor written in one and the self same place. Because therefore they
are thine and true, they are all thankfully and faithfully to be received by
me. They are thine, and thou have spoken them; and they are mine also, because
thou have spoken them for my salvation. I willingly receive them from thy
mouth, that they may be the deeper imprinted in my heart. These so gracious
words, so full of sweetness and love, do encourage me, but mine own offenses do
dishearten me, and my impure conscience drives me back from the receiving of
so great mysteries. The sweetness of thy words does encourage me, but the
multitude of my sins does oppress me.

2. Thou command me to come confidently unto thee, if I will have part with
thee; and to receive the food of immortality, if I desire to obtain everlasting
life and glory. Come, say thou, unto me, all ye that labor and are burdened,
and I will refresh you. O sweet and loving word in the ear of a sinner, that
thou, my Lord God, should invite the poor and needy to the participation of
thy most holy body! But who am I, Lord, that I may presume to approach unto
thee? Behold the Heavens cannot contain thee, and thou say, Come ye all unto
me.

3. What means this so gracious a condescension, and this so loving
invitation? How shall I dare to come, that know not any good in my self,
whereupon I may presume? How shall I bring thee unto my House, that have so
often offended thy most gracious countenance? The Angels and the Archangels
honor thee, the Saints and just Men do fear thee, and say thou, Come ye all
unto me? Unless thou O Lord, did say it, who would believe it to be true? And
unless thou did command it, who would attempt to come unto thee? Behold Noah
a just Man labored a Hundred years in the making of the Ark, that he might be
saved with a few, and how can I in one hours space prepare my self to receive
with reverenee the Maker of the world?

4. Moses thy great Servant, and thy especial friend, made an Ark of
incorruptible wood, which also he covered with most pure Gold, to put the
Tables of the Law therein; and I a corruptible creature, how shall I dare so
lightly to receive the Maker of the Law, and the giver of life? Solomon the
wisest of the Kings of Israel bestowed Seven years in building a magnificent
Temple to the praise of thy Name, and celebrated the feast of Dedication
thereof Eight days together; he offered a Thousand peace offerings, and he
solemnly set the Ark in the place prepared for it, with the sound of Trumpets,
and joy; and I the most miserable and poorest of Men, how shall I bring thee
into my House, that can scarce spend one half hour religiously? And I wish I
could once spend about one half hour in a worthy and due manner!

5. O my God, how much did they endeavor to please thee, and alas how little is
that which I do! How little time do I spend to prepare my self to receive! I am
seldom wholly recollected, very seldom free from all distraction; and yet
surely no unbecoming thought ought to appear in the comfortable presence of thy
Deity, nor any creature wholly take me up; for I am not to harbor an Angel, but
the Lord of Angels.

6. And yet there is great difference between the Ark of the Covenant with its
relics, and thy most pure body with its unspeakable virtues; between those
legal Sacrifices, figures of future things, and the true Sacrifice of thy body,
the complement of all ancient Sacrifices. Why therefore am I not more zealous
in thy venerable presence? Wherefore do I not prepare my self with greater care
to receive thy holy things; since those holy ancient Patriarchs and Prophets,
yea Kings also and Princes, with the whole people, have showed such an
affectionateness of devotion to thy divine service?

7. The most devout King David danced before the Ark of God with all his might,
calling to mind the benefits bestowed in times past upon his Forefathers. He
made instruments of sundry kinds, he published Psalms, and appointed them to be
sung with joy; he also oftentimes sung to the harp, being inspired with the
grace of the holy Ghost. He taught the people of Israel to praise God with
their whole heart, and with pleasant voices every day to bless and praise him.
If so great devotion was then used, and such celebrating of divine praise
before the Ark of the Testament; what reverence and devotion is now to be
performed by me and all Christian people at the Sacrament, in receiving the
most precious body of Christ?

8. O God the invisible Creator of the world how wonderfully do thou deal
with us! how sweetly and graciously do thou dispose of all things with thine
elect, to whom thou offerest thy self to be received in the Sacrament! O this
exceeds all understanding! This chiefly draws the hearts of the religious
and inflameth their affections. For thy true faithful Servants that dispose
their whole life to amendment, by this most precious Sacrament, oftentimes gain
much of the grace of devotion, and love of holiness..

9. O the admirable and hidden grace of this Sacrament, which only the faithful
ones of Christ do know; but the unbelieving, and such as are slaves unto sin,
cannot have experience thereof! In this Sacrament spiritual grace is given, and
strength which was lost is restored in the soul, and the beauty disfigured by
sin returns again. This grace is sometimes so great, that out of the fullness
of devotion which is here given, not only the mind, but the weak body also,
feels great increase of strength.

10. Our coldness and negligence surely is much to be wailed and pitied, that
we are not drawn with greater affection to receive Christ, in whom all the hope
and merit of those that are to be saved does consist. For he is our
sanctification and redemption; he is the comfort of those who are here but
travelers, and the everlasting fruition of Saints. It is much therefore to be
lamented that many do so little consider this comfortable mystery, which
rejoices Heaven, and preserves the whole world. O the blindness and hardness
of Man's heart, that does not more deeply weigh so unspeakable a gift; but
rather comes by the daily use thereof to regard it little or nothing!

11. For if this most holy Sacrament should be celebrated in one place only,
and consecrated by one only Minister in the world; with how great desires do
thou think would Men be affected to that place, and to such a Minister, that
they might enjoy the celebration of these divine mysteries? But now there are
many Ministers, and Christ is offered in many places; that so the grace and
love of God to Man may appear so much the greater, how much the more this
sacred Communion is spread through the world. Thanks be unto thee good Jesus,
the everlasting shepherd, that have vouchsafed to refresh us who are poor and
in a state of banishment, with thy precious body and blood, and to invite us to
the receiving of these mysteries with the words of thy own mouth, saying, Come
unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you.

CHAP. II. That the great goodness and love of God is exhibited to Man in this
Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.

IN confidence of thy goodness and great mercy, O Lord, being sick, I approach
unto my Savior, being hungry and thirsty to the Fountain of life, needy to the
King of Heaven, a Servant unto my Lord, a creature to my Creator, being
disconsolate I come to thee my merciful comforter. But whence is this to me,
that thou vouch-safest to come unto me? Who am I that thou should give thy
self unto me? How dare a sinner appear before thee? And how is it that thou
do vouchsafe to come unto a sinner? Thou know thy Servant and see that
he has no good thing in him, for which thou should bestow this favor upon
him. I confess therefore my unworthiness, and I acknowledge thy goodness; I
praise thy mercy, and give thee thanks for this thy transcendent love. For thou
do this for thine own sake, not for any merits of mine; to the end that thy
goodness may be better known unto me, thy love more abundantly showed, and thy
gracious condescension may be the more eminently set forth. Since therefore it
is thy pleasure, and thou have commanded that it should be so, this thy favor
is also dearly pleasing to me, and I wish that my sins may be no hindrance
herein.

2. O most sweet and benign Jesus, how great reverence and thanks together with
perpetual praise, is due unto thee for the receiving of thy sacred body, whose
preciousness no Man is able to express! But what shall I think of at this
Communion, now that I am to approach unto my Lord, whom I am not able duly to
honor, and yet I desire to receive him with devotion? What can I think better,
and more profitable, than to humble my self wholly before thee, and to exalt
thy infinite goodness above me? I praise thee my God, and will exalt thee for
ever; and I do despise and submit my self unto thee, in a deep sense of my own
unworthiness.

3. Behold thou art the Holy of Holies, and I the skum of sinners! Behold thou
inclinest unto me, who am not worthy so much as to look up unto thee! Behold
thou come unto me! It is thy will to be with me, thou invitest me to thy
banquet. Thou will give me the food of Heaven, and bread of Angels to eat,
which is no other indeed than thy self, the living bread, that descendest from
Heaven, and give life unto the world. world.

4. Behold from whence does this love proceed! What a gracious condescension of
thine appears herein! How great thanks and praises are due unto thee for
these benefits! O how good and profitable was thy council, when thou ordainedst
it! How sweet and pleasant the banquet, when thou gave thy self to be our
food! How wonderful is this thy doing, O Lord, how mighty is thy power, how
unspeakable is thy truth! For thou say the word, and all things were made;
and this was done which thou command.

5. A thing of great admiration, that thou, my Lord God, true God, and Man,
should be exhibited unto us by the Elements of Bread and Wine. Thou who art
the Lord of all things and stand in need of none, had pleased to dwell in us
by means of this thy Sacrament; preserve my heart and body unspotted, that with
a cheerful and pure conscience I may often celebrate thy mysteries, and receive
them to my everlasting health; which thou have chiefly ordained and instituted
for thy honor and for a perpetual memorial.

6. Rejoice, O my soul, and give thanks unto God for so noble a gift, and so
singular a comfort left unto thee in this vale of tears. For as often as thou
call to mind this mystery, and receivest the body of Christ; so often do
thou remember the work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the
merits of Christ. For the love of Christ is never diminished, and the greatness
of his propitiation is never exhausted. Therefore thou ought always to
dispose thy self hereunto by a fresh renewing of thy mind, and to weigh with
attentive consideration this great mystery of thy salvation. So great, new, and
joyful it ought to seem unto thee, when thou come to these holy mysteries; as
if the same day Christ first descending into the womb of the Virgin, were
become Man; or hanging on the Cross did suffer and die for salvation of Mankind.

CHAP. III. That it is profitable to communicate often.
The voice of the Disciple.

BEhold, O Lord, I come unto thee, that I may be comforted in thy gift, and be
delighted in thy holy banquet, which thou, O God, have prepared in thy goodness
for the poor. Behold in thee is all whatsoever I can or ought to desire; thou
art my salvation and my redemption, my hope and my strength, my honor and my
glory, make joyful therefore this day the soul of thy Servant, for that I have
lifted it up to thee. O Lord Jesus, I desire to receive thee now with devotion
and reverence. I do long to bring thee into my house, that with Zacheus I may
obtain to be blessed by thee, and to be numbered amongst the Children of
Abraham. My soul thirsts to receive thy body, my heart desires to be united
with thee.

2. Give thy self to me, and it suffices; for besides thee no comfort is
available. I cannot be without thee, nor live without thy visitation. And
therefore I must often come unto thee, and receive thee for the welfare of my
soul; lest perhaps I faint in the way, if I be deprived of thy Heavenly food.
For so, most merciful Jesus, thou once did say, preaching to the people and
curing sundry diseases, I will not send them home fasting, lest they faint in
the way. Deal thou therefore in like manner now with me, who have vouchsafed to
leave thy self in the Sacrament for the comfort of the faithful. For thou art
the sweet refection of the soul; and he that eats thee worthily, shall be
partaker and heir of everlasting glory. It is necessary for me, that do often
fall and sin, and so quickly wax dull and faint, that by frequent prayer and
confession, and receiving of thy holy body, I renew, cleanse, and inflame my
self; lest perhaps by long abstaining I should fall from my holy purpose.

3. For the imaginations of Man are prone unto evil from his youth, and unless
some divine remedy help him, he quickly slideth to worse. This holy Communion
therefore draws back from evil and strengthens in good. For if I be now so
often slack and cold when I communicate, or celebrate; what would become of me
if I received not this remedy, and sought not after so great an help? Though
every day I be not fit, nor well prepared to communicate; I will endeavor
notwithstanding at due times to receive the divine mysteries, and to be
partaker of so great a grace. For this is one chief comfort of a faithful soul,
whilst she wandreth from thee in this mortal body, that being often mindful of
her God, she receive her beloved with a devout mind.

4. O the wonderful condescent of thy mercy toward us, that thou O Lord God,
the Creator and giver of life to all spirits, do vouchsafe to come unto a
poor soul; and with thy whole Deity and Humanity to replenish her hunger! O
happy mind and blessed soul, that obtains to receive thee, her Lord God, with
devout affection, and in receiving of thee to be filled with spiritual joy! O
how great a Lord does she entertain! How beloved a guest does she harbor! How
pleasant a companion does she receive! How faithful a friend does she take in!
How lovely and noble a spouse does she embrace! She embraces him who is to be
loved above all that is beloved, and above all things that may be desired. Let
Heaven and Earth and all their furniture be silent in thy presence; for what
praise and beauty soever they have, it is received from thy bounty, and shall
not equal the beauty of thy Name, whose wisdom is infinite.

CHAP. IV. That many benefits are bestowed upon them that communicate devoutly.
The voice of the Disciple.

MY Lord God, prevent thy Servant with the blessings of thy sweetness, that I
may approach worthily and devoutly to thy glorious Sacrament; stir up my heart
unto thee, and deliver me from all dullness; visit me with thy salvation, that I
may taste in spirit thy sweetness, which plentifully lies hid in this
Sacrament, as in a fountain. Enlighten also my eyes to behold so great a
mystery, and strengthen me to believe it with undoubted faith. For it is thy
work, and not Man's power; thy sacred institution, not Man's invention. For no
Man is of himself able to comprehend and understand these things, which surpass
the understanding even of Angels. What therefore shall I unworthy sinner, dust
and ashes, be able to search and comprehend of so high and sacred a mystery?

2. O Lord, in the simplicity of my heart, with a good and firm faith, and at
thy commandment, I come unto thee with hope and reverence, and do truly believe
that thou art present in the Sacrament. Thy will is, that I receive thee, and
that by love I unite my self unto thee. Wherefore I implore thy mercy, and do
crave thy special grace, to the end I may wholly melt and flow over with love
unto thee, and hereafter never harbor any external comfort. For this most high
and worthy Sacrament is the health of the soul and body, the remedy of all
spiritual weakness; hereby my vices are cured, my passions bridled, temptations
overcome or weakened, greater grace is infused, virtue begun increased, faith
confirmed, hope strengthened and love inflamed, and enlarged.

3. For thou have bestowed, and still oftentimes do bestow many benefits in
this Sacrament upon thy beloved ones that communicate devoutly, O my God, the
Protector of my soul, the strengthner of humane frailty, and the giver of all
inward comfort. Thou impartest unto them much comfort against sundry
tribulations; and liftest them up from the depth of their own dejectedness, to
hope in thy protection; and do inwardly refresh and illustrate them with new
grace, so that they who before Communion felt themselves heavy and indisposed,
afterward being refreshed with Heavenly meat and drink, do find in themselves
a great change to the better. And in such a way of dispensation thou dealest
with thy elect, that they may truly acknowledge, and patiently prove, how great
their own infirmity is, and what goodness and grace they receive from thee. For
they of themselves are cold, dull and undevout; but by thee they are made
fervent, cheerful, and full of devotion. For who is there, that approaching
humbly unto the fountain of sweetness, does not carry away from thence at least
some little sweetness? Or who standing by a great fire, receives not some
small heat thereby? Thou art a fountain always full and overflowing, a fire
ever burning and never decaying.

4. Wherefore if I cannot draw out of the full fountain it self, nor drink my
fill; I will notwithstanding set my lips to the mouth of this Heavenly conduit,
that I may draw from thence at least some small drop to refresh my thirst; that
so I may not be wholly dried up. And though I be not altogether Heavenly, nor
so inflamed as the Cherubins and Seraphins, notwithstanding I will endeavor to
apply my self to devotion, and prepare my heart to obtain some small spark of
divine fire, by humble receiving of this enlivening Sacrament. And whatsoever
is hereunto wanting in me, good Jesus, most holy Savior, do thou supply for
me, most bountifully and graciously, who have vouchsafed to call us unto thee,
saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you.

5. I indeed labor in the sweat of my brows, I am vexed with grief of heart, I
am burdened with sins, I am troubled with temptations, I am entangled and
oppressed with many evil passions; and there is none to help me, none to
deliver and save me, but thou, O Lord, my Savior, to whom I commit my self,
and all that is mine, that thou may keep me and bring me to life
everlasting. Receive me to the honor and glory of thy Name, who have prepared
thy Body and Blood to be my meat and drink. Grant, Lord God, my Savior, that
by frequenting thy mysteries, the zeal of my devotion may increase.

CHAP. V. Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and Ministerial function.
The voice of Christ.

IF thou had Angelical purity, and the sanctity of St. John Baptist, thou
were not worthy to receive this Sacrament. For it is not within the compass of
the deserts of Men, that Man should consecrate the Sacrament of Christ, and
receive for food the Bread of Angels. A great mystery, and great is the dignity
of the Ministers of God, to whom is given that which is not given to the
Angels. It is proper for Ministers rightly instituted in the Church, to have
power to celebrate, and consecrate the Body of Christ. The Priest is the
Minister of God, using the word of God, by Gods Commandment and appointment;
but God is there the principal Author, and invisible Worker; to whom is subject
all that he pleases, and all that he commands does obey.

2. Thou ought therefore more to believe God Almighty in this most excellent
Sacrament, than thine own sense, or any visible sign. And therefore thou art to
come unto this mystery with fear and reverence. Consider attentively with thy
self, and see what that is, whereof the Ministry is delivered unto thee by the
imposition of the hands of the Bishop. Behold thou art made a Priest, and
consecrated to celebrate; see now that in due time thou do this faithfully
and devoutly, and carry thy self so, as thou may be without reproof. Thou
have not lightened thy burden, but art now bound with a straiter band of
discipline, and art obliged to a more perfect degree of sanctity. A Minister
ought to be adorned with all graces, and to give example of good life to
others. His conversation should not be according to the ordinary and common
course of Men, but like to the Angels in Heaven, or to perfect Men on Earth.

3. A Minister is the Vicegerent of Christ, to pray humbly with a prostrate
mind unto God for himself and the whole People. Neither ought he to cease from
prayer till he obtain grace and mercy. When a Minister does celebrate, he
honoreth God, rejoices the Angels, edifieth the Church, helps the living;
and makes himself partaker of all good.

CHAP. VI. An interrogation of the exercise before Communion.
The voice of the Disciple.

WHen I weigh thy worthiness, O Lord, and my unworthiness, I tremble, and am
confounded in my self. For if I come not unto thee, I fly from life; and if I
unworthily intrude my self, I incur thy displeasure. What therefore shall I do
my God, my helper, and my counceller, in necessity?

2. Teach me the right way, appoint me some exercise suitable to this holy
Communion. For it is good for me to know how I should reverently and
religiously prepare my heart for thee, for the profitable receiving of thy
Sacrament, or for the celebrating of so great and divine a Sacrifice.

CHAP. VII. Of the discussing of our own conscience and purpose of amendment.
The voice of the beloved.

ABove all things, The Minister of God ought to come to celebrate, and receive
this Sacrament with great humility of heart, and lowly reverence, with a full
faith, and a pious intending of the honor of God. Examine diligently thy
conscience, and to thy power purge and cleanse it with true contrition and
humble confession; so as there may be nothing in thee, that may be burdensome
unto thee, or that may breed in thee remorse of conscience, and hinder thy free
access. Repent thee of all thy sins in general, and in particular bewail and
lament thy daily offenses. And if thou have time, confess unto God in the
secret of thy heart, all the evils of thy disordered passions.

2. Lament and grieve, that thou art yet so carnal, so worldly, so unmortified
in thy passions, so full of the motions of concupiscence, so unwatchful over
thy outward senses, so often entangled with many vain fantasies, so vehemently
inclined to outward things, so negligent in the interior, so prone to laughter
and immodesty, so indisposed to tears and compunction, so prompt to ease and
pleasures of the flesh, so dull to strictness and life of zeal, so curious to
hear news and see glorious sights, so slack to embrace what is humble and low,
so covetous of abundance, so niggardly in giving, so fast in keeping, so
inconsiderate in speeh, so unbridled to silence, so loose in manners, so
importune in action, so greedy to meat, so deaf to the word of God, so hasty to
rest, so slow to labor, so watchful to tales, so drowsy to watch in the
service of God, so hasty to the end thereof, so inconstant in attention, so
cold in Prayer, so undevout in celebrating, so dry in receiving, so quickly
distracted, so seldom wholly gathered into thy self, so suddenly moved to
anger, so apt to take displeasure against another, so prone to judge, so severe
to reprehend, so joyful in prosperity, so weak in adversity, so often purposing
much good, and yet performing little.

3. These and other thy defects being confessed, and bewailed with sorrow and
great dislike of thine own infirmity, make a firm purpose always to amend thy
life, and to endeavor still after a farther progress in holiness. Then with
full resignation, and with thy whole will, do thou to the honor of my Name,
offer up thy self a perpetual sacrifice on the Altar of thy heart, faithfully
committing thy body and soul unto me, that so thou may come worthily to
celebrate this Eucharistical sacrifice, and to receive profitably the Sacrament
of my body.

4. For Man has no oblation more worthy, nor greater, for the destroying of
sin, than to offer up himself unto God purely and wholly in the holy Communion.
And when a Man shall have done what lies in him, and shall be truly penitent,
and shall come to me for pardon and grace, as I live, says the Lord, who will
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted and live, I will not
remember his sins any more, but they shall be all forgiven him.

CHAP. VIII. Of the oblation of Christ on the Cross and resignation of our
selves.
The voice of the Beloved.

AS I willingly offered up my self unto God my Father for thy sins, my hands
being stretched forth on the Cross, and my body naked, so that nothing remained
in me that was not wholly turned into a sacrifice for the appeasing of the
divine Majesty; so ought thou also to offer up thy self willingly unto me
every day, as a pure and holy oblation, with all thy might and affections, in
as hearty a manner as thou can. What do I require of thee more, than that
thou entirely resign thy self unto me? Whatsoever thou give besides thy self,
is of little account in my sight, for I seek not any gift of thine, but thy
self.

2. As it would not suffice thee to have all things whatsoever, besides me; so
neither can it please me, whatsoever thou give, if thou offerest not thy
self. Offer up thy self unto me, and give thy self wholly for God, and thy
offering shall be acceptable. Behold I offered up my self wholly unto my Father
for thee, and gave my whole body and blood for thy food, that I might be wholly
thine, and thou remain mine. But if thou abidest in thy self, and do not
offer thy self up freely unto my will; thy oblation is not entire, neither will
the union between us be perfect. Therefore a free offering up of thy self into
the hands of God, ought to go before all thy actions, if thou will obtain
freedom and grace. For this cause so few become inwardly free and illuminated,
for that they are loath wholly to deny themselves. My saying is undoubtedly
true, unless a Man forsake all, he cannot be my Disciple. If thou therefore
desire to be my Disciple, offer up thy self unto me with thy whole affections.

CHAP. IX. That we ought to offer up our selves, and all that is ours unto God,
and to pray for all.
The voice of the Disciple.

THine, O Lord, are all things that are in Heaven, and in Earth. I desire to
offer up my self unto thee, as a free oblation, and to remain always thine. O
Lord, in the simplicity of my heart I offer my self unto thee this day, for a
sacrifice of a perpetual praise, to be thy Servant for ever. Receive me with
this holy oblation of thy precious body; and may this be for my good and the
good of all thy People.

2. I offer unto thee, O Lord, all my sins and offenses, which I have committed
before thee and thy holy Angels, from the day wherein I first could sin, to
this hour, upon thy merciful altar; that thou may consume and burn them all
with the fire of thy love, and wash out all the stains of my sins, and cleanse
my conscience from all offenses, and restore to me again thy grace, which I
lost by sin, forgiving me all my offenses, and receiving me mercifully to the
kiss of peace.

3. What can I do with my sins, but humbly confess and bewail them, and entreat
always thy favor? I beseech thee, hear me graciously, when I stand before thee
my God. All my sins are very displeasing unto me. I will never commit them any
more; but I bewail, and will bewail them as long as I live, and am purposed to
repent and according to my utmost power to please thee. Forgive me, O God,
forgive me my sins for thy holy Names sake; save my soul which thou have
redeemed with thy most precious blood. Behold I commit my self unto thy mercy,
I resign my self into thy Hands. Do with me according to thy goodness, not
according to my wickedness and iniquity.

4. I offer up also unto thee all whatsoever is good in me, although it be very
little and imperfect, that thou may amend and sanctify it, that thou may
make it grateful and acceptable unto thee, and always perfect it more and more;
and bring me also, who am a slothful and unprofitable profitable creature, to a
good and blessed end.

5. I offer up also unto thee all the godly desires of pious persons, the
necessities of parents, friends, brethren, sisters, and of all those that are
dear unto me, and that have done good either to my self or to others for thy
love, and that have desired and begged of me to pray for them and all theirs;
that they all may receive the help of thy grace and comfort, protection from
dangers, deliverance from pain; and being freed from all evils, may joyfully
give worthy thanks unto thee.

6. I offer up also unto thee my Prayers, especially for them who have in any
thing wronged, grieved, or slandered me, or have done me any damage or
displeasure; and for those also, whom I have at any time sadded, troubled,
grieved, and scandalized by words or deeds, wittingly or at unawares, that it
may please thee to forgive us all our sins and offenses, one against another.
Take, O Lord, from our hearts all jealousy, indignation, wrath, and contention,
and whatsoever may hurt charity, and lessen brotherly love. Have mercy, O Lord,
have mercy on those that crave thy mercy; give grace unto them that stand in
need thereof, and grant that we may be counted worthy to enjoy thy grace, and
attain to life everlasting,

Amen.
CHAP. X. That the holy communion is not lightly to be forborne.
The voice of the beloved.

THou ought often to have recourse to the Fountain of grace and of divine
mercy, to the Fountain of goodness and of all benignity; that thou may be
healed of thy sins and passions, and be made more strong and vigilant against
all the temptations and deceits of the Devil. The enemy knowing the great good
and advantage which comes by the holy Communion, endeavoreth by all means and
occasions to withdraw and hinder faithful and pious persons from it.

2. Some when they purpose to fit themselves for the holy Communion, suffer
worse assaults of the Devil. For that wicked spirit (as it is written in Job)
comes amongst the sons of God, to trouble them according to his accustomed
malice, or to make them over fearful and perplexed, that so he may diminish
their affection, or by subtle assaults take away their faith, to the end they
may either altogether forbear the Communion, or at least come unto it but
coldly. But there is no heed to be taken of his frauds and suggestions, be they
never so filthy and hideous, but all is to be turned back upon his own head.
Thou ought to contemn and scorn him a miserable wretch, and not to omit the
holy Communion for his assaults, and the troubles which he raises.

3. Oftentimes also an excessive care for the obtaining such a degree of
devotion, and some anxiety about confessing thy sins hinders thee. Follow
herein the counsel of the wise, and put away all doubt and scruple; for it is
an hindrance to the grace of God, and prejudiceth the devotion of the mind. For
every small vexation and trouble omit not the holy Communion, but the sooner
confess thy sins, and willingly forgive others whatsoever offenses they have
done against thee; and if thou have offended any, humbly crave pardon, and God
will readily forgive thee.

4. What avails it to delay long the confession of thy sins, or to defer the
holy Communion? Purge thy self with speed, spit out the venom presently, make
have to apply this sovereign remedy, and thou shall find it to be better with
thee, than if thou deferredst it long. If thou omittest it to day for this
cause, perhaps to morrow some greater will fall out; and so thou may be
hindered a long time from the Communion, and become more unfit. With all
possible speed shake off from thy self all present heaviness and sloth, for it
will not avail thee to continue long in disquietness and trouble of mind, and
for daily occurring impediments to withdraw thy self from the divine mysteries.
Yea it is very prejudicial to defer the Communion long, for this usually
causes a greater dullness and undisposedness. Alas, some cold and dissolute
people do willingly delay confession and defer the sacred Communion, lest they
should be engaged to the greater watch over themselves.

5. O how little is their charity, and how weak is their devotion, that so
easily omit the holy Communion! How happy is he and acceptable to God, who so
orders his life, and keeps his conscience in such purity, that he is ready
and fit to communicate every day, if it were convenient and might be done
without others taking notice. If one does sometimes abstain out of humility, or
by reason of some lawful impediment, he is to be commended for the reverence
which therein he shows. But if it proceeds of dull slothfulness, he must
stir himself up, and do what lies in him, and God will assist his desire for
the good will he has thereto, which God does chiefly respect.

6. And when any lawful hindrance does happen, he must yet always have that
good will, and a pious intention to communicate, and so shall he not lose the
fruit of the Sacrament. For every good Man may every day and hour profitably
and without let receive Christ spiritually; and yet on certain days, and at
time appointed he ought to receive Sacramentally with an affectionate reverence
the body of his Redeemer, and rather seek the honor and glory of God, than his
own comfort. For he communicates mystically and is invisibly, as often as he
devoutly calls to mind the mystery of the Incarnation, and the Passion of
Christ, and is inflamed with his love.

7. He that prepares not himself, but when a Festival draws near, and when
custom compels him thereunto, shall usually be found to be unprepared for
it. Blessed is he that offers himself up as a Sacrifice to the Lord, as often
as he does celebrate or communicate. Be not too long, nor too short in
celebrating, but keep the accustomed manner of those with whom thou live.
Thou ought not to be tedious and troublesome to others, but to observe the
received custom, according to the appointment of thy Superiors; and rather
frame thy self to the profit of others, than to thine own devotion or desire.

CHAP. XI. That the Body of Christ, and the holy Scriptures, are most necessary
unto a faithful soul.
The voice of the Disciple.

O Sweetest Lord Jesus, how great sweetness has an holy soul that feasteth
with thee in thy banquet, where there is set no other food to be eaten but thy
self, her only beloved, and most to be desired above all the desires of her
heart! And verily it should be a sweet thing unto me to pour out tears from the
very bottom of my heart in thy presence; and with holy Magdalene to wash thy
feet with my tears. But where is this devotion? Where is there any so plentiful
shedding of holy tears? Surely in the sight of thee and thy holy Angels, my
whole heart should be inflamed and even weep for joy. For I enjoy thee in the
Sacrament truly present, though hidden under another representation.

2. For to behold thee in thine own divine brightness, mine eyes would not be
able to endure it, neither could the whole world stand in the brightness of the
glory of thy Majesty. I do really enjoy and adore him, whom the Angels adore in
Heaven; but I, as yet in the mean time, by faith, they by sight, and without a
veil. I ought to be content with the light of true faith, and to walk therein,
until the day of everlasting brightness break forth, and the shadows of
figures pass away. But when that shall come which is perfect, the use of
Sacraments shall cease. For the blessed in Heavenly glory need not any
Sacramental remedy, but rejoice without end in the presence of God, beholding
his glory face to face, and being transformed from glory to glory into the
Image of the incomprehensible Deity, they taste the word of God made flesh, as
he was from the beginning; and as he remains for ever.

3. Whilst I mind these wonderful things, even all spiritual comfort
whatsoever becomes tedious unto me; for that as long as I behold not my Lord
openly in his glory, I make no account at all of whatsoever I see or hear in
this world. Thou art my witness, O God, that nothing can comfort me, no
creature can give me rest, but thou my God, whom I desire to behold
everlastingly. But this is not possible whilst I remain in this mortal life.
Therefore I must frame my self to much patience; and submit my self to thee in
all my desires. For thy Saints also, O Lord, who now rejoice with thee in the
Kingdom of Heaven, whilst they lived, expected in faith and great patience the
coming of thy glory. What they believed, I believe; what they hoped for, I also
hope for; whither they are come, I trust I shall come by thy grace. In the mean
time I will go forward in faith, strengthened by the examples of the Saints; I
have also godly books for my comfort and for the glass of my life, and above
all these, thy most holy body for a singular remedy and refuge.

4. For I perceive Two things to be chiefly necessary for me in the life
without which this miserable life would be unsupportable unto me. Whilst I am
kept in the prison of this body, I acknowledge my self to stand in need of Two
things, to wit, food, and light. Thou have therefore given unto me a weak
creature, thy sacred Body for the nourishment of my soul and body; and thou
have set thy word as a light unto my feet; without these Two I could not well
live. For the word of God is the light of the soul, and thy Sacrament, the
bread of life. These also may be called the Two Tables set on the one side and
the other, in the storehouse of the holy Church. One is the holy Table having
the holy bread, that is, the precious body of Christ; the other is that of the
divine Law, containing holy Doctrine, teaching the true faith, and certainly
leading to that within the veil, where is the holy of Holies. Thanks be unto
thee Lord Jesus, the light of everlasting light, for the table of holy
Doctrine, which thou have afforded us by thy Servants, the Prophets and
Apostles and other Teachers.

5. Thanks be unto thee, Creator and Redeemer of Man, who to manifest thy love
to the whole world, have prepared a great supper wherein thou have set before
us to be eaten (not the typical Lamb, but) thine own most sacred Body and
Blood, rejoicing all the faithful with thy holy banquet, and replenishing them
to the full with thy Cup of salvation, in which are all the delights of
Paradise; and the holy Angels do feast with us, but yet with a more happy
sweetness.

6. O how great and honorable is the office of Gods Ministers, to whom it is
given with sacred words to consecrate (the Sacrament of) the Lord of glory;
with their lips to bless, with their hands to hold, with their mouth to
receive, and also to administer to others! O how clean ought to be those hands,
how pure that mouth, how holy that body, how unspotted that heart, where the
Author of purity so often enters! Nothing but what is holy, no word but good
and profitable ought to proceed from his mouth, which so often receives the
Sacrament of Christ.

7. Simple and chaste ought to be the eyes that use to behold the body of
Christ; the hands pure and lifted up to Heaven, that use to receive the Creator
of Heaven and Earth. Unto the Priests especially it is said in the Law, be ye
holy for that I your Lord God am holy.

8. Assist us, Almighty God, with thy grace, that we who have undertaken the
office of Priesthood, may serve thee worthily and devoutly in all purity, and
with a good conscience. And if we live not in so great innocence as we ought to
do, grant us notwithstanding in due manner to bewail the sins which we have
committed; and in the spirit of humility and with the full purpose of a good
will to serve thee hereafter more fervently.

CHAP. XII. That he who is to communicate ought to prepare himself with great
diligence.
The voice of the beloved.

I Am the lover of purity, and the giver of all sanctity. I seek a pure heart,
and there is the place of my rest. Make ready and adorn for me the great
Chamber, and I will keep with thee the Passover amongst my Disciples. If thou will have me come unto thee, and remain with thee; purge out the old leaven,
and make clean the habitation of thy heart; shut out the whole world, and all
the throng of sins; sit like a sparrow solitary upon the housetop, and think
of thy offenses in the bitterness of thy soul. For every lover prepares the
best and fairest room for his beloved; and herein is known the affection of him
that entertaineth his beloved.

2. Know thou notwithstanding, that the merit of no action of thine is able to
make this preparation sufficient, although thou should prepare thy self a
whole year together, and think on nothing else. Thou art of my mere grace and
favor suffered to come to my Table, like a beggar invited to dinner to a rich
Man, who has nothing else to return him for his benefits, but to humble
himself and give him thanks. Do what lies in thee, and do it diligently; not
for custom, not for necessity, but with fear and reverence, and affection;
receive the body of thy beloved Lord God, who vouchsafes to come unto thee. I
am he that have called thee, I have commanded it to be done, I will supply what
is wanting in thee; come and receive me.

3. When I bestow the grace of devotion, give thanks to thy God; for it is
given thee, not for that thou art worthy, but because I have mercy on thee. If
thou have it not, but rather do feel thy self dry; continue in Prayer, sigh
and knock, and give not over until thou art meet to receive some crum or drop
of saving grace. Thou have need of me, not I of thee, neither come thou to
sanctify me, but I come to sanctify and make thee better. Thou come that
thou may be sanctified by me, and united unto me, that thou may receive new
grace, and be stirred up again to amendment. Neglect not this grace, but
prepare thy heart with all diligence, and receive thy beloved into thy soul.

4. But thou ought not only to prepare thy self to devotion before
Communion, but carefully also to conserve thy self therein, after thou have
received the Sacrament. Neither is the careful guard of thy self afterward
less required, than devout preparation before. For a good guard afterward, is
the best preparation again for the obtaining of greater grace; because that a
Man becomes therefore very indisposed, if he presently pour himself out
overmuch to outward comforts. Beware of much talk, remain in some secret place,
and enjoy thy God. For thou have him, whom all the world cannot take from thee.
I am he, to whom thou ought wholly to give thy self, thatso thou may live
hereafter, not in thy self, but in me, without all solicitude.

CHAP. XIII. That a devout soul ought to desire with her whole heart, to be
united unto Christ in the Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.

HOw may I obtain this, O Lord, that I may find thee alone, and open my whole
heart unto thee, and enjoy thee as my soul desires? And that no Man may look
toward me, nor any creature move me or eye me, but thou alone may speak unto
me, and I to thee, as the beloved is wont to speak to his beloved, and a friend
to banquet with his friend? This I pray for, this I desire, that I may be
wholly united unto thee, and may withdraw my heart from all created things, and
more and more by sacred Communion and often celebrating, learn to relish
Heavenly and eternal things. O Lord God, when shall I be wholly united to thee,
and absorpt by thee, and be altogether forgetful of my self? Thou in me, and I
in thee, and so grant us both to continue in one.

2. Thou art truly my beloved, the choicest amongst Thousands, in whom my soul
is well pleased to dwell all the days of her life. Thou art indeed my
peacemaker, in whom is greatest peace and true rest, without whom is labor and
sorrow and infinite misery. Thou art indeed a God that hidest thy self, and thy
counsel is not with the wicked, but thy speech is with the humble and simple of
heart. O Lord, how sweet is thy spirit, who to the end thou might show thy
sweetness toward thy Children, vouchsafest to feed them with the bread which
descends from Heaven, and is full of all sweetness! Surely there is no other
Nation so great, that has God nigh unto them, as thou our God art present to
all thy faithful ones, unto whom for their daily comfort, and for the raising
up of their hearts to Heaven, thou give thy self to be eaten and enjoyed.

3. For what other Nation, is there so famous, as the Christian People? or what
creature under heaven so beloved, as a religious soul to whom God himself
comes to feed her with his glorious flesh? O unspeakable grace! O admirable
condescent! O infinite love singularly bestowed upon Man! But what shall I give
unto the Lord in return of his grace, for so eminent an expression of thy love?
There is no other thing more acceptable that I am able to give, than to give my
heart wholly to my God, and to unite it most inwardly unto him. Then shall all
my inward parts rejoice, when my soul shall be perfectly united unto God. Then
he will say unto me; if thou will be with me, I will be with thee. And I will
answer him, Vouchsafe, O Lord, to remain with me, and I will gladly be with
thee. This is my whole desire, that my heart be united unto thee.

CHAP. XIV. Of the fervent desire of some devout Persons, to receive the Body
of Christ.
The voice of the Discipie.

O How great is thy goodness O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee! When I remember some devout persons who come unto thy Sacrament, O Lord,
with greatest devotion and affection, I am oftentimes confounded and blush
within my self, that I come so formally and coldly to thy Table of the holy
Communion, that I remain so dry, and without heart affection, That I am not
wholly inflamed in thy presence, my God, nor so earnestly drawn and affected,
as many devout persons have been, who out of a vehement desire of the
Communion, and a feeling affection of heart, could not contain themselves from
weeping; but with the desire both of soul and body, they earnestly longed after
thee, O God the living Fountain, being not otherwise able to allay nor satisfy
their hunger, but by receiing thy body with all joy and spiritual greediness.

2. O the most ardent faith of those persons! A clear argument of thy sacred
presence. For they truly know their Lord in the breaking of bread, whose heart
burns so mightily within them, whilst thou, O blessed Jesus, conversest with
them. Such desire and devotion, so vehement love and fervency, is oftentimes
far from me. Be merciful unto me good Jesus, sweet and gracious Lord, and grant
me thy poor needy creature, to feed sometimes, at least in this holy Communion,
somewhat of thy hearty affectionate love, that my faith may be more
strengthened, my hope in thy goodness increased, and that my charity once
perfectly enflamed, after the tasting of Heavenly Manna, may never decay.

3. Thy mercy, O Lord, is able to give me the grace I desire, and to visit me
most mercifully with the spirit of fervor, when it shall please thee. For
although I burn not with so great desire as those that are so singularly
devoted to thee; yet notwithstanding by thy grace, I desire to have this great
inflamed desire, praying and craving that I may participate with all such thy
fervent lovers, and be numbered among them in their holy company.

CHAP. XV. That the grace of devotion is obtained by humility and denial of our
selves.
The voice of the Beloved.

THou ought to seek the grace of devotion instantly, to ask it earnestly, to
expect it patiently and with confidence to receive it gratefully, to keep it
humbly, to work with it diligently, and to commit the term and manner of this
Heavenly visitation to God, until it shall please him to come unto thee. Thou
ought chiefly to humble thy self, when thou feel inwardly little or no
devotion, and yet not to be too much dejected, nor to grieve inordinately. God
often gives in a short moment, that which he has long time denied; he gives
sometimes in the end, that which in the beginning of prayer he deferred to
grant.

2. If grace should be always presently given, and at hand ever with a wish,
the weak Man could not well bear it. Therefore the grace of devotion is to be
expected with good hope and humble patience; yet impute it to thy self and thy
sins, when it is not given thee, or when it is secretly taken away. It is
sometimes a small matter that hinders and hides grace from us, if yet it be
to be called small, and not rather a great matter, that hinders so great a
good. And if thou remove this, be it great or small, and perfectly overcome it,
thou shall have thy desire.

3. For presently as soon as thou from thy whole heart give thy self to God,
and seek not this nor that, for thine own pleasure or will, but setlest thy
self wholly in him, thou shall find thy self united and quiet; for nothing will
relish so well, and please thee so much, as the good pleasure of the divine
will. Whosoever therefore, with a single heart lifts up his intention to God,
and purges himself from all inordinate love or dislike of any created thing,
he shall be the most fit to receive grace, and meet for the gist of devotion.
For the Lord bestows his blessings there, where he finds the vessels empty.
And how much the more perfectly one forsakes these low things, and the more he
dies to himself by contempt of himself; so much the more speedily grace shall
come, and enter in more plentifully, and raise up higher the heart that is thus
free.

4. Then shall he see, and be filled, and wonder, and his heart shall be
enlarged within him, because the hand of the Lord is with him, and he has put
himself wholly into his hands for ever. Behold, so shall the Man be blessed,
that seeks God with his whole heart, and busieth not his soul in vain. This
man obtains the great favor of divine union, in receiving the holy Eucharist;
for that he respects not his own devotion and comfort, but above all devotion
and comfort, the honor and glory of God.

CHAP. XVI. That we ought to manifest our necessities to Christ, and crave his
grace.
The voice of the Disciple.

O Most sweet, and loving Lord, whom I now desire to receive with all devotion,
thou know my infirmity and the necessity which I endure, with how many sins
and evils I am oppressed, how often I am grieved, tempted, troubled, and
defiled. I come unto thee for remedy, I crave of thee comfort and succor; I
speak to him that knows all things, to whom all my inward parts are open, and
who can only perfectly comfort and help me. Thou know what good things I
stand in most need of, and how poor I am in virtues.

2. Behold, I stand before thee poor and naked, calling for grace, and craving
mercy. Refresh thy hungry beggar, inflame my coldness with the fire of thy
love; inlighten my blindness with the brightness of thy presence. Turn all
earthly things to me into bitterness, all things grievous and cross into
patience, all low and created things into contempt and oblivion. Lift up my
heart to thee in Heaven, and suffer me not to wander upon Earth. Be thou only
sweet unto me from henceforth for evermore; for thou only art my meat and my
drink, my love and my joy, my sweetness and all my good.

3. O that with thy presence thou would wholly inflame, burn and conform me
unto thy self; that I might be made one spirit with thee by the grace of inward
union, and by the meltings of ardent love! Suffer me not to go from thee hungry
and dry, but deal mercifully with me, as thou have oftentimes dealt wonderfully
with thy Saints. What marvel is it if I should be wholly inflamed by thee, and
die from my self, since thou art fire always burning and never decaying, love
purifying the heart, and enlightening the understanding?

CHAP. XVII. Of fervent love and vehement desire to receive Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.ple.

WIth great devotion and ardent love, with most hearty affection and fervor I
desire to receive thee, O Lord, as many Saints and devout persons have desired
thee, when they received thy Sacrament who were most pleasing unto thee in
holiness of life, and most fervent in devotion. O my God, my everlasting love;
my whole good, my happiness without end. I would gladly receive thee with the
most vehement desire and most worthy reverence, that any of the Saints ever
had, or could feel.

2. And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of devotion, yet I
offer unto thee the whole affection of my heart, as if I alone had all those
highly pleasing inflamed desires; yea and whatsoever also an holy mind can
conceive and desire; all that, with greatest reverence and most inward
affection, I offer and present unto thee. I desire to reserve nothing to my
self, but freely and most willingly to sacrifice my self and all mine unto
thee, my Lord God my Creator, and my Redeemer. I desire to receive thee this
day with such affection, reverence, praise and honor, with such gratitude,
worthiness, and love, with such faith, hope, and purity, as thy most holy
Mother the glorious Virgin Mary received, and desired thee, when she humbly and
devoutly answered the Angel, who declared unto her the mystery of the
Incarnation, and said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, let it be done unto me
according to thy word.

3. And as thy blessed Forerunner, the most excellent amongst the Saints, John
Baptist, cheerfully leaped by reason of the holy Ghost, whilst he was yet shut
up in his Mothers womb; and afterward seeing Jesus walking amongst Men,
humbling himself very much, said with devout affection, The friend of the
Bridegroom that stands and hears him, rejoices with joy for the voice of
the Bridegroom; so I also wish to be inflamed with great and holy desires, and
to offer my self up to thee with my whole heart. Wherefore I offer also and
present unto thee the joys, fervent affections, mental excesses, and supernal
illuminations, and Heavenly visions of all devout hearts, with all the virtues
and praises celebrated and to be celebrated by all creatures in Heaven and
Earth, for my self, and all such as are commended to me in prayer, that by all
thou may be worthily praised and glorified for ever.

4. Receive, my Lord God, my wishes and desires of giving thee infinite praise
and thanks, which according to the measure of thy unspeakable greatness, are
most worthily due unto thee. These I yield thee, and desire to yield thee every
day and moment. I do entreat and invite all Heavenly minds, and all the devout
Servants, to give thanks and praises together with me.

5. Let all People, Tribes, and Tongues praise thee, and magnify thy holy and
sweet Name, with great joy and fervent devotion; and let all that reverently
and devoutly celebrate thy most high Sacrament and receive it with full faith,
find grace and mercy at thy hands, and pray humbly for me a sinful creature.
And when they shall have obtained their desired devotion and joyful union, and
depart from thy sacred Heavenly Table, well comforted and marvellously
refreshed, let them vouchsafe to remember my poor soul.

CHAP. XVIII. That Man be not a curious searcher of the Sacrament, but an
humble follower of Christ, submitting his sense to faith.
The voice of the Beloved.

THou ought to beware of curious and unprofitable searching into this most
profound Sacrament, if thou will not be plunged in the depths of doubts. He
that is a searcher of Majesty, shall be oppressed by thy glory. God is able to
work more than Man can understand. A pious and humble inquiry of truth is
tolerable, so it be always ready to be taught, and do endeavor to walk in the
sound doctrines of the Fathers.

2. Blessed is that simplicity, that forsakes the difficult ways of questions,
and goes on in the plain and assured path of Gods Commandments. Many have lost
devotion, whilst they would search after high things. Faith and a sincere life
required at thy hands, not height of understanding, nor a diving deep into the
mysteries of God. If thou do not understand, nor conceive those things that
are under thee, how shall thou be able to comprehend those that are above thee?
Submit thy self to God, and let thy sense be subject to faith; and the light of
knowledge shall be given thee in that degree as shall be profitable and
necessary for thee.

3. Some are grievously tempted about faith and the Sacrament, but this is not
to be imputed to them, but rather to the Enemy. Be not thou anxious nor dispute
with thy thoughts, neither do thou give answer to the doubts cast in by the
Devil; but believe the words of God, believe his Saints and Prophets, and the
wicked Enemy will fly from thee. It is oftentimes very profitable to the
Servant of God to suffer such things. For the Devil tempts not unbelievers
and sinners, whom he already securely possesses, but he sundry ways tempts
and vexes the faithful and religious.

4. Go forward therefore with a sincere and undoubted faith, and come to the
Sacrament with unfeigned reverence. And whatsoever thou art not able to
understand, commit securely to Almighty God. God deceives thee not; he is
deceived that trusts to much to himself. God walks with the simple,
reveals himself to the humble, gives understanding to the little ones,
opens the sense to pure minds, and hides grace from the curious and proud.
Humane reason is weak, and may be deceived, but true faith cannot be deceived.

5. All reason and natural search ought to follow faith, not to go before, nor
infringe it. For faith and love do here chiefly excel, and work in a hidden
manner in this most holy and excellent Sacrament. God, who is everlasting and
of infinite power, does great and inscrutable things in Heaven and in Earth,
and there is no searching out of his wonderful works. If the works of God were
such, as might be easily comprehended by humane reason, they were not to be
called wonderful and unspeakable.

FINIS.

