CHRISTIAN AND CONJUGAL COUNSEL OR, Christian Counsel, applied unto the
MARRIED ESTATE.

By Will. Thomas, Minister of the Gospel, and Rector of the Church of Ubley.

Heb. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled.

Bernard. super Cantica. Sermon. 66. Toll de Ecclesia honorabile connubium and
^^^um immaculatum, nonne reples eam concubinariis incestuosis, semini^luis
mollibus, masculorum concubitoribus, and omni denique genere immundorum?

London, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1661

To the CHRISTIAN READER.
THese Meditations (Good Reader) were long since conceived and imparted for the
use of one entr^ into the Married state* and coming afterward into more hands,
the printing of them has been long since desired, which (the World being full
of Books, and my self of Weakness) I diverted, and ^^ve hitherto deser'd.

Yet fearing lest being fixed among (...) few in a private place, I should be
wanting to more* and ^onsidering that what I have here written is so little, as
that it is not like to be tedious; and of such a subject as touches upon the
substance of Godliness, and so may be some way profitable, I have, at length,
advenred to let it see the light.

And that the rather, because I would have this imprinted in the hearts of
Christians, that Religion is much seen in Relations; Hence the Apostles
proceeding in their Epistles from matters of doctrine to prescripts of
practice, do therein descend, and disperse their directions into several
Callings and Conditions, as of Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and People,
Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; Many of which are
contained and concerned in the Married estate: Even Nature and Reason make
Offices and Societie-services the trial of Virtue, Magistratus Virum indicat
it being an easy matter to creep into a Cell, and under a pretense He that
will prove his yoke of Oxen proves them best by putting them into the yoke,
Luke 14. 19* with 2 Cor. 6. 14.
of Devotion to serve and satisfy Selfwill: but to appear in the sight of the
Sun, and to appear approved when there are many quicksighted, and some severe
observers; this will find work enough for the greatest grace where it is, and
too much for the best nature where it is not.

This difficulty, and the excellency of walking with approbation in the works
and offices belonging to all and every one, in their particular place and
calling, I am the more willing to note, because I have heard diverse Godly
persons complain, that having had in the Single estate much liberty for sweet
and Soulrefreshing conversings with God, being afterward married, and having a
Family to look to, they have been so forced from them, as to find a great loss
in their acquaintance with God, in regard of that frequent enlarged and
un-interrupted communion with him which they formerly enjoyed. But let not such
who would fain be communing with God Genesis ^8. 33.
if they could, and at Jesus feet Luke 10. 39.
if they might, droop or be disconsolate, much less dismayed, for now (being
entered into society) they come to make use of that habit, and those helps of
holiness, which they got and laid up in the single estate; And this may be a
Rule, that the Use of all preparatory exercises and assistances is better than
the Using of them: They therefore that show forth the power of their former
religious performances, do not lose, but make a gainful exchange, They do but
come from the exercises of Religion, to the exercise, which is the end,
ornament, perfection, and complement of all Exercises.

Its true as the Apostle says, He that is Unmaried cares for the things
belonging to the Lord, how he may please the Lord, that is, having not other
things to care for, he is more free for it; He does not say that every one that
is married takes that care, or that if a man be once married, he takes it not,
but only that the Un-maried have an advantage, and may do it more and more
easily Again, He that is married cares for the things that are of the World,
how he may please his wife, 1 Cor. 7. 32, 33, 34.
but then this is to be noted that he performs a good office in it, his Care is
not his Sin but his Duty; and every Duty has its comfort and reward; Yea that
care and sorrow which women are called to in the Married estate, has this
comfort assured to it, that (their continuance in Faith, Charity, Holiness and
Sobriety being supposed) they shall be saved in Childe-bearing, 1 Timothy, 2. 15.
that is, the conscientious and patient performance of the offices, and
undergoing the afflictions of Childbearing women, is their proper way to
Heaven; for that is the work which God has committed to them to do, Mark 13, ^4.
and the thing wherein the reality of their Religion is to discover it self.

Yet here there is need to annex a Caution, to wit, that though the external
duties of religion be lessened by marriage (I mean to some, for diverse that had
less liberty before marriage have more by it,) I say, though religious duties
be lessened by marriage, yet they must not be left; Christians, whether married
or unmaried must still acquaint their hearts with wisdom, Eccles. 2. 2.
and be provident to preserve their Fellowship with God; They that can be
content with an Husband, with a Wife and Children (and all Worldly
accommodations) without God, never knew what it was to enjoy God. Nay rather,
They that have Wives must be as if they had none, 1 Cor. ^. 29.
that is, in regard of their readiness for the service of God. A Husband must
not say, I have married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come, Luke 14. 20.
Nor the Wife, I have a Husband, therefore God cannot have me; but though they
be not able to take (as some unmaried may) every opportunity, yet they must not
neglect those they may take, nor make themselves liable to that most sad Charge
of making light Mat. 22. 5.
of Gods Ordinances and gracious invitations.

But the Gate grows wide for so little an House (although it may be reckoned a
part of the House, I shall hasten therefore; If any require why I publish this
at this time, it might be enough for me so aged) to answer, Because every man
should do what good he can while he has time; yet something more may be said
in regard of the present time, wherein the great God (whose Works are like
Himself) by rare providence, I say, rare and admirable providence, both
because so high and so dry, has in such sort altered and bettered the state of
things amongst us, that our rightful, gracious and accomplished King is
returned unto us, which, if our high sins, our broad and spreading profaneness,
and deep security do not hinder, promises unto us an happy Settlement. Now, as
times of trouble and persecution detain and deter from marriage, so times of
peace (albeit marriage should have some further and greater reason than National
rest) I say, times of peace and establishment, give encouragement to it, and
consequently make these and the like Scripture-directions seasonable for the
rendering of it more holy, and thereby more happy.

And to say all, though this advice reflect on the married estate, yet it is not
so appropriated to it, but that there is use of it, as there is of that
godlyness and regular Walking, that it persuades unto, in every estate: It is
Christian as well as Conjugal counsel, and though it be composed for, and
contrived into the married condition, yet (that estate being so comprehensive)
much of it may serve indifferently for Christians in every Condition.

Desiring thy prayers (Christian Reader) that the Author of the Counsel (or
rather the weak Instrument) may be Himself the Observer; I rest,

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, William Thomas.

ERRATA.
Epistle, P. 4. concentred r. concerned.

P. 27. Christan, r. Christian.

P. 41. Col. 1. 17. r. Col. 4. 17.

P. 69. l. 8. damage, r danger.

P. 63. l. 7. comfort, r. consort.

P. 84. l. 8. rustles, r. justles.

P. 88. l. 2. it combines, r. is comeliness.

The Matter of the ensuing MEDITATIONS Summed up, and referred to the several
Numbers and Partitions of them: WHEREIN --
1 Marriage dignity and duty is generally mentioned. N. 1, 2, 3. 2 Four
Requisites in Marriage. 1 Zeal in Religion. N. 5. 2 Patience in all Occasions.
N 6. where is further declared concerning Impatience -- 1 The evils of it, as
being an Enemy to comfortable Society, 1 With God. N 9, 10. 2 With Men. N. 11.
3 With our own Consciences. N. 12.
2 Supports for those that groan under it. N. 14, etc. 3 The cure of it. N. 17.
Viz. 1 Consideration of Gods providence. N. 19. 2 Of our own faults. N. 21. 3
Communing with our own hearts. N. 22. 4 Faithful friends. N. 23. 5 Prayer. N.
24.

3 Wisdom: And that -- -- 1 In matters of Religion:] Particularly, in using
and ordering 1 Of religious Exercises. N. 26, 27. 2 Of Christian and edifying
conference and admonition, enlarged with diverse particular directions from N.
28, to N. 41.
2 In duties of Relation: Namely, relating -- 1 To Ministers. N. 41, to 49. 2
To Neighbors and Friends. N. 49, to. 53. 3 To those in the Family. N. 53. Viz.
-- 1 Equals. N. 54. 2 Inferiors. N. 55. 3 Man and Wife: where there are diverse
advertisements for both. N. 56, to N. 66. 4 Children, to whom Parents owe 1
Instruction. N. 66, to 69. 2 Correction. N. 69. 3 Disposition into a Calling.
N. 70. 4 Disposition in Marriage -- to a Consort religious, discreet, with
respect to Person and Portion. N. 71, 72, 73, 74.





CHRISTIAN COUNSEL, applied to the Married Estate.
1. Marriage is an estate honorable in all; Hebr. 13. 4.
And they fall below the nature and worth of men, (and much more of Christians)
who quarrel that estate which God has ordained for the comfort, benefit, and
increase of mankind.

2. The honor of the married estate is preserved, while the bed is kept without
being defiled either by falseness or filthiness.

3. But the duty of the estate is as difficult as the dignity is great, and a
business it is of far greater virtue for any to acquit himself in the married,
then in the single estate.

4. A single and solitary estate is the touchstone of sincerity, and they are
surely good that Requisites in marriage.
are good secretly, but of our wisdom, patience, and zeal, society is the
truest trial.

5. Of zeal in regard of 1. Zeal.
religious exercises and private conversings with God; for which, to gain a
competent time, and therein, to come before God with a clear heart in the
multitude and number of worldly businesses, will undoubtedly make Christians to
bestir themselves.

6. And of patience also 2. Patience.
in regard of Familyoccasions, and the many vexations of spirit that do arise
both from things and persons.

7. Its true that diverse occasions of disturbance and distemper, may by
providence, and prudence be prevented; and our little stock of patience
bespeaks the best assistance of that providence; but to avoid and discharge our
selves of all, is no more in our power, then to command the course of
providence, Ecc'es. 1. 15.
or to alter the nature and dispositions of people.

8. We have need of patience therefore, that what we are not able to prevent we
may be willing to endure.

9. Nor does patience Impatience an enemy to Society
endure it only, but abate and end it; and this is the common fruit of our
impatience, the doubling of our disturbance.

10. And consider here (to make patience more precious) that perturbations of
spirit are great molesters of piety, and interrupt our society 1* With God*
with God; for the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1.
20.
that is, a wrathful person, (especially in a wrathful passion) is very unfit
to do the will of God, either in works of Religion, that require a quiet and
peaceable heart; 1 Timothy 2. 8.
or in works of Righteousness, that require an equal and dispassionated
judgment, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.

11. Wrathful distempers 2. With Man.
also dissweeten our society with men: Needs must others less comfortably come
near us, and we less honorably converse with them, if we shall (though but in
some degrees) resemble that Nabal who was so froward (as his Servants said, and
none is able to shake off what Servants say truly, Job 31. 13.) that a man
could not tell how to speak to him, 1 Samuel 25. 17.

12. Add to this, that 3. With our own Consciences.
the comfortable society with our selves, and our own Consciences is hindered
while we give way to those passionate words and carriages wherewith the
Conscience, upon serious and sober consideration cannot choose but be much
grieved, 1 Samuel 25. 31.

13. Now why should we have any fellowship with that which darkens and disturbs
all fellowship both with God, and Men, and with our own Consciences?

14. Not that all comfort Comforts in crosseness of nature.
is lost by the crossenesse and cursedness of our nature; Diverse belong to God
that are very unpleasant and troublesome to M^n. God has some knotty timber in
his Carmel; All that serve him are not like his Servant Moses, Numb 12. 3.
(you may find me^ker men on Earth, (happily) in Hell too, in regard of natural
meekness) but some as Jonah 4. 9.
Jonah. And yet to speak the truth (not to protect Perverseness, but to support
those that groan under the Burden of it) the harshest Good-Christian is better
than the sweetest either Heathen or Hypocrite; and the worst Child God has is
better than the best the Devil has.

15. But though sincerity of Heart, and sowrnesse of Carriage may stand
together, yet they stand as two Enemies in the Field, and many sad Fights there
be in that divided-heart that is the seat of that War, the reason whereof is,
because the one Enemy, I mean a crooked nature, is so unweariable; and the
other, that is, the 2 Pet. 1. 4.
divine nature, the grace of God, the Rose among the Thorns, is so
unconquerable, and so irreconcilable.

16. This combat, hard as it is, is often the best hold that a Christian has,
and is so necessary a fruit of Sincerity, that they never feared God truly that
endured their inordinate passions patiently. Impatience, with others is their
fault, to be impatient with themselves for it, is their comfort.

17. Yet trouble with our Frowardness is the more uncomfortable part of our
Comfort; To God all things are possible* and, howsoever we can no more quite
put off our Naughtiness here, than our Natures, yet by prayer The cure of
Impatience.
and care (Gods power, and Gods course) this disease may receive some competent
cure.

18. To this cure, it conduces much; First, seriously to consider Gods
providence. Secondly, to call to mind our own faults. And Thirdly, to commune
with our own hearts.

19. That diverse molestations 1. Consideration of Gods providence.
arise in our affairs, may be the fruit of our* own Improvidence, and then our
anger should abide at home, but (howsoever) diverse cross^ things there are
inwrapt within the course of divine providence, wherein (therefore) a perverse
Impatience amounts to this, the* charging of God foolishly* Job 1. ^2.
That which is crocked cannot be made straight, Eccles. ^. 15.
the more need had we to set our selves straight, for if they be crooked and we
too, though God can make their Crookedness end in his glory, yet ours will end
in our own smart.

20. Besides that, they that can bear nothing forget why they were born, for,
Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, Job 5. 7.

21. Withal, our own 2. Of our own faults.
faults, (both past and present) feelingly mind us of forbearance in the faults
and wrongs of others: we do not only need Patience (for) others, but (in)
others; if they need ours, consider also, that we exercise theirs, Eccles. 7.
22.

22. As the considering 3. A Communing with our own hearts.
of our own faults persuades Patience, so communing with our own hearts, works
it; I mean communing, not in our fits, (for then Passion is the Judge, and
nothing is pleasing but what pierces) but on our Beds, and in cool blood, for
then Reason is the Judge; then God is the Judge, and it is for Patience that he
passes Sentence; He is not in these winds and earthquakes, and fires, but in a
soft and still voice, 1 King. 19. 11, 12. They that commune with their own
hearts most, are like to chide least, for the upshot of that is, Be still, Ps.
4. 4.

23. To these may be 4. A friend to us, and an enemy to our frowardness.
added as an happy help, a patient and prudent Friend, what would David have
done if Abigail had not been? If a Woman may prevail so much with a Superior,
why not a Man with an equal, with an inferior? if not, while the fit lasts,
yet that it may not last; Passion is but the turning of Reason out of office.
Now as the Flatterer takes part with the Beast in Man, and the sensual part, so
does a true Friend with the understanding part, Plutarch de Adulat, and Amici
discrim.
and a Christian Friend with the regenerate part. Hence, (by his help) Reason
and Grace is restored, and Passion expelled.

True it is, that Patience is an hard task in a choleric temper; the more need
had such of greater care, and wiser company, and (to say all) to make the more
earnest Prayers, and as faithful Prayers.
as earnest; for what Heart is so rebellious and impetuous but He can put
bounds unto it, who says unto the Sea itself, Hitherto shall thou go, and no
further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed? Job 38. 11.

24. But as Society tries 3. Wisdom.
our Zeal and our Patience, so it puts us much to the proof of our wisdom,
and that both in matters of Religion and Relation.

25. And as concerning In matters of Religion.
matters of Religion, both in the carriage of religious exercises, and of
religious conference.

26. Religious exercises are as necessary as it is to depend upon God for the
prosperous carriage of our affairs; for God will be depended upon in his own
way; It is the base and atheistical opinion that people have of having to do
with God (as if it were but so much labor lost) that makes them grudge the
time for holy Duties, and make as if a day of humiliation would undo them. Look
upon prayer as a familiar communing with the most glorious God; Genesis 18. 33.
as the Supplyer of all wants; Luke 11. 9, 10.
as a Shelter from all dangers; Ezra 8. 21, 22.
as the Setler, Sanctifier, and Prosperer of all Businesses; Genesis 24. 12, 15, 7.
and is it possible to neglect it? Worthy thoughts of better things will shift
for time, and devise ways whereby to enjoy them, only Infidelity abandons
Duty.

27. Let it be the shame therefore of those that profess themselves Believers,
to think that Piety is against Profit, and that there is no gain in Godliness;
yet times for our general and particular Calling should be discreetly divided;
religious 1. In religious exercises.
exercises should be fitly ordered, and those Prayers (in particular) that are
made with others should be framed according to the State and Condition of our
Family or Company; Not so hard and high as that the Simple cannot understand
them; 1 Cor. 14. 16.
not so simple and insufficient as that they that have understanding cannot
relish them; Jer. 48. 10.
not so long as that the weak cannot bear them; Mat. 9. 16, 17.
nor so short and overly as to nourish Security, and to accommodate Unghostly
men in their aversnes from holy Duties by the sleightnesse and cursorinesse of
them.

28. As for Christian 2. In Christian conference.
and Spiritual conference, and that continual, (as opportunity shall offer it
self) it is both the duty of men faithful, who are called upon to exhort one
another daily; Heb. 3. 12, 13.
and the character and mark of men fearing God, who speak often one to another,
Mal. 3. 16.

29. Yet difference is to be made between Persons and Persons; Some be
Superiors in age, abilities, office, before whom it becomes Inferiors rather
to offer things to consideration, than to affirm; Some are weaker, and of
better hearts, others wiser and of better parts; good and ghostly things will
be accepted of those, but wiser things as well as better must be brought to
these, for though they approve all holy things, yet they relish higher. Again.
Some are willing and able to speak of better things, (and happily not able to
speak well of other things) to these come purposely to talk of God and Heaven,
and do it plentifully; but give not Weaklings more of Spiritual conference than
they are able to accept; rather mix (as Sawces) civil, moral, pleasant, (but
some way profitable) speeches; yea, if men be so unghostly and Ungodly, that
religious conference will not be admitted, join with them in civil, to prevent
profane.

30. And distinguish also between Times and Times; between a private visit,
(wherein Christians shall do well to sit together on Earth as Saints in Heaven,
and to pour forth themselves one to another in the fullness of Spiritual
discourse) and a common feast, wherein though they ought principally to intend
Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
yet they are permitted also to cheer up themselves with such things and words
as are suitable for (...) refreshing of the out^ard man in an human (...): Genesis
43 34. Judge. 14. 12.
Not but that ^en in such meetings ^ere should be a mixture ^ better things,
(and ^me be so happy as to ^ merry and wise too,^d to convey pious ^ings with
pleasure and ^th power also) I say, ^t but that in such mee^gs there should be
a ^ixture of better things ^hats no Christian mee^g that shuts out Christ) ^t
in other meetings, ^ when people be more ^ both to speak and to ^ ear things
spiritual) a greater measure.

31. Such cautions being observed, they that fear God do like themselves in
speaking often one to another. Mal. 3. 16.
But often is not all; Christians must be good and wise; Goodness speaks much,
and Wisdom speaks well; and very well it should be, because when they that
fear God speak often, God still stands by with his book of remembrance; Mal. 3.
16.
and how wise should the Speaker be when God himself is the Noter.

32. That Christians may admonish one another, the word of God must dwell in
them; Col. 3. 16.
Its the great fault (I do not say of Christan but of) Christians - conference,
that they speak out of their own heads, without their books or their guide,
their Bible or their Pastor, and of those things most whereof the Scripture
speaks least; indeed of things curious and disputable, rather than necessary
and profitable: A thing the more to be both marked and feared, because the
spending and engaging of men's time and talk, and wits, and zeal in niceties and
more refined Speculations, tends -- 1. to a sleighting and a kind of loathing
of the plain and maine things of Scripture, as ^oo low for so great
Proficients to look upon: and 2. to a separating from ^he Churches of God, as
^oo corrupt for men so ghostly to abide in.

33. To prevent this the better, as the word of God must dwell in us, so it
must dwell in us richly, that we may not need to rove other where to make our
selves rich in Religion. Now because men may talk much of Scripture, and yet
talk but little Scripture; (for Scripture is not it self unless taken and
spoken* in its right sense) therefore* the word of God must not only dwell in
us richly, but rightly, and in all wisdom, Coloss. 3. 16.
that is, with a right and judicious interpretation and apprehension, that so
we may the better, when we meet together, teach and admonish one another.

34. Withal, Christian To edifying is required,
Conference must not only abound, and be sound, but it must (as the Scripture
every where speaks) edify, that is, it must be seasonable, suitable, and so
ordered and carried as shall be most for the building up of the Company before
whom it is delivered.

35. He that builds 1 Clearing the soil.
must first clear the soil, that is, get some rights and interests, some good
affections and estimations among them to whom he speaks; or (at least) be able
to produce a good calling, that he may not be diverted with this sad and sour
demand, upon what acquaintance or title do you make so bold as to build here.

36. Next, he must lay 2. A good foundation.
a good foundation; and not rear a high and weighty frame (such as Zeal is
willing to make) upon such sand and soluble matter as will not abide a Storm.
Good things had need to be so much the better laid, by how much they are worse
loved, and he that would speak hopefully in things not pleasing to nature, is
put to it to speak convincingly, for men will never receive things against
their will and their reason too.

37. A sound foundation 3. A ^ight frame.
being laid, he must build, not hay and stubble upon it, but what will abide
trial; for as a man would be loath that all his building should fall with the
foundation, so he may be very sorry too that all the building should fail but
the foundation; to wit, for want of a right and workman* like raising his frame
upon it. Wisdom is needful for every Builder, though most for a Minister,
who, though he be not a Paul, yet may be called, in respect of People, a
Master Builder, 1 Cor. 3. 10.

38. The manner of Building is a material 4 A meet manner of build ing.
thing also; knotty timber requires the Axe much, and some must be saved with
Fear, Jude, v. 23.
whether they like it or no, for its sure (if they be saved) they will like it;
others (happily) are so meekned and made ready by the grace and hand of God,
that there is no cause why hammer or axe, or any iron or harder tool should be
heard, 1 Kings 6, 7.
and if it be so, he has a hard heart that will strike but one needless
stroke, on such have compassion, Jude v. 22, 23.

39. As for the fashion of the Building, wisdom is a winner, prove. 11. 30.
and the commendation of a Spiritual builder is, to raise upon a good
foundation, a substantial frame, in an amiable form; amiable, and yet variable.
All men love not to have their Houses built alike: Some love higher Houses, and
delight that others should set up in their hearts, a most spiritual and
heavenly structure: others love a lower piece, and cannot be abstracted from
the world, and from affairs, yet in truth they are: and upon Meditation, but
not in such a height, and with such devotion, either because of the necessity
of their Calling, or the propension of their minds to secular employments and
engagements: in which respect something must be yielded, and they that would
edify, must (as our Savior speaks) tell them of earthly things John 3. 12.
that is, speak of heavenly things in a more human and rational, rather than in
a more ghostly and spiritual way; and (withal) so limit their Christian
discourse, as to let them see that as they be willing to advantage them in
regard of their Souls: So they be loath to prejudice them in regard of their
Affairs. To go on, Some there be that like a Wide house, and to be left wholly
to that large room which the Scripture puts them into in its general rules;
others love lesser rooms, and to have the generalities of Scripture drawn down
for a regular and strict course in all particulars; for where grace is less
advantaged by natural abilities, it had need be more assisted and encouraged by
outward observances. Thus there being a latitude in Religion, and God being
pleased to dwell in Houses of different Forms; Ephesians 2. 22.
Building-Christians may not contend to have all as one, neither stand with men
that are truly willing, that with them Christ should have a house to put his
head in, about the fashion of the building; only the foundation, the
materials, and the maine parts of the building must be alike in all.

40. Generally, As the Constitution of the Patient regulates the Physicians
Prescript; So we should observe in all religious Communications what will take,
and how much: Give Christians leave to leave with an appetite, even when the
Conference is pleasing; and if (happily) it be less grateful, and carry a
reproof with it, then, as the maine project of the Physician is to preserve
nature, and to maintain himself a party, in the body of the Patient; so ever
look to this, to preserve love: Be so wise at one time as to be welcome at
another, yea so sweet at one time as to be sem for at another.

41. As Christian wisdom Duties of Relation
is seen in the exercises of Religion, so also in our ordinary relations,
amongst which that of Pastors may well challenge 1. For Ministers
the first place; concerning whom, the Rule is, esteem them very highly in love
for their works sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
Nor is due and just estimation to be entertained only, but (as there is
occasion) to be declared; for as outward expressions without inward and real
respects are reputed a Flattery; so an inward estimation, not seconded by
outward and answerable acknowledgements, is in danger to be reckoned a
Dissimulation. The heart is the treasury of good affections, not the prison.

42. Yet Ministers require no such respect as to debar their People from
being their private and modest Remembrancers, whether of defects or faults;
Col. 1. 17.
for as People have from Pastors a ministerial, so Pastors have from People a
christian assistance; but its sufficient when they have to do with Ministers
and men apprehensive* to intimate the former; and while they have to do with
men conscientious and tender, to touch the latter. Not that things not
justifiable should be favored in any: but Men look to have so much right done
them as not to be worse thought of than they are. Now a frequent and
importunate Monitor, reports himself to have either a dull or an hard-hearted*
hearer.

43. Christian Remembrances from People to their Pastor, as they ever require
due observance, so do they relish best, when they are tendered to them (and so
it is when they are tendered to any other) as acts of obedience and conscience,
proceeding from them not as men affecting such an office, but as not daring to
omit such a duty: its one thing to speak of things amiss (especially to
Superiors) as those that are bound to do it, another thing to speak as those
that are bent to do it.

44. Its good also to be sure things are amiss before a man signify it, else
he must needs discover a want either of a good judgment, or of good will,
which, though the wisdom and humility of Ministers and good Christians will
and should cover, yet People should provide not to discover. Two things are due
to all good People, in particular; to a Pastor, Love and Honor: Love covers a
multitude of things that are truly blameable: but Honor will not so much as
mention that that is questionable.

45. Such things as these are requisite, in point of prudence between People
and their Pastor: but the best wisdom of a Hearer is, to make the best use of
his Minister, for which purpose Disciples shall do well to propound, and
Ministers to accept and countenance, useful Questions: but propounded they
should be at fit times without molestation, and urged with modesty, as by those
whose meaning is not to maintain an Argument (there is difference between a
Disciple and a Disputant) but to obtain an Answer.

46. Upon such Proposals, Ministers do for present (as need requires, and as
occasions permit) debate the matter, and perhaps deliver their judgments,
which people are reverently to receive, and to entertain, as those that are
willing to take resolution as well as to seek it; not but that they may examine
any man's judgments (as the Bereans did Paul's Sermon) by Scripture, or by
Reason; but not oppose it by mere opinion. I grant indeed there may be some
belonging to a Ministers charge of extraordinary parts, knowledge, and
judgment, to whom therefore more is to be granted; but (to speak of that which
is ordinary) it is not equal nor modest (when Teachers and Scholars confer
together,) for the Scholar and Disciple to oppose judgment with judgment, nor
to be high and peremptory, (though with some show of reason) for if the Teacher
have not better reason for the present, yet he may have.

47. But whatever Pastors and Teachers say for the present, yet as preaching is
a Ministers principal task, so is it a Hearers highest help; what Hearers
propound, Ministers do (perhaps) more observe than answer when they propound
it, and choose rather to speak better in public, than more in private; and
public Sermon-solutions are absolutely best, (unless in some private and
personal Cases) as being -- 1. more general; what 1.
satisfaction I alone should have in private, many by my means and proposals
have in public -- 2. more 2.
full; and (by reason of study and meditation) more full of sufficiency than
those can be that are delivered suddenly -- 3. and more effectual; 3.
by informing the mind, and satisfying the conscience, as being held forth in
Gods principal Ordinance, to which he has promised his special presence and
blessing, Mat. 28. ^0.
and with the prayers of the Minister and the whole Congregation that that
blessing may be bestowed.

48. Yet the occasions, gifts, and dispositions of men being different, and
some being more addicted to Discourse than Meditation, (and more happy in it
also) nothing can be here certainly defined, nor is it needful; for the wise
and careful Christian will quickly see what he may have, and how he may best
have it, and accordingly manage the matter so as to obtain his own best
assistance, with his Pastors best acceptance.

49. Next to the Minister, 2. For Neighbors and Friends.
our Wisdom will be well employed in carrying our selves commendably to our
Neighbors and Friends, whether called by the grace of God, and sanctified, or
(as yet) uncalled.

50. With those that are truly good, we shall do well to converse -- 1. with 1.
more familiarity and openesse of heart, as being of one household, Gal. 6 10.
however Un-united by external allyances; -- 2. with 2.
intireness of affection as being children of one Father, 2 Cor. 6. last.
whatever outward distances there be; Ps. 119. 69.
-- 3. with respect to edification, as being Servants 3.
of the same Master, for whose use we ought to improve one another; In this
regard, the sum of our Duty is, to assist in Persons regenerate, the part
regenerate, and that according to that good and perfect, and acceptable will of
God, whereby the renewed mind ought to be guided. Romans 12. 2.
A thing the rather to be marked, that our Zeal in the pressing of Persons
well affected, may be employed with respect to Duty, not Fancy* so as to
nourish grace in them, not humor; and so as to beat down sin in them, not
civility and humanity: In brief, that that is contrary to Gods word, not our
way.

51. As for those that are Un-called, the rule is, to carry our selves toward
them wisely; Coloss. 4. 5.
It suffices (in a sort) to carry our selves toward the good innocently, but
as for those that be without, as all Un-converted persons are in a true and a
sad sense; Mark 4. 11.
Innocence needs Wisedoms assistance for the avoiding of any thing blameable,
though but in appearance. 1 These. 5. 22.
It belongs to our Sanctity and Sincerity, not to be Faulty, but to our
Wisdom, not to seem so.

52. Particularly, we shall do well before unregenerate Neighbors and Friends,
to carry our 1.
selves, -- 1. Innocently, then shall not they harm us, 1 Pet. 3 13.
then may we the better hope to win them. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
-- 2. Meekly, for if they be bad, so were 2.
we, and if we be good, so may they. Tit. 3. 2, 3.
-- 3. Kindly, if Barbarians show no 3.
small kindness to Christians, Act 28. 2.
shall Christians show no great kindness to Barbarians, and Persons
unacquainted with religion? if those that we wish were good were found to be
very neighbourly, shall we harden them in their Condition by being behind with
them in Kindness? -- 4.
-- 4. Courteously, being affable, amiable, willing to keep correspondence and
to comply with others, not against Conscience, but against natural Disposition,
and the bent of our Spirits; which must be so far ordered and mastered, as that
we withdraw not from Neighbors and Friends, as those that be loath to look
upon them; that is against humanity: nor be sour toward them, that is against
civility: nor refrain causlesly common meetings with them, that is against the
laws of love and humane society. 5.
-- 5. Christianly, in regard of all the former, carrying them all with an aim
at their Conversion; and trying them whether they may be made good by any good
words or ways of love; but not tyring them in the trial. By such courses as
these we shall either allure them to our Profession, and (if God will) gain
them, or else honor our Profession before them.

53. But Friends and 3. For those in the Family.
Acquaintance are further off; In the Family, where our residence is most
required, our prudence is tied to a continual task.

54. Therein (happily) some are Equals; and toward 1. Equals
these we must carry our selves humbly, not haughtily; Romans 12. 10.
and cheerfully, not dully and lumpishly; one Friend is not to be a Stone to
another, out of which nothing can be gotten; but a whet stone, Prove. 27. 17.
to sharpen and quicken to such conference and converse as is both pious and
profitable, both for the advantage of their Souls and their affairs.

55. Others in the Family are Inferiors, toward ^: Inferiors.
whom we must be careful to exercise Religion, Justice, Patience: -- 1.
Religion in the countenancing 1.
of that that is good, and discountenancing of every thing that is evil. It is
not to be spoken how much good Superiors do by casting their favors upon them
that fear God; and their frowns upon the Sins and corruptions of their Ps.
101. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Charges. -- 2. Justice, 2.
The care of those that are not equal (but advanced above others) is to do that
that is equal; Col. ^. 1.
trembling to abuse their power and pre-eminence to oppression. Job 31. 21, ^3.
-- 3. Patience and condescending, 3.
and that so far as to let my Servant know, that as I am his Master, so Reason
is mine, and much more Religion. Job 31. 13.


56 The nearest Familyrelation, and the dearest, is that of man and wife, 3.
Man and wife.
wherein Love is the wifes due, and Subjection the husbands; Honor is a thing
belonging to them both; 1 Pet. 3. 7.
to the husband as the Worthier, to the wife as the Weaker; as a costly piece
of Plate is laid up choycely, and a curious Glass handled tenderly; the one
because of the value, the other because of the beauty and bricklenesse.

57. Its an easy matter for the Wife that is the less and the tenderer, to
love the Husband; but Ephe. 5. ^5. Col. 3. 14.
of greater virtue for the Husband (that is the higher) to love the Wife, and
of especial efficacy also, turning all the wheels in the Wifes frame for the
Husbands use; for Love in it self is an amiable and attracting Virtue, but
withal it includes an estimation; hence the love of eminent men is a Rarity;
for they look upon what is in others as great Merchants upon petty Markets,
wherein there is nothing but things too poor for them to prize. Now Estimation
is the greatest encouragement to Action and Accommodation; the Wife therefore
discerning her self to be a Person prized and her Husbands delight. Delights to
do that only (and all that) that may accomplish the Husbands desire.

58. A Husbands love will never take away the Wifes fear: Ephesians. 5. 33.
Virtue begets Reverence (especially in those who do not only behold the
beauty, but enjoy the benefit of it) and love is the Husbands proper Virtue:
Familiarity may breed Contempt in a political and civil distance, but not in a
conjugal; which is not like the head politic and the body, in which either
part uses too much to shift for it self, that to maintain an honor, and this
to obtain a benefit: but like the head natural, and the members that are so
indeared, that the head is never in damage of contempt for dealing kindly with
the inferior members. Besides, that God so blesses what he requires in the
Husband, that is, entire love, that it shall never hinder him of what the same
God requires in the Wife, that is, hearty and seemly respect.

59. As Love must be the Husbands study, so is Subjection the Wives duty, I
say, Subjection; a sad word, but a thing not only easy, but sweet, if the
Husband mind his duty first; The Husband loves, the Wife serves; and who are
not Servants most willingly when they are loved most dearly? Love was never yet
known to be a Tyrant. Besides, in him that guides and carries things by his
Command the ability is required, and by him the adventure is born; the Wife
has the ease to walk only in the way chaulked out, neither cumbred with the
managing of the business, if it be difficult, nor blamed for the success, if
it be disasterous; Add to this, that it is the custom of Love in the Husband
to put the Wifes counsel into his own Command, and so to obey him, is to please
her self, and to fulfill her own mind.

60. If it so fall out, that the Husband be more imperious than wise, and have
more mind to rule than to love, it sends the sad Wife to see why she chose him,
but does not privilege her to disobey him; here her Wisdom must facilitate
her Subjection, which in stead of denying Obedience, prevents Commands; for
which purpose, if she foresee any thing unlawful, her piety pleads for the
prevention; (and that so, as to take no Nay) if unreasonable, her wit; if
unpleasing, her interests; and by these means (but ever with prayer to God, for
though it do not belong to Wives to rule their Husbands, yet to God it does) I
say, by these means, the matter is like to be well amended: If any thing be yet
heavier* that will not make Disobedience lawful, but it will make Obedience
laudable, and much more thank-worthy: 1 Pet. 2. 19.
and its like to be as profitable to the Wife, as commenlable in her, the doing
of what God requires of her, being the only way to change and mollify her
hard Husband, not only because meekness and submissiveness has a melting
quality in any heart that can relent, Judge. 8* 1, 2, 3
but because where Gods will is performed, Gods power (that is able to alter
and order all things and persons Phil. 3. 21. Prove. 21. 1.
) is more hopefully expected, and the more like sooner or later) to be obtained.

60. Nothing more alienates Married* persons than the studying of each others
imperfections and errors, which as they should keep as much as may be from
others eyes, so from their own thoughts; the observation of them is too much
for others, the meditation for themselves.

62. The best way to live comfortably (therefore) is, for the Wife or Husband
to look upon their own faults, but upon the virtues or perfections of their
comfort; the first of these begets Patience; the later maintains Love.

63. Wilfullness is a fault inexcusable every where; but if a Wifes Weakness
raise up stirs and debates, that is the Husbands fault, for why is he a Man
(endued of God with more knowledge) but that he should dwell with his wife
according to knowledge, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
that is, according to that knowledge that is in him, not that infirmity that
is in her, using his wit for the covering of her weakness? or why is he a
Husband, but to put a veil over, and to cast an honor upon the weaker part of
himself? and equal it is that he should be a covering to b Genesis 20. 16.
her when she needs it, who, when she needs it not (and out of the case of
weakness) is a crown to him.

64. To sum up all Man and Wife should live together as Fellow heirs of the
grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
and those that stand Godward, and Heavenward, in an equality; if life belongs
to him, so does it to her; if grace help her to that life, so does it him; if
he be an heir of this life, in that she is his fellow. This should make the
Wife bear her Subjection with much more meekness, and the Husband also to carry
his Superiority with much modesty and mildness.

65. Yea, both of them to use Mariage-contentments with much moderation, to
wit, as those that are to live together but for a while here, but hereafter for
ever; and that after another fashion; for the fashion of this world passes
away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 31.
and no estate here affords any other than a perishing com fort; and a poor
also, as being of too low a nature to be heard of when once we come to Heaven,
Lu 20 35, 36.
and why should we that are appointed to heavenly glory, engage our affections
in those pleasures that are altogether unworthy that place, and not rather
enter (as much as may be) into acquaintance with those comforts which we shall
never shake hands withal, but have a full fellowship with hereafter? Meat and
Drink, and Marriage, are for our need (while we are here below) rather than for
our honor; it becomes us not (therefore) to lie down, and wallow in them, but
to lap (with our hands) and leave, Judge. 7. 5, 7.
reserving our hearts for and settling them upon the glories of that place,
wherein, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of
God.

66. If the Family, be blessed with Children, God must be blessed for them,
Genesis 33. 5.
and thankfulness must be showed in carrying the course of our dealing so
with them, as to sit them for 1. Children.
his use, from whom we have them. In this care, the whole Family (if it may be)
should concur^e, (the unregenerate part gets strength, if there be but a
Servant to hold with it) but (however) Father and Mother should perfectly agree
together, that children may not take a boldness to themselves in things evil,
by discerning (which they are quick to do) a protection for their Unjustifiable
ways in Parents discords. Joint Opposition masters Corruption, but
Family-faction is the bane of Education.

67. The rule of this Education is, Teach a Child; Prove. 22. 6.
Its true, such cannot understand what is taught them in the things of God; nor
did Christ's Disciples underderstand diverse things that he taught them while he
was amongst them; Joh. 2. 22.
Its well that the seed is sown, and good things lodged in the heart; the fruit
must be expected; and when the Spirit comes (that quickens all things) it
will be produced from that very seed that in Childhood was received, Prove. 22.
6.
nor shall they depart from that very teaching when they be old, whereof they
seemed to take no notice when they were young; Not but that (diverse times) i^
falls out otherwise: but the course (for all that) is Gods course, which he
will make effectual according to his own counsel, and which (if it reach not
further, yet prevails ordinarily for some good restraint, 2 King. 12. 2.

68. The best time and ways of instruction, Parents themselves (that mind the
duty) will well discern, only the thing must be done, and neither idleness
and dullness, nor averseness from better things (when twice so much time is
spent in impertinencies) nor an indisposition to that particular duty, nor
worldlyness and business (which is so presented by Satan, as if half an hours
Catechizing were an irrecoverable impediment) I say, neither these, nor any the
like things should hinder the bringing up of Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.

69. Unto instruction, correction must be added, that puts in wisdom, this
drives out folly Prove. 22. 15.
; of this Correction there must be, -- 1. a clear cause, to 1.
wit, the childs foolishness, not the correctors frowardness; -- 2. In it
there 2.
must be a calm heart; it is not good to give a Medicine scalding hot; and --
3. ejaculations 3.
and prayers to God do well with correction; for the rod is not only an
instrument, (fit in reason, to do a child good) but an ordinance appointed of
God for that purpose, unto which also God has annexed a promise that it shall
drive out and scatter, even Fast-boundfolly; Prove. 22. 15.
now every promise bespeaks a prayer. 2 Samuel 7. 27.


70. It belongs to Parents to lay up for children, 2 Cor. 12* 14*
but withal, to make them able (in a way wherein they shall glorify God and
profit others) to lay up for themselves; This is done by disposing them into a
sit and useful calling, with respect to the abilities God has bestowed on
them, and the inclinations he has planted in them: for their condition must
not appoint their calling, but their Talent; A man must not seek out such a
Calling as will provide best for him, but wherein he shall do most for God: Not
but that a man may look to live by his Calling, and according to the charge of
Children he has, to lay up with it: but first seek the kingdom of God, and the
glory of God, that other things may (and then other things shall) be ministered
and added. Mat. 6. 33.


71. Disposition in marriage is (for Parents) the highest duty, and for Children
(being well discharged) the happiest, wherein the principal thing to be
regarded is, the fear of God: for let the World esteem or disesteem Religion as
they please, yet this is the Sentence of Scripture, Favor is deceitful, and
Beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord, (and its true of a man also)
she shall be praised. Prove. 31. 30
Its not to be denied but a good nature (if any nature were good) is a great
sweetner of Society, and would do pretty well if man and wife were to live
together only in a humane way, (wherein virtuous Heathens will completely keep
them company) but being that they are to live together, as Christian and
Christian, that they are to walk together with God as well as with Man, and
with one another, yea and to converse together as Fellow-heirs of the grace of
life; 1 Pet. 3. 7.
what is a good nature (in reference to these things) but the white of an egg,
which has this in it, that it offends not; but this withal, that it relisheth
not? Let it be the praise of good natures, that they contradict not goodness,
but is not this a deep defect that they contribute nothing to it? Good they be
for the six days, but on the Lords day, what is there pleasant in them but
their Patience? Its true that a fair nature rustles with religion in a froward,
and seems to get the better; yet to them that love to live in a course beyond
nature, and to see God in a Companion (not Cato, Socrates, Phocion, etc.) Grace
with all its faults will be better than refined Nature: A piece of Gold is
better though it needs its allowance, than the compleatest piece of Silver, and
fretfull Jonas will be found more lovely than the meekest Mariner, or the
sweetest Nin^vite.

72. The next thing to be looked at (after the religion of a Consort) is the
good discretion; for Wisdom exceeds Folly, as much as Light exceeds Darkness.
Eccles. ^. 13.
This is true in all, but in those especially of better parts. If a Daughter be
to be disposed of (of more worth) nothing is more to be feared (next to an
Ungodly) than an Unworthy Husband; for the duty of a Wife is to be subject, and
with what patience shall wisdom be subject to Folly? It may better be born if
there be eminency of gifts on the Husbands part, and infirmity on the Wives;
and yet, this is a business also, for a Husband ought to love his Wife, and
there is such a distance between Wisdom and Weakness, that there will be work
enough for a more than ordinary Wisdom to love (with a Husbands love) a Woman
of more than ordinary Weakness.

73. After this, Mariage-affection requires a pleasing person, I say after this
discretion, which is of the greater consequence (even in the matter of
affection) than an external amiablenesse is; for this is the difference between
Discretion and Beauty, that Discretion is a thing still continuing and still
thriving; hence the love grounded upon that, both stays and grows: but Beauty
may be gone suddenly and (howsoever) is going continually; hereupon, the
affection must needs fall with the foundation; yet it combines on both sides
(in her especially that is to be the desire of a man's eye, Ezekiel. 24. 16, 18.
) of no small importance, which, suppose (erelong) it loose its luster: yet
diverse things that will not abide to the last, may serve for the rooting and
settling of affection at the first.

74. Nor is a Patrimony and Portion to be contemned where a Family and
Posterity is to be raised; Fathers must not only lay out, but lay up for their
Children, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
and it is not easy, nor a thing so likely that they should lay up much who
begin with nothing: Besides, we would be willing to live so, as to express
Virtue, and draw a just reputation from others by the beams of beneficence
dispersed from our selves; now though Wisdom and Virtue be truly, yea and
eminently good in it self; yet it is evidently good with an inheritance, Eccles
7. 11.
in which regard, howsoever a worldly portion is justly reckoned a very bad
Leader, yet neglect not to look upon it as a useful Follower.

75. All these things do in special manner concern the Parties themselves that
are toward marriage; only Parents are to see that they do not (out of self
will and imperiousness, or for vain and worldly ends, or out of self-respects)
hinder their Children from walking in, but rather do all they can by their
counsel and authority, to guide and carry them in a right and regular way in a
matter of so great importance. When God has given Children unto them, as his
Trustees, a chief part of their care lies in this, to take ^eed how they give
them away, and into what hands they put them for a continual, and perpetual
abode.

76. Marriage being according to these (and the like) Rules religiously managed,
as it is an estate honorable in it self, and in Gods account, so shall it be
1 Pet. 3. 7.
honorable also in the judgment of all those that do impartially observe it,
yea and in the Consciences of those Men that do ungroundedly oppose it.

FINIS.

