A SPEECH OF William Thomas ESQVIRE, IN PARLIAMENT In May, 1641. Being a short
View and Examination of the Actions of Bishops in Parliament, from Anno Dom.
1116. to this present of 1641. in the several Reigns of 23. Kings and Queens
of this Kingdom of England, etc.

In all and each of their times it is made to appear they have been most
obnoxious to Prince and People, and therefore that it is not fit or convenient
that they should continue members of that Honorable House, in which they have
been so disloyally and traitorously affected to Regality, And no less
mischievous and pernicious to Church and Commonwealth.

A SPEECH OF WILLIAM THOMAS ESQVIRE.
I Have formerly spoken of the present Church government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. Declaring the corruption and unsoundnesse thereof, and how far
degenerate, if not contrary to the pure Primitive* Apostolical institution:
Also I have touched a little of the other parts, as how unlawful it was for
them to intermeddle in temporal affairs, to use civil power, or to sit as
Judges in any Court, much less in the Court of Parliament, where they pass
censure and judgment not only of our lives and liberties, but on the Estates
and inheritance and blood, as of us, so of our posterity: And as this is
unlawful by the Divine Law, so by the Canons of the Church, yea of this
Church, and Acts of Parliament of this Realm, (whereof I shall further enlarge
myself in my ^^^^ing discourse:) So has their sitting there been
prejudicial and obnoxious to Kings and Subjects. Now I desire briefly to
declare when and how the Bishops came to be members in the Parliaments in the
House of the Lords, and by what means they continued their sitting there;
because prescription is much insisted upon; although long usage (as King James
truly delivers) confirms no right, (if unlawful originally, or at
convenient times interrupted.) And whereas it has been demanded why the first
of our reasons, viz. that it hinders Ecclesiastical vocation was not urged
600. years ago. I answer, There was then no cause; for the first beginning of
Parliaments was not 74. years after. But if this had been delivered of the
lawfulness and convenience of their intermedling in temporal affairs, I
should have replied that it has been declared not only 600. but 1600. years
ago, and in each century since. But supposing and granting that it was meant
of such Parliaments as were before the Conquest, you shall find that above
600. years ago the Prelates are charged (by their intermedling in secular
affairs) to neglect the office of Episcopal function. For this we read: The
Clergy Hollinshead.
altogether were unlearned, wanton, and vicious, for the Prelates altogether
neglected the office of Episcopal function, which was to tender the affairs
of the Church, and to feed the slocke of Christ, lived themselves idle and
coveto^s, addicted wholly to the pomp of the world, and voluptuous life,
little caring for the Churches and souls committed to their charge.

And if any (says Higden) told them that their lives ought Rand. Higden
Policron. lib. 6. cap. 24.
to be holy, and their conversation without covetousness, according to the
sacred prescript, and virtuous example of their Elders, they would scoffingly
put them off with a

Nunc aliua tempus alii pro tempore mores. Thus, says he, they plained the
roughness of their doings with the smoothness of their answers. Briefly, they
were so loose and riotous (says Gervasius of Canterbury) that Gervasius D^
^oberne^s^*
they fell so fast to commit wickedness, as to be ignorant of sinful crimes,
was then held to be a great crime it self.

And the Clergy (says Malmsbury) contenting themselves William Malmsbury.
with trivial literature, could scarcely hack*and hew out the words of the
Sacrament. Robert was then Archbishop of Canterbury, who instigated King Edward
the Confessor against his mother queen Emma, charging her with incontinency
with Alwyn Bishop of Winchester, (observe how one Locust stings another) which
she washed away, W^ll. Malmsbury.
and cleared her self of by a sharp trial of fire, Candentes ferri, being
put (according to the Law Ordalium) to clear her self, by passing nine
Plough-shares, glowing red hot, barefooted and blind-folded, which she did
without hurt. And as this Bishop had charged the queen his mother with
incontinence, so did he likewise the queen his wife Edith or Egith with
adultery; but no less untruly and unjustly, then maliciously and enviously, as
says Malmesbury, she being a Lady incomparable, as for beauty, so for virtue,
in whose breast there was a School of all liberal Sciences. And the like
testifies Ingulphus, that had often conference with her, that as she was
beautiful, and excellent well learned, so in her demeanor and whole course of
life, a virgin most chaste, humble, and unfainedly holy, mild, modest,
faithful, and innocent, not ever hurtful to any. And do we not read that
about the year 1040. that Bishop Alfred had his hand deep in the murder of
Prince Alfred, who, having his eyes inhumanely put out, lived not long after,
in torment and grief: Some say he died by a more horrible kind of cruelty, as
his belly was opened, and one end of his bowels fastened to a stake, his body
pricked with sharp W. Caxton^.
poniards, till all his entrails were extracted, in which most savage torture
he ended his innocent life. These Bishops little regarded Ecclesiastical
vocation or function, but worldly pomp and courtly rule. They cannot be at
assemblies of States and Parliaments, but their neglected flock must be
starved; these feed not their hungry sheep, but hunger to feed on them; and
this care of the world volves them in a world of cares. What has been spoken
of those Bishops, I wish had not been delivered of other latter Prelates,
wherein I crave leave to speak what others write. That they are grown to that
height of idleness (the mother of ignorance and luxury within themselves) and
by reason thereof, in contempt and base estimation with the people, that it is
thought high time that blood should be drawn from their swelling veins: I
will not (though perhaps I might) say with them, that the Commonwealth has
little use of such (I mean of over Lordly Bishops) out for that they are so far
degenerated from the Primitive institution, I wish there were reformation, I
speak not of demolishing* but of amendment and restitution, and until it
appear that the whole is unsound, I shall not assent to utter extirpation or
eradication. Thus much I have made bold to deliver, though not in due place,
nor in any purpose to plead against those or any of them that have declared
themselves to be of contrary opinion: I am not ignorant of my disability to
enter the lists with any, or to contend with such Worthies in this or other
argument: but I hope there will not be denied to me leave and liberty to
declare the cause and reason of my vote in this house, in which I have the
honor to sit as a member: and if I have erred, I have been misled not only
by learned Fathers and Divines, by Synods and general Councels, but by great
Lords and Barons, yea by the whole Peerage of these Kingdoms of England and
France: Peter Lord Primandy and Barree, who writ the French Academy, and
dedicated the same to Henry the 3. King of France and Poland, in that book and
chapter of the causes that bred change, says, that Bishops and Prelates
neglecting their charge to bestow their times in worldly affairs, grew to
misliking and contempt, have procured great offenses, and mavelous trouble,
which may more easily be lamented then taken away, or reformed, being such
abuses as have taken deep root. And what he affirms did the Peers of France
unitely deliver, That Bishops should follow Saint Peter's steps, to win
souls, and not to meddle with wars, and murder of men's bodies.

But to come near and to speak of this Kingdom of England, let us hear what
the English Lords did declare; we read that they did decree in the time and
reign of King John, that Bishops should not intermeddle in civil affairs, or
rule as Princes over their Vas^alls, and the reason is ^enderd; for Peter, (say
they) received no power but only in matters pertaining to the Church: and
further enlarging themselves, use these words: It appertains not to Bishops to
deal in secular affairs, since Peter only received of our Savior a power in
matters Ecclesiastic all: what (say they) has the Prelates to entermeddle with
wars, such are Constantines successors, not Peter's, whom as they represent not
in good actions, so neither do they in authority: Fie on such Rascal Ribaulds,
the words in Paris are Marcidi Ribaldi, how unlike are they to Peter that
usurp Peter's place? But this point of intermedling in secular affairs (though
I have often digressed) and intermingled with the former parts, is proved in
its proper place to be unlawful ( viz.) in that part that treats thereof,
craving pardon for this deviation, I will pursue the present argument (the
obnoxiousnesse of their sitting in Parliament) and come to the points I
intended to insist on ( viz.) the entrance of Bishops into the Parliament
house, and by what means they came there and continued: That they have sat
there from the first Parliament to this is not denied: But as we are not now to
consider an suerunt, but an profuerunt, so are we not to debate and discuss an
factum, but an sieri debuit, for it was the argument of a Pagan ( viz.)
Symmachus to the Emperor Theodosius recorded by Saint Amb. servanda est tot
saeculis fides nostra, and sequendi sunt majores nostri qui secuti sunt
faelicitur suos. Our religion which has continued so many years is still to
be retained, and our ancestors are to be followed by us who happily traced the
steps of their forefathers, but (with Tertullian) nullam v^lo con^uetudinem
defendas, if good, no matter how short, since, if bad, the longer the worse;
Antiquity without truth (as says Cyprian) is but ancient error. The first
Parliament (as I read) began 1116. or thereabouts, and in the sixteeneth or
seventeenth year of King Henry the first, who being an usurper, brought in by
the Bishops to the disherison of Robert his elder brother, admitted the said
Bishops to be members of the said high Court, partly ingratefulnesse, but
rather for that he durst not do otherwise: for was not Ralfe the then
Archbishop of Canterbury so proud and insolent a Prelate, that was read of him,
that when Roger Bishop of Salsbury was to celebrate the Kings Coronation by
reason of the palsy of the Archbishop, this ^holerick outdaring Prelate could
hardly be entreated by the Lords, to withhold his hands from striking the
Crown from the Kings head: Of such spirits were these spirirituall Eadmerus.
Prelates, and the jealousy to lose their pompous pre-eminence of honors, yet
had he no other reason Matthew Paris ^no 1119.
for this his sau^ines and bold attempt, but for that Roger did not this by his
appointment. At the same time T^ursto^ was Archbishop of York, who, though a
disloyal and perjured man by breach of his oath to the King, yet was he
highly (...). ^7. c. 15.
favored and countenanced by the Pope, and put into that See by him, in
dispite of the said King. And as he, so the rest of the Bishops (not less
guilty, nor much less potent) were likewise admitted members of that high
Court; and to speak plainly, how could he spare their being in that house who
were to justify his title to the Crown?

*Now pass we to King Stephen, another usurper, nephew ^ Stephen.
to the former King Henry, him (though he had an elder brother, and before them
both the title of Anjou by his wife Maud the Empress, as also of his son Henry
to precede) the Bishops did advance to the Royal Throne, no less persidiously
Matthew. Paris.
then traitorously, having formerly sworn to Maud the Empress. We are also to
understand, that the Bishop of Winchester was his brother, a very potent man in
the State; and it is worthy our noting, that the Bishops did endeavor to salve
their disloyalty and perjury, by bringing in the Salicke ^. Hunting^n.
Law to this Kingdom, traitorously avowing, that it was baseness for so many
and so great Peers to be subject to a woman: Nay, it seems the Bishops did
not intend to be true subjects to him, though a brave and worthy Prince, (had
his title to the Crown been as good as the Prelates at his election did
declare:) for read we not that the Bishops of ^^nd^ver.
Salisbury, Lincoln, Ely, and others, did fortify Castles against him, and
advanced to him in armed and warlicke manner: nay, did not his brother, the
Bishop of Winchester forsake him, and in a Synod of Clergy accursed all those
^^is. ^^lmsbury.
that withstood the Empress Maud, blessing all that assisted her. Surely this
curse ought to have fallen on himself and the Archbishop, who did trouble the
Realm, with fire and sword. Sure as these were too great to be put out of
Parliament, so were they very dangerous therein. Unto Stephen succeed Henry 2.
In this time Thomas Becket was H. 2*
Archbishop of Canterbury* what his demeanor toward his Sovereign was, and
what mischief was by him occasioned to the Kingdom, would take too much time
to declare; and though some Papists that adore him for a Saint, Caesarius Dial.
lib. 8. c. 69.
will say, he resisted on just cause, yet I will deliver what I read, and
render him with the Chronicles, an Arch-traytor, and tell you that the Doctors
in Paris did debate whether B^le B^^^. Cent. 2.
he were damned for his disloyalty, Rogerus the Norman avowing, that he
deserved death and damnation for his contumacie toward the King, the Minister
of God. From him I pass to his son Richard the first, who had two brothers
R. 1.
that were Bishops, the one of Duresme, the other of Lincoln, and after
Archbishop of York, and going to the holy Land, appointed for Governor of the
Kingdom, Fox ^ 289*
William Longchampe chief Iusticiar, and Lord Chancellor of England, and
Papal Legate.

This Viceroy, or rather King* (for so Paris calls him) Pa^i^* Hovedon, and
^ll^^* Guil. Nu^^^* ^. 4. ^. 14. Hovedon. Nub. l. 4. c. 17. Hovedon p. 399.
Rex and Sacerdos, had joined with him Hugh Bishop of Duresme for the parts
beyond Humber. This Kingly *Bishop (as Authors deliver) did use incredible
insolence and intolerable tyranny, and commit a most sacrilegious and
barbarous outrage upon the person of Ieffery, Archbishop of York, and
natural brother to K. R. the first; for which afterward (being taken in a
Curtesans apparel and attire, velut delicata muliercula) he was banished the
Realm. Now as it was very difficult to turn such Papal Bishops and Regulos
out of Parliament: so certainly such Lord Bishops did there work no little
mischief to Regal power, the subjects liberties, and the weal public*
Certainly this was not the duty and office of a Bishop; surely the Silk and
Matthew. Paris. Hollin. ^n (...)*
Scarlet Robes of Princes and Iusticiars, were as undecent for these Bishops,
as was the coat of Iron of the Bishop of Beavois, taken prisoner by this King,
which he sent to the Pope, with a vide an tunica silii tui sit, an non: to
which he made answer, That he was not his son, nor the son of the Church.
For he had put off the peaceable Prelate, and put on the warlicke Soldier,
took a Shield in stead of a Cope, a Sword for a stole, a Curac^ for an Albe, a
Helm^^ for a Miter, a Lance for a Bishops staff, perverting the order and
course of things. Thus we see that a Bishop must destroy men's lives either as a
Iusticiar in Court, or as a Soldier in Camp. Qui si non aliqua nocuisset
mortuus est, they will do any thing but what they ought to do ( Feed the
Flock;) they desire rather to sit in Parliament then stand in a pulpit,
accounting preaching (according to B. Iuel) so far below their greatness, as
indeed it is above their goodness. We neither deny or reject Episcopacy or
Church government it self, but the corruptions thereof: and we say, that the
Bishops who stiffely maintained those corruptions, have enforced this our
distaste.

When Jacob was forced to depart from Laban for ill usage, I conceive that the
breach was in Laban, not in Jacob.

So also those that did forsake Babylon (God commanding to depart from it) lest
they should be partakers of their punishment, as they were guilty of their
crimes, did not occasion the schism or breach, but the sins of Babylon: And
we confess, that true it is, that we refuse and forsake the present Church
government, but no further then it has forsaken pure and primitive
institution, therefore let none say that we are desirous of innovation: for I
think we may boldly with the sore-named reverend Bishop Jewel, affirm, Nos
non sumus novatores.

From K. R. I come to K. John, an usurper likewise, who John.
was advanced to the Regal Throne by Archbishop Hubert and the Prelates. This
lewd Bishop unjustly declaring this and all other Kingdoms to be elective,
and that no man has right or fore-title to succeed another in a Kingdom,
Paris. ^^. major.
but must be by the body of the Kingdom thereunto chosen, with invocation of
grace and guidance of Gods holy Spirit; alleging further, and that (most
plainly) by example of David and Saul, that whosoever in a Kingdom excelled
all in valor and virtue, ought to surmount all in rule and authority; and
therefore they had all u^an^^^^usly elected John (first imploring the Holy
Ghosts assistance) as well in regard of his merits, as royal blood. And thus
the Bishops blanch their disloyal assertion with sacred Writ, and their lewd
devised plot with the holy Ghosts assistance. Hereby they rejected the just
Title and hereditary succession of Arthur his elder brothers son. And as he
did this disherision unjustly and disloyally, so did he this election lewdly
and fraudulently, as himself after confessed, when being demanded the reason
of his so doing, he replied, That as John by election got the Crown, so by
ejection upon demerit* he might lose the same; which after he did endeavor to
his utmost, and at last effected by depriving him of life and kingdom. Let me
not be misconceived, I know Hubert died eight or ten years before him, Matthew.
Paris. R. Hovedon. Girald Car^. who called him, Principio ^^aenum.
but what he did begin and forward, was furthered and pursued by Stephen
Langton, and other Bishops and Prelates, too long to rehearse. His other
brother being Archb. of York, a strange example, says Malm. to have a King
ruled by two brethren of so turbulent humors. Many of their treasonable acts
and disloyalties, I will omit, and passing by as well particular Bishops and
Prelates, as Stephen Archdeacon of Norwich, and others, as also of them in the
general, I will only relate one villainous passage of traitorous disloyalty;
whereof (as good Authors deliver) the Archbishops and Prelates were principal
Abetters and Conspirers. The King being at Oxford, the Bishops and Barons came
Paris.
thither with armed multitudes without number, and forced him to yield, that
the government should be swayed by twenty five selected Peers. Thus one of
the greatest Sovereigns was but the six and twentieth petty King in his own
dominions, etc. To him succeeded his son, K. H. 3, who H. 3.
being at Clarkenwell in the house of the Prior of S. John's, was told by him no
less sawcily then disloyally (if I may not say traitorously) that he should be
no longer King then he did right to the Prelates. Whereto he answered: What?
do you mean to deprive me of my Kingdom, and afterward murder me, as you did
my Father? And indeed they performed little less, as shall hereafter appear.
But now to take the particular passages in order. In this Kings reign Stephen
then Archbishop of Canterbury, as we read, was the Ringleader of disorders
both in Church and State; and no better was Peter Bishop of Winchester. But not
to speak of them in particular, but of them all in general, and that in
Parliament at Oxford thus we read, To the Parliament at Oxford, says Matthew.
Paris, and Matthew. Westminster. came the seditious Earls and Barons with Paris. Westminster.
whom the Bishops Pontisice's ( ne dicam Pharisei, those were his words) had
taken counsel against the King, the Lords anointed, who sternly propounded to
the King sundry traitorous Articles, to which they required his assent; but not
to reckon all the points, you shall hear what the same Authors deliver of
their intent, I will repeat the words as I find them. These turbulent Nobles,
says M. West. had yet a further plot then all this, which was first hatched by
the disloyal Bishops, which was, that four and twenty persons should there
be chosen to have the whole administration of the K. and State, and yearly
appointment of all great Officers, reserving only to the King the highest
place at meetings. Primus accubitus in caenis, and salutations of honor in
public places. To which they forced him and his son Prince Edward to swear
for fear (as mine Author says) of perpetual imprisonment, if not worse: for
the traitorous Lords had by an edict threatened death to all that resisted. And
the perfidious and wicked Archbishop and Bishops, cursing all that should
rebel against it: which impudent and traitorous disloyalty (says Matthew.
Paris, and Matthew. Westminster.) the Monks did detest, asking with what foreheads the
Priests durst thus impair the Kingly Majesty, expressly against their sworn
fidelity to him. Here we see the Monks more loyal and honest then the Lord
Bishops: we have cashiered the poor Monks, and are we afraid of the Bishops
Lordlinesse, that they must continue and sit in Parliament, to the prejudice of
the King and people? And so we may observe, that this traitorous Bishop did
make this King as the former had done his father, merely titular.

From him I pass to his son Edward the first: In his reign Boniface was
Archbishop of Canterbury and Brother to the Queen, what he and the rest of the
Prelates did in prejudice to the regal authority and weal public I will
pass over, the rather for that they declare themselves in his sons reign so
wicked and disloyal that no age can parallel, of which thus in brief; does
not Thomas De la More call the Bishop of Hereford Arch plotter of treason,
Omnis mali Architectum, and not to speak of his contriving the death of the
late Chancellor, and other particular villainies, he is branded together with
Winchester then Chancellor, and Norwich Lord Treasurer, to occasion the
Dethroning of this Prince: nay, after long imprisonment, his very life taken
away by Bishop Thorltons aenigmaticall verse (though he after denied it)
Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est. But this, Adam de Orleton, alias
To^leton, and his fellow Bishops in this Kings reign, I may not slightly pass
over: Therefore I desire we may take a further view of them. First of this
Adam Bishop of Hereford, we find that he was stripped of all his temporalties,
for supporting the Mortimers in the Barons quarrel. He being (says Thomas de
la More) a man of most subtle wit, and in all worldly policies profound,
daring to do great things, and factious withal, who made against King Edward
the second a great secret party. To which H^nry Burwash Bishop of Lincoln (for
like causes deprived of his temporalties) joined himself, as also Ely and
others, Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, a turne-coat, left the Queen and
came to England to in^orme the King of his Queens too great familiarity with
Mortimer, which after cost him his head. Perhaps some now (as Thomas de la
More) will say, he was therein a good man; yet I will take leave to think* nor
do I fear to speak it, This was no part of Episcopal function. But I will
pass him by, not concluding him either good or bad, every man may think as
he pleases, I will declare the traitorous and disloyal actions of the other
Bishop formerly mentioned. This Bishop of Hereford, whom I find called the
Queens bosom Counselor, preaching at Oxford, took for text, My head, my
head aketh, 2 Kings 4. 19. concluding more like a Butcher then a Divine, that
an a king and sick head of a kingdom, was of necessity to be taken off, and
not to be tampered with by any other physic, whereby it is probable, that he
was the author of that aenigmaticall verse formerly recited, Edwardum
occidere, etc. And well may we believe it* for we find that he caused Roger
Baldock Bishop of Norwich, the late Lord Chancellor, to die miserably in
Newgate. Not much better were Ely, Lincoln, Winchester, and other Bishops that
adhered to the Queen, Mortimer and others of her part. Nor can I commend those
Bishops that were for the King and the Spencers. The Archbishop of Canterbury,
and his Suffragans, decreeing the revocation of those pestilent Peers, the
judgment given against them judged a^ erroneous. Thus these Lord Bishops, as
all in a manner, both before and after, in stead of feeding the flock o^ Christ
only, plotted dismal wars, death and destruction of Christians. I might tell
you how in this Kings reign, as in others, they persuaded the Lords, and
Peers of the Realm, that they had power and right not only to reform the
Kings House and Council, and to place and displace all great Officers at their
pleasure, but even a joint interest in the regiment of the Kingdom, together
with the King. And now will any say, No Bishop no King: yet one word more
before I part with these Bishops: What groundwork they laid, and what means
they used for the ruin of King and Kingdom, was it not their working upon the
impotence of a woman's will, insinuating what indignity it was, that a she
daughter of France, being promised to be a Queen, was become no better then a
waiting woman, living upon a pension; and so nourishing in her great
discontents, persuaded her going to France, which was the matter and Embrion,
and as I may say, the chief cause of common destruction, which after ensued.
God keep all good Princes from harkening or consenting to the pernicious
counsels of such pestilent Priests, and prating Parasites. To declare all their
disloyalties in Parliament, and out, would fill a large volume. But now Brevis
esse laboro, therefore I only say, that as it was not for their goodness, but
greatness, that they sat^ in Parliament, so their sitting there did (I think
I may say) almost evert Monarchy, yea Regality: with what face can they
inculcate that aspersion, No Bishop, no King? Certainly, by what I have already
delivered, and shall now declare in the reigns of succeeding Princes, it will
appear quite contrary, that where Lordly Bishops dominsere and bear rule and
sway, neither Kings nor Kingdoms, themselves or subjects are secure.

Now to the reign of King Edward the third, did not John Archbishop of
Canterbury persuade and incite this King and the Parliament, to a most
dangerous war with France, whereby the death of millions has been
occasioned. To such mischief d^e they use their learning and eloquent Orations
in Parliament. What Epiphanius delivered of Philosophers, that they were In re
stulta sapientes, so may we say of such Bishops, that they are In malo publico
facundi. But to pass by particular men and actions, I shall only deliver unto
you some notable passages in Parliament Anno 1371. The Parliament did petition
the King to have them deprived of all Lay Offices and government, they being
commonly the plotters and contrivers of all treasons, conspiracies and
rebellions, the very incendi^ries, pests and grievances both of tho Church and
State, the chiefest instruments to advance the peoples usurped authority,
though with prejudice of the kings (which they never cordially affected) and
the Arch-enemies of the Commonwealth through their private oppression,
covetousness, rebellion and tyranny, when they have been in office, as may
appear by Antiquitates Ecclesiae Britannicae, in the lives of Anselme, Becket,
Arundel, etc. Here we see, that they never affected the authority of Kings, but
rather were scourges to their sides, and thorns in their eyes.

Now we come to Richard the second, his grandchilde R. 2.
who succeeded him: we read that when in Parliament in London the Laity had
granted a fifteenth, on condition that the Clergy would likewise give a^tenth
and a half; William le Courtney then Archbishop, did stiffly oppose it,
alleging, they ought to be free, nor in any wise to be taxed by the laity,
which answer so offended the Lords and ^ho. Wal^ngham.
Commons, that with extreme fury they befought the King to deprive them of
their temporalties, alleging that it was an almesdeed and an act of charity,
thereby to humble them; that was then deliverd for an almesdeed and an act of
charity, which is now accounted sacrilege and cruelty.

The next that succeeded him, was Henry the fourth, but H. 4.
an usurper also, for at that time there were living of the house of York
others whose right by the title of Clarence was before his as Mortimer, etc. In
opposition to his claim and right, the Bishop of Carlisle made a most eloquent
oration; (...). yward.
but to what purpose? to persuade his dethroning now vested in the regal
government; and thereby to engage the Kingdom in a civil war, (which when
his oratory could not effect) he labored and so far prevailed, that by his
subtle insinuations, and persuasions many Princes of the blood royal and
other great Lords were drawn to a conspiracy, himself laying the plot, (and
together Ioh. Stow ex ^onymo ^^al ^ron.
with the Abbot of Westminster, the chief wheels of all the practice, as
moving the rest) for the Kings death whereby he brought to the block those
noble Peers, and as his pestilent counsel had infected their minds, so was
the blood of them and theirs, tainted by this foul treason; Ioh. Stow. ^^n^ll.
^^^l ex Tho. Walsingh.
but as I discommend his disloyal actions, so I no better approve the other
flattering and timeserving Bishops, who did plead the right of the title of
the said King more eloquently then honestly, more rhetorically then divinely;
for which their expressions they were employed as Ambassadors to foreign
parts to declare and justify his title and right to the Scepter; the Bishop of
Hereford to Rome, the Bishop of Duresme to France, the Bishop of Bangor to
Germany, and the Bishop of St. Asaph to Spain; which Bishop of Asaph sat as
Judge in that Parliament and pronounced the sentence of deposition against King
Rich. The form (as near as I remember) was: We John Bishop of St. Asaph, John
Abbot of Glastenbury, Commissioners, named by the house of Parliament, sitting
in place of judgment, etc. Here you may note that the Bishop did pass
judgment of a great inheritance, no less then two or three Kingdoms, and
though not between two brothers, but cosins, yet did adjudge most wrongfully,
as was most apparent. I note withal, that the title of Lord is not assumed by
this King-deposing Bishop, nor any other that I read of. Now what he had
judged in Parliament his holy brother of Canterbury must make good in Pulpit,
delivering, What unhappiness it was to have a child either Fabian 1. concor.
Hall ex Fab.
of age or discretion to be a King, and what felicity it was to a Kingdom to
have it governed by a man. Certainly a most dangerous position to an hereditary
Monarchy. I also note that this Archbishop was brother to the Earl of
Arundell, and at the same time the Archbishop of York a near kinsman to the
Earl of Wiltshire; and who durst then plead against the right of the Bishops
sitting in Parliament?

In the same Kings reign Richard le Scroope the Archbishop of York, did in
Parliament enter into conspiracy with Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall, against
the said King, for which they were both beheaded; I say the Archbishop as well
as the Earl Marshall had his head cut off, iterate it, because some have
doubted whether an Archbishop may be beheaded. And now in the said Kings
reign, in the Parliament of Coventry, let me also tell you that in the said
Parliament, as in other both before and after, a Bill was exhibited against the
Temporalties of the Clergy, who called that Parliament Parliamentum indoctorum,
saying that the Commons were fit to enter Common with their cattle, having no
more reason then bruit beasts. This is Speeds delivery; but I take it that he
repeateth it as the Prelates censure of the house of Commons.

But to him succeeded Henry the 5. in his time did not H. 5. Hall in 8. R. a.
Henry Chichley in an eloquent oration in Parliament revive the wars with
France, by declaring the Kings right thereunto; to the effusion of much
Christian blood, and to the loss of all we had there? To expiate which, he
built a College in Oxenford, to pray for the souls slain in France. Though
what he did then deliver was true of the Kings right to the Crown of France
(as was also the other of John Archbishop of the same See in Ed. 3. time, and
no less true was that of Carlisle against Hen. 4. title:) Yet I may say it was
not the office or function of a Bishop to incense wars domesticke or
foreign. Nay this Bishop did set this war on foot to divert the King from
reformation of the Clergy. For in that Parliament held at Leicester there was a
petition declaring that the temporal lands which were bestowed on the Church
were super^^uously and disorderly spent upon hounds and hawks, horses and
whores, which better employed would suffice for the maintenance of 15. Earls,
1500. Knights, 6200. Esquires, an hundred Almeshouses, and besides of yearly
rent to the Crown 20000. pounds.

From him I come to his son H. 6. I read many accusations Matt. in
that Gloucester the good protector did lay to the charge of Beaufort the
Cardinal of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor, great uncle to the King living,
son to John of Gaunt, alleging him a person very dangerous both to the King
and State; his brother of York a Cardinal also, together with the other
Bishops no better. For we read of Archbishop Bourchier and other Bishops,
that they did shamefully countenance the distraction of the time. These as I
delivered before, though bad in Parliaments, yet too great to put out, I will
not now speak of many other particulars, that I might either in this Kings
reign, or his successors to King H. 8. for that I desire to declare what they
did since the reformation, yet therein will be as brief as I may, having
already too much provoked your patience, for which I crave humble pardon.

To Henry the sixth succeeded Edward the fourth who indeed had the better title
to the Crown, notwithstanding Archbishop Nevill Brother to the King-make-
Warwick with others, did conspire and attempt his dethroning, and after took
him prisoner, and kept him in his Castle of Midleham; and after in Parliament
at Westminster, did they not declare him a traitor and usurper, con^iscate his
goods, revoke, abrogate, and make frustrate all Satutes made by him, and
intaile the Crown of England and France upon Henry and his issue male, in
default thereof to Clarence, and so disabling King Edward his elder Brother?

But to hasten, I will pass over Edward the fifth, whose E. 5.
Crown by means of the Prelates as well as the Duke of Buckingham, was placed
on the head of his murtherous Uncle that cruel Tyrant; for had not the
Cardinal Archbishop by his persuasion with his mother, taken the Brother
Richard Duke of York out of Sanctuary, the Crown had not been placed on his
Vnkes head, nor they lost their lives; and not to speak of Doctor Pinker, and
Doctor Shaws Sermons, and other foul passages of Prelates (as Morton and
others) who sought also the destruction of K. Richard, Rich. 3.
and that when his Nephews were dead, and none had right before him to the
Crown which he then wore; what disloyal long speeches made he to the Duke of
Buckingham to persuade the said Duke to take the Crown to himself?

From Richard I pass to Henry the seventh: I told you before H. 7.
that Morton would have persuaded Buckingham to dethrone King Richard the
third, and take the Kingdom to himself, to which he had no right; and failing
therein he adressed himself to Henry then Earl of Richmond, and as by his
counsel he prevailed with him, so he prevailed against and won from Richard
the garland; this perswader and furtherer of bad Titles was advanced to the Sea
of Canterbury, his desire whereof perhaps caused his disloyalty, and being in
high favor with this Prince by his special recommendations, procured one
Hadrian de Castello an Italian to be be made first Bishop of Hereford, after of
Bath and Wells, who also was made Cardinal, by that Antichristian and divelish
Pope Albert the sixth; and as Morton had endeavored Goodw. Ca^^l. of BB in
Bath* etc. page 309. Paulus Jovius.
the dethroning of his Lord and King, so did the other conspire the murder of
Pope Leo the tenth, when he was told by a Witch that one named Hadrian should
succeed.

As to Henry the eighth, I need not speak much of his opinion of Bishops, who
he says were but half subjects, if subjects at all to him, when he caused Sir
Thomas Audley, Speaker, to read the oath of Bishops in Parliament. And that it
was so, appeared when Wolsey and Campeius refused ^ede.
to give judgment for the unlawfulness of the marriage of Henry the eighth,
and thereupon a divorce: Whereupon the Duke of Suffolk said, and that truly,
It was never merry in England since Cardinal Bishops came amongst us. It were
too large to repeat all the petitions, and supplications, and complaints of
Divines against them, in this Kings Reign, as of Doctor, Barnes, Latimer,
Tindal, Bean and others. ^s supplic. ^i.
This last named says, that the Bishops alone have the keys of the English
kingdom hanging at their girdles* and what they traitorously conspire among
themselves, the same is bound and loosed in Star Chamber, Westminster Hall,
privy Council and Parliament. This and much more he. But as their sitting
there has been obnoxious, so it is useles, as may appear by the Statute 31.
Hen. 8. yet in force, ry 8. 31. ^
where it is ena^cted, That as the then Lord Cromwell, so all other that should
thereafter be made Vicegerents, should sit above the Archbishop in Parliament;
nay, hold general visitations in all the Diocesses of the Realm, as well over
the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, as Laity, to enquire and correct their
abuses, to prescribe Injunctions, Rules and Orders for reforming of religion,
for abolishing of superstition and Idolatry, and correction of their lives and
manners, etc. And read we not that in the 37. of this Kings reign, letters
patents were granted to Laymen, to exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, as the Kings officers, ^ry 8. 37.
not the Bishops. Thus we see the government of Bishops as well as their
sitting in Parliament, may be spared. And that they neither have, nor
heretofore had any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in making of Canons or
Constitutions, but by the Kings Writ, nor promulge or execute any such, without
the Kings Royal assent and license, under pain, appears by the Statute of
the 25. of the same King, upon ^ry 8. 25.
the Clergies own submissive petition. And the Bishops themselves in the
prosecution of this Act 1603. in the beginning of King James his reign, did
decree the same, and pronounce excommunication ipso facto upon all or any that
should ordain or execute the same without Royal assent. Now you have seen
their demeanor in Parliament for three or four hundred years, or there abouts.
The delivery hereof has taken up much time, and perhaps thereby most are
satisfied, that they have been hurtful, and therefore that it is not
convenient they should longer continue members of that honorable House, where
they have done such mischief to King and Commonwealth: yet in regard of my
promise, and undertaking to declare them prejudicial from the first Parliament
to this present, by testimony of credible authors in each Kings reign, as
also to meet with an objection which I conceive will be offered to make all
that has been proved, as extravagant, so invalid, That those actions,
practices, plots, conspiracies, or treasons, were done and perpetrated in time
of Popery; and that it was done by Papal command, I will deliver their actions
no less detestable, nay rather more heinous after the reformation then before.
In the several reigns of King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth,
King James, of blessed memory, and our present Sovereign, whom God long
preserve. But I desire I may be rightly understood, that when I charge these
reverend Bishops that were very good men, chief pillars of the Church, great
lights of learning, and charge them to have done those things as Bishops, which
I believe they would not have done as private Ministers; if (I say) I declare
that they, to hold their Bishoprics, and in expectance of great preferment,
and to please great Lords and Princes, Kings and Emperors, have not only
yielded to, but persuaded to introduce Idolatry, to dis-inherit the right heirs
of Kingdoms, and force good Princes to do acts unnaturalll and unjust: Let me
not be thought to speak in depravation or detraction, I do not intend their
infamy (and so desire to be understood) their memory ought to be dear to us
all, and it ever has been, and is precious in my esteem; but I thereby
insinuate, that corrupt Lordly Episcopacie has an infection in it, tainting
the purest Divines and godliest* Ministers.

I pray you misconceive me not, I am not against Episcopacy, truly understood,
or a Church Government rightly used, but I conceive, and therefore (under
correction) say, that it has (with Theseus ship) received so many new pieces
and additions to the first building, that it does justly occasion a dispute
whether it be the same, little or nothing of the first substance and materials
remaining. So that we have Episcopal government in name, but want the
substance; Vox and praeterea nihil: With I^ion we embrace but a cloud in stead
of a Juno, or (at best) but a bleare-eyed Leah in stead of a beautiful Rachel.
This tree (I say) is almost rotten, this salt somewhat unsavory, this light
very dim, this building scarce sound or sure, which (if propping will help)
I would not have demolished, till a model of a better be agreed upon.

In King Edwards reign did not the reverend Bishop (O ^. 6. ^x acts and ^n.
grief to hear! says mine Author) persuade and subscribe to the
dis-inheriting of the two daughters of Henry the 8. the sisters of his King,
contrary to the Statute of the 35. of Henry the 8. as also in prejudice of the
right of Scotland, Margaret being eldest sister to Mary, grandmother to Jane,
on whose head they would settle the Crown; which plot I think I may say,
wicked and disloyal, if it had taken effect, in all likelihood, the blessed
union of both Kingdoms had not ensued, which, as I said before, was hindered by
Betton Bishop of Saint Andrews in Henry the 8. time.

I have not yet spoke any thing as to the point of Idolatry, the most wicked
and highest degree of treasons being against the King of Kings; did not the
Archb. Cranmer and Bish. Ridley, persuade, nay earnestly press K. Edward the
sixth, that the Lady* Mary might have Mass said in her Speed.
house, and that to be done without all prejudice of Law, the greatness of her
person being the immediate successor, and the might of Charles the Emperor
moved those Bishops too forword, and so far urged this to the King, and from
Divines becoming Politicians, alleged the danger in breach of amity with the
Emperor, and when he convincing them by scripture, and told them he would
rather hazard his life then grant that which was not agreeable to truth, they
allege the bonds of nature, at last tell him they would not be said nay; this
they offered, and thus far they pressed, although they could not prevail
with this pious Prince.

These were not the baits that Peter angled with to catch souls, or the
weapons that Saint Paul fought with when he professed they were not carnal,
but mighty through God to cast down holds, they propose not honor and
security to Christ's disciples, but hazard and baseness. A most godly speech of
a good Christian Prince, the like whereto I read that King James uttered in
his protestation made to Watson, as he after confessed to the* Earl of
Northampton upon some occasion offered: All the Crowns and Kingdoms in this
world (says he) shall not induce me to change one jot of my profession, which
is the pasture of my soul, and earnest of my eternal inheritance. A pious
speech of a magnanimous King, whose memory shall ever be justly blessed; and I
doubt not but our gracious Sovereign, as he holds his Kingdoms, so
possesses the like religious courage and constancy.

But to return to our former Bishops, viz. Cranmer, Ridley, etc. did they
repent them of this upon better consideration, and upon the death of this good
King advance the title of the right heir? Nothing so; for when queen Mary Q
Mary's L^tter to the BB. and LL. from Kening^ll 9. July 1553. Their answer from
the Tower, die and anno praedict. B. Ridley his Sermon at Paul's cross,
defending Ianes title.
hearing that Jane her cousin was to be proclaimed queen, writ her letter to
the Lord, declaring her own right, and marvelling that they so unjustly
attempted to put her from it, contrary to their loyalty, allegiance, and the
Statute which had formerly settled the Crown upon her; they (I mean the
Bishops as well as the Lords, for I find Canterbury and ^ly to have
subscribed) told her that she had no right thereto, but ^^n^ must be queen,
and she must submit her self to her as her Sovereign. And what they w^it did
Ridley Bishop of London preach. And though this was not done or spoken in
Parliament, yet no men doubts but if it had been effected, they would have
pleaded in justification thereof, and confirmed it as rightful in the next
Parliament that should have been called. Now I have declared them disloyal
traitors, and most unjust and ungodly in these passages.

To pass from this Queen to the next, I find that in the first year of good
Queen Elizabeth there was a further reformation desired; and what was then
earnestly pressed by good Divines, as Doctor Scorie, Cox, Mr. Jewel, Elmer,
Grindal, Jo. Stow page 1034.
Whitehead, Horn, Gest, was thus far granted by that godly Princess that
there should be a conference at Westminster; where being come, they were
opposed by the Bishop of Winchester, Lincoln, Lichfield, Carlisle, and Chester,
together with some others. These Bishops (says mine Author Stow, abruptly
broke off this conference, pleading a mistaking of their directions: and in the
next sitting utterly refused either to write their own, or to read the others
reasons, whereby all was undone that was intended, whereof part was imprinted
by Richard Judge and John Cawood, as is to be seen: and this was in time of
Parliament. Much more I might declare of Bishops actions in this queens time,
as that the Bishops at queen Elizabeth's inauguration, did refuse to anoint or
consecrate her ( viz.) York, (Canterbury dying a little before;) also these
chief Bishops denied the same, as London, Duresme, Winchester, Ely, Lincoln,
Exeter, Bath and Wells, Coventry and Lichfield, Chichester and Peterborough.

But I hasten to conclusion. And as this virtuous Queen did yield that a
disputate should be had for reformation; so did the gracious Prince King James
grant the like at Hampton Court, where were Doctor Reynolds and Doctor
Conference at Hampton court upon Thursd. January 12.
Sparks of Oxford; and Knewstubs, and Chaderton of Cambridge. Now who resisted
the reformation? Sure none other but the Bishop of Canterbury, Duresme, London,
Winchester, Chichester, Worcester, Carlisle and Saint David's; and the Deanes of
Westminster, Windsor, Paul's, Chester, Worcester and Christchurch, alleging
that there was no need of reformation: But God and good men did know the
contrary* but I will not trouble you with their actions (...) this Kings
reign, their introduction of (...), (...), and idolatry, of ^opery and (...),
and what not of irreligion to the Deity, mischief and danger to the King, and
prejudice to the people and Kingdom, few or none within these walls but know
them, and felt the harmfull fruits thereof. As for their actions in his
Majesty's reign, which I think do poy^e down and overbalance all formerly
done since the beginning of Parliaments, put together in the other Scale, I
will refer them to the reports of the Committees for the ^ope of Lambeth, and
his Cardinals Wren and others, and briefly conclude, That whereas from their
first sitting in Parliament to this time, they have as well in Parliament as
ou^, been so prejudicial, and appeared to have during their sitting there,
plotted and contrived treasons and conspiracles, rebellion and war, domestic
and foreign, been incendiaries and grievances to State and Church, and
Arch-enemies to King and Commonweal, introducing Salique Law, making this
Kingdom elective, and our Princes only Kings durant^ been g^rend* or rather
been placi^. in worse case and less hold then a Duke of Venice, I hope his
Majesty will ^ege talionis make their Episcopacie to be only titular, which
is as much as is due to them, whether Archbishops or Bishops: for they are to
have priority or precedencie, quoad ordinem, not quoad ministerium, wherein the
poorest Curate is his equal and his fellow Minister. And as I am not for
equality and parity, so I would not have too great a distance, the danger
whereof to any Estate, be pleased to hear, as I receive it from an Author
formerly mentioned, in these words rendered:

Too much increase and unproportionable growth, is a cause that procures the
change and ruin of Common-we^les. For a^ the body is made and compounded of
parts, and ought to (...) by propo^^^on, that (...) may sleep a ^ust treasure;
so e^^ry Commonweal being compounded of orders and estates as it were of
parts, they must be maintained in concord* one with another, as it were with
equal and due proportion observed between each of them. For if one estate be
advanced too much above another, dissension arises, equality being the nursing
mother of peace, and contrariwise, inequality the beginning of all enmity,
factions, hatred, and part-taking. But seeing it is meet that in every well
established policy there should be a difference of rights and privileges
betwixt every estate, equality may continue, if provision be made that one
estate grow not too much before the other: but more of this elsewhere in its
more proper place.

And as for these reasons, I yielded my vote for the unlawfulness and
inconvenience of their sitting there: therefore I wish they may be no longer
members of that most Honorable House.

I humbly crave leave to add a word or two to what I formerly spoke.

I am not ignorant, that the foresaid assertion, No Bishop no King, is received
as the delivery of King James* but though it might be admitted in the sense he
meant and intended, to wit, that those that dislike a Church Government will
hardly admit Regal rule; yet we can no way allow thereof as it is commonly
offered and pressed* that the Regal power cannot subsist without the present
Episcopacy. Now, what that wise, learned, and religious King did conceive of
the rules and tenants of Bishops and Prelates, how consonant to the majesty* of
temporal Princes, or whether he thought them rather to tend to the trampling
thereof under foot, and laying their honor in the dust, may appear by his
quotations in the latter end of his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, which I
thought fitter to annex hereunto, then to have delivered then in the proper
place, when I spoke of Bishops in the reign of E. 2. being then desirous to
continue the Historical narration of their sitting and actions in Parliament,
having too much transgressed by my so often enterweaving other passages
therewith, I overpassed the same.

King James Collection out of Cardinal Bishop Bellarmine are as follows:

1 That Kings are rather slaves then Lords. 1 De laic^^ c^ 7.
2 That they are not only subjects to Popes, to Bishops, to 2 De Pont* Romans l.
1 cap. 7.
Priests, but even to Deacons. 3 That an Emperor must content himself to
drink, not only 3 Ibid.
after a Bishop, but after a Bishops Chaplain. 4 That Kings have not their
authority nor office immediately 4 Ibid. and. de cl^r cap. 20.
from God, nor his Law, but only from the law of Nations. 5 That Popes have
degraded Emperors, but never Emperor 5 De Pontif lib. 3 cap 16
degraded the Pope: nay, even Lib. 5. cap. 8.
Bishops that are but the Popes vassals, may depose Kings, and abrogate their
Laws. 6 That Churchmen are as far above Kings, as the soul is 6 De Laic^s,
^ (...).
above the body. 7 That Kings may be deposed by their perple for diverse
respects. 7 De Pontif l. b. 5 cap. 8.
8 But Popes can be deposed by no means: for no flesh has power 8 De Pontif.
lib. 2. cap. 26.
to judge of them. 9 That obedience due to the Pope is for conscience sake. 9
De Pontif. lib. 4 cap 15.
10 But obedience due to Kings is only for certain respects of 10 De Clericis
cap 28.
order and policy. 11 That those very Churchmen that are borne and inhabit in
11 Ibidem.
Sovereign Princes countries, are notwithstanding not their Subjects, and
cannot be judged by them, although they may judge them. 12 And that the
obedience that Churchmen give to Princes 12 Ibidem.
even in the meanest and mere temporal things, is not by way of any necessary
subjection, but only out of discretion, and for observation of good order and
custom.
Here we find what base estimation Prelates had of Princes, may we not then
justly except against their delivery (as it is by them urged, No Bishop, no
King?


