Imprimatur;

Junii 24. 1678. Geo. Thorp Rmo in Christo P. and D. D. Guliel. Archi-Episc.
Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE Church OF ENGLAND, In Point of Separation From it.

By the Reverend Father in God, William Lord Bishop of St. David's.

LONDON, Printed for William Leach, at the Crown in Cornhil, near the Stocks
Market, 1679.

TO THE READER.
The design of this address is to recite the occasion of the writing, and of
the publishing of this Tract. Hic Rhodus, hic saltus.

As for the rise of the Composure of it.

Having had a conference, and therein an amicable dispute with a professed Pastor
of a separate Church (in the time of the Protectors Usurpation) he shortly
after sent to me a large letter fraught with arguments for vindicating his
separation from the Church of England.

I determined for some months to wave any reply to it, being not the enquiry of
a disciple or sceptick, for satisfaction, but rather the challenge (in effect)
of an adversary, for victory, for triumph.

I persisted in the same resolution, till I was advertised that my silence was
interpreted conviction in judgment, and that the letter whilst unanswered, was
concluded unanswerable.

Though I could have tacitly brooked a contempt, a contumely, as to my self;
yet my duty prompted me to assert the cause, the honor of my Mother, the
Church of England, especially in the distress, the umbrage of her persecution,
being no Persian Votary to adore the rising, to revile the setting Sun.

I have in this Apology entirely avoided not only virulency of passion, but
also acrimony of style, recollecting the grave, candid animadversion of Mr.
Hooker.

There will come a time when three words uttered with charity and meekness,
will receive a more blessed reward, than three thousand volumes written with
disdainful sharpness of mitt.

As for the printing of this Tract, it had still laid dormant in obscurity, had
I not been lately informed, that the Original (conveyed out of my study above
twenty years since without my knowledge) was imperfectly copyed, thereby
disadvantagiously dispersed in many hands; and that if I would not recommend a
true copy to the press, a false would be obtruded, without my correction, or
approbation. I alleged my incapacity of compliance, being destitute not only of
my first draught, but indeed of any other.

To remove this obstruction, the same transcript which was delivered to my
Antagonist was retrieved and produced to me, which is now exposed to the view
of a censorious world, without any alteration.

One reason that (after much reluctance) sways me to a publication, is the
charitable sentiment of several judicious persons, that this Apology may, by
the divine blessing, conduce to reclaim some who have unwarily separated from
the Church of England, at least to fix others, to prevent an unwarrantable
recess, which I primarily aim at within my own Episcopal charge, that those
precious souls I am accountable for be not like clouds whifled about with every
gust of wind; with every novel fancy, as if their compass for Religion had as
many points to vary, as the Mariners for navigation.

I wish my dissenting Brethren would pensively consider, what advantages they
exhibit to our Romish adversaries, who glory in the infamy of our divisions
(though fomented by themselves in varieries of disguises) accounting our brands
their ornaments, our rents their Union. As Themistius did recriminate, return
the Pagan objection of Sects among the Primitive Christians to the
Philosophers, divided, bandied against each other; so may I retort the same
papal Argument against the Protestants; to the modern Romanists, whose jarring
parties are not more linkt, cemented than ours, but their enmities, animosities
more concealed smothered (as to vulgar notice) How confidently do they spread
their plumes, whilst some Separatists no less unadvisedly than invalidly
attempt to justify their separation from the Church of England, by the
separation of the Church of England from that of Rome. Par impar.

In sum. They are not bottomed on the same solid important grounds.

They are not empowered by the same, or equal legal Authority (the one
withdrawn from a foreign, indirect, unlawful usurpation, the other from a
genuine, direct, lawful jurisdiction.)

They have not been managed by the same sedate, prudent, regular methods and
expedients (as I have assayed to demonstrate in this Tract)

The one has an amiable aspect by the unsullied colors and lineaments of a
Reformation (the attractive beauty of truth, and holiness)

The other has an uncomely feature, disfigured with the scars, the gashes of
schism.

I acknowledge, I received a speedy rejoinder to my Apology, from my
Antagonist, the answering whereof I deliberately declined for three reasons.

1. Because the rejoinder was not complete, nor distinct to my Apology, as this
was to his letter.

Only, some passages reflected on, wherein the material exceptions were
discust before.

2. The rejoinder started new debates (like Hydra's heads) with reiterated,
sharp invectives against enormities of practice in Ecclesiastical Courts; which
probably sifted, might prove unweighed aspersions, no less readily credited,
than reported. Accusations are no evidences of Crimes. Barely to be impeacht
makes no man a delinquent. However, I espoused no such quarrels. I neither was,
nor am an Advocate for the defailances or corruptions of any members or
professors, but for the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, which
upon mature examination, my conscience has constantly dictated to me, to be
the best constituted reformed Church in the world, most untainted, unbyassed,
for principles of Piety and Loyalty (the pillars of Church and State) of
exactest correspondence with Christ's signal precept. Render unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods, Matthew. 22.
21. Of nearest resemblance to primitive purity, so reputed by disinteressed
persons, by eminently learned accomplished foreiners, Isaak Casaubon, Hugo
Grotius, and many others.

Whereas I scanned the arguments of my Antagonist, which himself framed to
Syllogisms, by the rules of Logic (the most proper test) having manifested
their defects and blemishes in form and matter, having reduced them to several
sorts of Elenchs, of fallacyes, the better to unmask such specious pretenses.
He has offered no other defense for himself, nor confutation of me but only
this concise Evasion, that he will not meddle with my fallacies. Whereby I
apprehended my self disengaged, as to further contest, which, at this rate,
would prove fruitless and endless.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. Line 11. read wines. p. ib. in the Margent r. infinitam, p. 9. l. 16
r. no. p. 11. l. 24. r. renew, p. 25. r. Damus veniam, p. 32. l. ^. dele the,
p. 32. l. 16. r. imagination, p. 63. l. 21. r. initiation, p. 72. in the
margent r. (...), p. 82. l. 7. dele of, ib. l. 9. r. 12, p. 103. l. 5. r.
initiate, p. 108. in the marg. r. refers. p. 113. in the marg. r. Scult. p.
119. l. 18. r. offerers, p. 120. l. 18. r. Cherem, p. 131. in the matg. r.
ludatur, p. 156. in the marg. r. notatam, p. 157. l. 10. dele or, p. 167. l.
24. r. concurrent, p. 174. l. 2. r. add is, ib. in the marg. r. Sodomam, p.
179. l. ult. r. bursts, p. 181. The account of Causabon touching Hesychius,
misplaced in the marg. p. 187. l. 21. r. reins. p. 291. l. 10. r. paint, ib. l.
19. r. solution, p. 192. l. 27. add a, p. 193. in the margin (...), p. 201. l.
13. r. add I, p. 203. l. 16. r. moderator, p. 209. l. 23. r. Nyssen. ^. (...)
l. 10. add of, p. 217. 11. r. the, p. 223. l. 2. r. your, ib. l. 12. r. too, p.
(...) 11. r. conjure, p. 225. in the marg. r. nolint, p. 227. l. 13. dele that.
ib, l. ^^ r. earth, p. 229. l. 6. r. sit, p. ib. in the marg. dele Aug.

SIR,
SIr Henry Wootton, who had studied Men and Books, (...).
versed in numerous Cities and various Manners (like Ulysses) desired to be
celebrated to posterity, only in being the Author of this sage Observation, The
Itch of disputing becomes the Scab of the Church. This Scab is almost improved
to a Leprosy: Differences not only started in points of Indifferency,
Controversies touching Circumstances, Ceremonies, (shadows of Religion) but the
Body, the Substance is unsinewed by disputes, established Doctrines being
bandied Queries, the Principles of Belief being entertained for Problems of
Debate: whereby both the Staves of Zachary are broken, and the Splinters of
those Staves have pierced to Wounds and Gashes, the Church being become like S.
Epiphanius. Bed of Snakes. The sad apprehensions hereof inclined me to mourn
for these Divisions, rather than to stickle in them, for to cure Contention by
Devotion, accounting my Prayers and my Tears my best Weapons, that I might
contribute my assistance to quench, not forment the Flame. But recollecting
that the Grecians enacted severe Sanctions against (...), such as rejected,
quitted their Shields and Targets, though they tolerated (...), such as
abandoned their Swords and Spears. (...). 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Pondering also that Apostolical Precept to be ready always to give an answer,
an apology to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you,
with meekness, and fear, dreading lest my silence should confirm that error I
disprove not, lest it should be interpreted consent by man, and charged for
guilt by God: having withal received an assurance, in our last discourse, of a
candid Reception, I vanquished my own resolution of waving any Reply, assaying
a particular Answer to each part of your civil Letter, in point of Separation.
Wherein I pray God grant us discerning solid Judgments, with humble, upright
hearts, (a prudence tempered with innocence) that truth and peace may sincerely
be promoted.

The LETTER.
That reverend opinion and Christian persuasion which I have of your Learning
and Piety, together with your moderate and sober Disposition, which I lately
perceived, toward those that differ from you in some Circumstantials of
Religion, invites me to write to you.

The ANSWER.
Your undeserved Character puts me to the mixture of a Blush and Anguish, who
own nothing but Defects and Infirmities. As for Literature, I dare pretend no
claim, but that of the Greek Orator, of Affection to it, not of the least
Perfection in it. As to Piety, (...). Isoc. ad Them.
my sole interest is a deep sense of my Impiety, a constant acknowledgment of a
constant Guilt, with the Prophet David, My sin is ever before me. Psalm. 51. 3.
That of Tertullian is my Motto: Born to drive on no design, Non ulli rei nisi
poenitentiae natus. Tertull. l. de Poenit. c. ult.
to expedite no task but repentance. As to a moderate temper, I hope I shall
not frustrate your expectation: Religion needs not our Passion to bolster it.
The Hearts of Christians may be cemented, when their Brains are not. Non eadem
sentire bonos de rebus iisdem Incolumi licuit semper amicitia. It is S. Paul's
Lecture, Gal. 6. 2.
Bear one another Burdens. It is not (...), but (...). As the Tenets of others
are irksome, disgusting to us (if different) so are ours to them; so that a
mutual moderation (discarding rancour and animosity) is a debt reciprocally to
be discharged and disburst. Even in substantial Differences, when I condemn any
erroneous Opinion, I shall commiserate the person who asserts it, though it
were not his Infirmity, but his Obstinacy. For even this state of spiritual
desertion is most to be condoled.

As to you I shall not dip my Pen in Gall or Oil, to revile, or flatter; expect
not a Satyrist, or a Parasite. As God's Minister, I shall not dare not mince,
nor shuffle in Religion, (as I hinted to you in my last Conference) but shall
search the Wound of Separation with the tenderness, yet with the faithfulness
of a spiritual Surgeon.

The LETTER.
Wherein I have declared my present Light of which I am convinced, to be a
truth, according to the Word of God, and therefore walk therein, yet I hope a
heart ready to embrace further what God shall by any means from the Law and the
Testimonies reveal.

The ANSWER.
This present Light is but a new Light, I pray beware lest it prove the
delusion of the old Serpent. The Spirit of Darkness can transform himself into
an Angel of Light. Conviction may in this case tend to Condemnation. The Jews
plead, that they are convinced, that their confident Tenets are evident truths
by the Light of the Prophets; yet the dismal fatal Veil is over their Hearts.

May the enlightening, sanctifying Spirit cleanse our Consciences, clear and
rectify our Apprehensions, our Opinions, that neither yours nor mine may be
dimmed, depraved.

Whilst you are thus convinced to walk by this Conduct, Conscientia erronia
ligat. Aqu.
I blame you not. For an erroneous Conscience is in a sort obligatory: though
Conscience ought to be sifted, that it be not erroneous; Gentilis the Heretic
pretended Conscience for his Blasphemy against the Trinity.

S. Paul vindicates himself, Act. 23. 1.
I have in all good conscience served God until this day, not only when he was
a Pilot to steer the Church, but when he was a Pyrate to rifle it, when he was
Paul the Apostle, and when he was Saul the Persecutor, in all good conscience,
though for a time errante, with an erring, yet not repugnante, vel dubitante,
with a clashing or scrupling Conscience.

Your profession of a prompt, cordial submission to the Law and the
Testimonies, is pious and commendable.

Though Scripture be the purest, the exactest test for decision, yet not
without some cautions. Satan like Hannibal can lay an ambush in the smoothest
Field.

The Apostle decyphers (...), 2 Cor. 4. 2.
making the word of Truth a passport for Falsehood, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
and (...), that deal with Scriptures as Hucksters do with Wares to corrupt, or
as Vintners do with Wine to sophisticate them, that make earthly Merchandise of
Heavenly Oracles.

The Heretics of all Ages have cited the Scriptures as Patrons of their
Errors. Videns eos Hireticos volare per singula quaeque sancta legis Volumina
-- Nihil unquam de suo proferunt, quod non etiam Scripturae verbis adumbrare
conentur. Lege Pauli Samosateni opuscula, Prisciliani, Eunomii, Joviniani
reliquarumque pestium, cernes infinita exemplorum congeriem prope nullam omitti
paginam quae non novi aut veteris testamenti sententiis fucata and colorata
sit. Vincent. Lyr. ad Haeres.


The Tempter, Mat. 4. 6.
the Grand Patriarch of Heretics in his conflict with our Redeemer, Luke 4. 10.
draws his Arrows out of this sacred Quiver.

He obtruded Scripture to our Savior, Non minus veritati obstrepit adulter
sensus quam corruptus stylus. Tertull. de Praes. c. 17.
but wrested, curtled it. It is the Orthodox Maxim of Tertullian; Truth is no
less obstructed by adulterating, depraving the sense, than corrupting,
perverting the Letter. It is not the Shell, but the Kernel is the delicious
word of life.

Some Expedients are requisite for attaining the Kernel.

The Expedients are inward and outward.

The first inward Expedient is Interpretation, which is promoted by examining
Translations, consulting with Originals.

The second inward Expedient is Comparation by a survey of the Context, to pick
the sense out of the coherence, or else by Analogy of Texts; for as one Taper
kindles, so one portion of Scripture illustrates another.

There are also external Expedients, the outward helps of the Arts, especially
Logic (for apprehending the force and importance of the Proofs in Scripture)
Rhetoric (for discovering the Flourishes, the Ornaments of its Tropes and
Figures) of Witnesses, wherein, though the Modern are not to be excluded, the
Primitive are to be preferred.

The most ancient are of best repute, (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 1.
being least tainted and biassed. Deuteronomy. 4. 32.


Moses and Bildad, Job 8. 8.
Jeremiah Jer. 16. 16:
and Solomon recommend the Inquiry of Antiquities: Prove. 22. 28.
it is Christ's prescription against Pharisaical, Mat. 19. 8.
Heretical Novelties; From the beginning it was not. se. Though the Fathers are
not to be idolized with the Papal Gloss, yet are they not peremptorily to be
contemned, or condemned in their opinions and expositions. Though the Romanists
are Veteratores, says Joseph Scaliger, corrupters of Antiquity, yet the
Reformed are no rejecters of it, not Novatores, nor introducers of Novelties:
unanimous Ecclesiastical Antiquity cheeques not with Purity. It is the Golden
Rule of Vincentius Lyrineusis. Id teneamus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditum est. Vincen. Lyr. advers. Haeres.
That which is asserted in all Christian Churches in all Ages is truly
Catholic and Venerable.

All these Expedients being united, are to be improved by a fervent penitent
Devotion.

Scripture is not (...), 1 Pet. 1. 20.
of private interpretation, that every one has liberty to impose his own
fancy, but there ought to be sensus innatus pursued (as the Hugonot Champion
Chamier distinguishes) not illatus.

Though the Holy Ghost only can truly expound what himself dictates, yet to
pretend his Comment on his own Text with a neglect of all subservient helps,
Omnes Patres sit, sed ego non sic. Abul.
were not a holy confidence, but a haughty arrogance.

I presume your Modesty and Ingenuity will not permit you to split on this
Rock, that you will not profess with Abulardus, to run counter with all the
Fathers of the Church; Ego neminem agnosco patrem, neminem magistrum. Socin.
nor with Faustus (Infaustus) Socinus explode the track of primitive Piety for
Guidance.

I have dilated this Point, because it is the Lydius Lapis, the Touchstone of
the Controversy.

Having premised these Cautions, Ad Evangelium appellasti, ad Evangelium ibis.
Bernard. Ede mihi unam Scripturae vocem pro part Donati. Aug. de pasc. c. 14.
I join issue with you in S. Bernard's Close: To the Gospel you have appealed,
to the Gospel you shall go. I may here review S. Austin's challenge; Produce
one voice of Scripture in the behalf of Donatus.

The LETTER.
For the Searcher of all hearts can bear me witness, that it was not
inconsiderately, or for any by-end, that I changed my former thoughts and
practice.

The ANSWER.
I cannot be so uncharitable as to boggle at that you ratify with so sacred
and solemn a seal. Though your changes have been the impressions of your heart,
yet be pleased to consider, there is no such pernicious Sophister, as the heart
of Man. It is deceitful above all things. Jerem. 17. 9.
A Supplanter according to the Original, deep beyond our fathoming, wily beyond
our kenning. Your spiritual change still suiting with your temporal advantages,
your own retired thoughts may admit a severe reflection on your integrity, so
far as to examine it, though I shall not blast, nor scruple it. The Enemy sowed
his Tares in the choicest Grain (the Wheat) like Agrippina that distilled her
poison into Claudius's delicacies. Satan may insert, rivet an advantageous
separation into a pious intention (whereby the Serpent may insensibly swallow
up the Dove) like Julian, Sozom. l. 5. p. 16
who caused the Images of the Heathen Gods in the engraving to be intermingled
with the Images of the Emperor, that so the Christians, in affording a civil
reverence to the one might exhibit an idolatrous to the other, though
unwittingly.

Ecclesiastical Histories are ample Records of Gracious Men ungraciously swayed
by secular interests to desert the best Tenets.

The most Orthodox Venerable Fathers under Constantine the Emperor were swayed
by the potent violent stream of the Age under Constantius, to embrace the
Arrian Confession. This Torrent bore away the grave, Sulpit. Senec. Hist. l. 4.
devout Osius (centenario major, says the Historian) being above an hundred
years old, as if more crazed and decrepit in Soul than Body, he renounced the
sacred Sanctions of the Nicene Council, which himself compiled and established.

How rigid and dismal a Doom did Ecebolius pronounce against himself, Socrat.
Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 11.
who having still molded his Religion to the season, shifted Sail with every
propitious Gale, at last he cast himself prostrate in the Church with this
expression of perplexity and horror, Trample on me as unsavory Salt.

I relate it not virulently with the least design of Application, but
affectionately hint it for caution.

The LETTER.
As my Creed taught me, there is a Communion of Saints, so my desire was to
find such a company; whereby I may comfortably partake of the things of God
according to his revealed Will.

The ANSWER.
I am glad you own that renowned Christian Badge of Piety and Antiquity,
whereto this Age affords not public recital, scarce private repute.

The Foundation you lay, will not support the Fabric you erect thereon. The
Communion of Saints will not prove a Division, a Fraction of Separatists: it is
(...), it is (...), it unsoders the Church, untwists the Article. This allows
not society with good Men in evil Actions, it debars not society with evil men
in good Actions. Ephesians. 4. 5.


S. Paul enforces his Admonition of endeavoring the preservation of the unity
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace by a Paraphrase of this Communion, One God,
one Faith, one Baptism.

This Communion relates to the Head or Members.

The Communion of the Head with the Members consists in our partaking of
Christ's Merits by Adoption, Gal. 4. 5.
by Justification, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26.
in his partaking of our indignities Romans 5. 1. 18.
by Interpretation, Col. 1. 24.
of our iniquities by Imputation, Es. 53. 4. 5. 1
Satisfaction. Pet. 2. 21, 24.


The Communion of the Saints deceased with the living, That importunate appeal
for judgment to persecutors, Rev. 6. 10. does infallibly infer a compassionate
suit, as to their Fellow Members.
consists in their general prayers for us, in our general and particular
praises for them. The former in the judgment of Reformed Divines consists with
the excellency of their Charity: The latter suits with the practice of the
Primitive Church. The Communion of the Saints living consists in affection by
sympathy of joy or grief, Romans 12. 15.
in edification, Romans 15. 2. 1
exercising our Graces to the benefit of others, These. 5. 11.
in Acts 2. 45.
distribution of outward Talents. Acts 4. 35.


This bottom of Communion of Saints being thus unravelled, will not countenance
or present the least thread of your separation.

If you aver a Communion with the Saints as Fellow Members, I desire to be
resolved, who those Saints are? Not the reformed Protestants, not the Primitive
Christians, you exclude both, their Church being not separate: if they be
acknowledged Members of the Catholic Church, they are interested in the
Communion of Saints expressed in the Creed. And then your separation from them
amounts to a separation from the Church, and the Communion specified in the
Creed. To ascend higher, are the Apostles the Saints you own a Communion with?
Then prove they made such separations from Christian Congregations as you do.
But you admit them not the Title of Saints (let me inoffensively ask for my own
satisfaction) if they be real Saints, why not Titular? If your selves as real
assume the Title, why may not the Apostles be indulged that privilege (in
regard you plead to be Saints of the same extraction) especially since us to
the judgment of others at least, there is greater certainty, infallibility of
their Saintship than of yours.

As for your desire of company comfortably to partake the things of God, those
Assemblies you have quitted do afford those sacred Comforts you have deserted
them for; wherein sacred Ordinances are most comfortably, because most
charitably celebrated. Being private Persons or Pastors of a Parochial Church,
we are principled to be Converts, not Judges; to exercise severity in
repentance, not censure; to be inquisitors in our own Breasts, to condemn none
but our selves. Religion is not tainted with Faction among us, nor Zeal stained
with Schism. We bewail the practical profaneness of any, that the same
tincture of Grace is not visible in Worship and in Life: however, our
wickedness is not in Gilgal, as to this charge; God's pure Ordinances are not
slurred, not vitiated, much less vacated (rendered ineffectual) by men's impure
desailances, unless to themselves only. 1 Tit. 15.
To the pure all things are pure.

The LETTER.
Therefore do humbly offer these ensuing grounds to your serious consideration,
desiring your judgment on them, and thoughts of them.

The ANSWER.
I take no felicity (...), (In Nazianzens expression) to mould Divinity into a
Comedy. I shall not (by the Divine assistance) fail of a serious Discussion of
your Advertisements, weighing them in the balance of Reason and Religion. I am
not so improvident an Enemy to a numerous Family, as to be peevishly wedded to
clouded Tenets, could I be rationally and conscienciously divorced from them. I
should not stick to pen my own Retractations, according to the laudable Example
of St. Austin.

The LETTER.
That there is a Church of God here on Earth all do agree in, concerning the
Matter and Form in general there is no great difference; That it is coetus
fidelium, a company of people called out and segregated from the World by the
Word; to walk together in the Gospel of Jesus, is granted.

The ANSWER.
The quod sit, that there is a Church is uncontrolled, undiscussed; the quid
sit, what that Church is, is the subject of Ancient and Modern Debates. Here
the Logic Rule is to be observed, Ambiguous words are first to be
distinguished, then defined. The Church is either Universal or Particular;
Grand Differences being loudly prosecuted touching the Matter and Form of both.

The Romanists comprehend Miscreants, Reprobates for material parts and Members
of the Catholic Church; the Reformed allow only Elect Persons to be true and
real Members of this Church; yet they avouch vicious Christians, nay scandalous
(till excommunicated) to be Members of a particular visible Church, but the
Separatists do quite expunge, raze them out.

The Romanists exact, not as a consecutive, but a constitutive essential Note
(as a formal mark of every particular Church) Subjection to the Pope. The
Separatists require a Church Covenant, an evidence, (if not assurance) of the
grace of every Member. The Reformed Protestants dissent from both. But not to
tread out of your track; Your Latin definition of the Church ( coetus fidelium)
is accommodated to the inward Church invisible. Though an Assembly, if
particular be an object of Sense, Believers properly are not: But your English
illustration of it is the Character of the outward visible Church (that walk in
the profession of the Gospel of Jesus) If they walk whether in the Notion of
Nature or Scripture; if they profess, they must be visible. This is to shuffle
together Disparata.

The LETTER.
(...). Saints by calling is Scripture Definition, Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 33.
but how far these terms may be understood how far extended, and wherein
restrained, is the controversy.

The ANSWER.
I shall not except at the Etymology, Sancti titulus, non virtutis sed
professionis. Erasm. in 1 Cor. 1.
nor the Scripture definition, but the Restriction of it. That Is the (...) the
main hinge of the Question. If you understand Saints by calling, of an inward
effectual vocation, the Testimony is an impertinency, as to our debate,
touching an outward visible Church. If you understand it of an outward
Vocation, remember our Saviors uncontrolled Maxim ( many are called, but few
are chosen.) This suites with a mixed Communion, with an outward profession;
take Aretius his rational descant on St. Paul's Character; How are they called
Saints, since it is certain many Novices in belief, yea, notorious lewd
wretches in life were among them, Matthew. 20. 26. Quomodo sancti dicantur, cum
certum sit apud eos multos rudes in fide, imo palam impios fuisse? Respon.
Recte dici Sanctos propter finem Vocationis ad Sanctitatem vocati sunt; w. e.
ut tales sint, Aret. in 1 Romans verse. 7.
whereto he frames a double answer. They were Saints by calling, because called
to Sanctity, and endowed with preparatory Graces: Because the better part were
Holy, the rest were Saints in the judgment of Charity, though not of
Infallibility. It is the Candor, the Rhetoric of the Apostle, that the Title
might be a Lecture, the name a charm to Holiness.

Zanchy under the name of Saints apprehends titular professing Christians,
Zanch. in Ephesians. 1. 2. the same distinction is expressed, Col. 1. 2.
but the faithful distinguished, severed from these by the Apostle to be
sincere Believers.

Thus your first Citation is a Nominal definition of Christians, nominal
professional, not real habitual, outwardly interested by Baptism, though not
inwardly regenerated; Saints by destination, by designation, not in
conversation, not in the least perfection (of parts, much less of degrees.).

Your second Citation (1 Cor. 14. 33.) is less advantageous to advance your
design. God is not the Author of confusion (not of dissension in the vulgar
Latin) not (...) of tumult, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints.
That is in all Christian Churches that are called, obliged to be Saints.

If you observe your separation to be the source of dissension, of confusion,
admitting no dependence, no subordination, it will appear at a great distance
from those Apostolical Churches of the Saints; especially if you note the
coherence in the Claromonte Edition (approved by Beza and other Reformed
Divines) immediately adjoining to the 33 verse, the 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 th.
verse. and annexing 34, 35 verse. to the 40 th. What came the Word of God from
you or to you only. The ophylact thus illustrates it, You are neither the prime
nor the sole Believers. It behooves you to entertain that with affection, with
submission, which has the approbation of the Christian World. St. Paul
conjures the Corinthians by the Examples of all Churches. The same Argument
unsinews your separation, not to run counter with all Christian Churches.
Produce one Christian undoubted Church of your separate strain not universally
branded for Schismatical -- -- Phyllida solus habebis.

The true Church shall be yours. You may derive your Pedigree from the
Novatians and Donatists, who boulted some of your Tenets for Separation and
Constitution. These will discover some lineaments of your Complexion, not the
entire proportion. However, if you are Saints upon their account, they were not
Heretics; and if they were Heretics upon your account, your selves are not
Saints. If you acknowledge them not Heretics, you reject the Judgment of all
Christian Churches in all Ages, since their Heresies were broached.

Sysinnius counsel to Theodosius was prudent, Socrat. in Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
10.
to move Innovators to stand to the Judgment of the Church before Division. I
tender to you the determination of our Question, by the suffrage and practice
of the Reformed Churches before your separation was raked out of the Embers it
was enwrapped in, or else to the Primitive Churches, either before the flame of
the Novatians and Donatists was kindled, or after it was extinguished (by the
vigorous Confutations of the Fathers, and the Pious Sanctions of Christian
Emperors and Councils.) If in despite of these you will persist in contention,
in separation; my Refuge is the Apostles Apology: We have no such custom, 1
cor. 11. 16.
nor the Churches of God.

The LETTER.
Visible Saints must be, but how far Saints must be discovered? The Word I
suppose carries in it a holy separation to God; a people separated for his
service, for his glory; and how wicked men, having only a bare outward
profession may be such, is unknown to me, whom the Scripture speaks otherwise
of, Tit. 1. Prove. 8. 9.

The ANSWER.
There is not an exact necessity of that Visibility, so far as to conclude no
Sanctity, if no Visibility, no Church if no luster. There may be Gold in the
Ore obscured, not yet resplendent, refined Bullion. Where was the Visibility,
when the Primitive Christians, during the brunt of Pagan persecution, betook
themselves for security to remote Deserts, to obscure Caves; when Prisons were
the sole Oratories and Temples, when the Churches were universally demolished;
the Sacred Scriptures burnt, the Christians disrobed, disfranchised, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 2.
stripped of their Dignities, immunities, deprived of their liberties and lives
by the fierce Edicts of Dioclesian?

Where was the Church visible, Ingemuit totus orbis and se Arrianum esse
miratus est. Hier. advers. Luc. 1 Kings 19. 18.
when it was overspread with a cloud of Arrianism ( Athanasius against the
whole World, and the whole World against Athanasius) Eliah discovered not one
Saint but himself, yet God vindicated seven thousand, that had not bowed their
knees to Baal. We are not visible Saints to you, nor you perhaps to us.

-- Veniam damus petimusque vicissim. I pray God we may be all visible Saints
to him.

I confess that to be a Saint imports a holy separation, a people separated for
the Divine Service and Glory. Those you have abandoned, are so servered,
dedicated by Baptism. They who demonstrate only a bare outward profession, may
be Saints outwardly, formally for profession, though not inwardly really as
touching affection, touching sincere Religion. Yet in this defect of entire
genuine Purity, the good are not to be eschewed for the evil, Non deserendi
boni propter malos sed tolerandi mali propter bonos. Aug. Ep. 48.
but the evil are to be tolerated for the good.

I shall wave your first Quotation, Tit. 1. (no verse being specified) I shall
not contend in a roving conjecture, in a dark conflict like the Andabates. I
presume you intended not the whole Chapter for a Proof, this were a fondness of
separation ((...)) like the vehement affection of the Platonists, whose
intellectuals being prepossest with numbers, imagined number an Essential in
every constitution.

Your second Appeal is to Prove. 15. 8, 9. The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the righteous is acceptable to him.

The way of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but he loves him that
follows righteousness.

If you can dispense with Charity to brand those you separate from, to be
wicked; If you can dispense with Humility to repute your selves righteous, yet
this is no Argument for separation.

The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination; therefore

The Sacrifice of the godly mingled with the wicked is abomination, you
conclude more than you premise.

Judas eating the Paschal Lamb (as for his own personal action) was an
abomination, Nec alii obest aut prodest alterius religio, Tert. in l. adv. Scap.
but this had no reflection on his associates (in that oblation) the Apostles.
Their Piety did not sanctify and acquit him, nor did his iniquity defile and
condemn them.

The LETTER.
The manner, also of their coming into such a condition (...), Saints called,
not Saints compelled, or Saints making their Saintships their Calling; their
Profession, not enemies to Holiness. This by the way.

The ANSWER.
It is true, Religion ought to be persuaded, Nec Religionis est cogere
religionem quae sponte suscipi debeat non vi. Tert. in l. adv. Scap.
not constrained, Faith and Innocence are not the products of power and
violence. Piety is not savoury if not voluntary. Yet tempers are to be
distinguished (men's dispositions being as different as their complexions) Some
are molded like Wax for the impressions of the Sacred Spirit. Others are to be
hewn like stones, to be squared and polished Materials for the Temples of the
holy Ghost. Of some take compassion, Jude 22. 23. (...), in the K. M. S.
making a difference (or commiserate those that are staggering according to a
famous Manuscript) others save with fear ( Beza interprets it with terror)
pulling them out of the fire.

Though compulsion is not allowable in the grafting, the planting of Religion,
yet it is in the fencing and pruning of it. It cannot be compelled, secundum
actum imperatum, for the inward apprehension; it may to outward profession,
secundum actum elicitum. I grant that Saints ought to make Saintship their
Calling, or rather their Calling makes them Saints.

When their conversation contradicts their Vocation, their Profession, the
crime is the greater; when our works confound our words, Reatus impii nomen
pii. Salvian.
our lives check with our names. The title of a Saint is the impeachment of a
Miscreant.

Your Proof (if logically examined) is fallacious. Wicked men are enemies to
holiness, therefore not Saints, Members of a Church.

It is ignoratio Elenchi. In the same consideration they are not Saints and
Enemies to Holiness. Their Saintship is in appearance, their enmity to Sanctity
in substance. Holy at least as Professors, though unholy as Malefactors.

This by the way (as you express it) is indeed a by way out of the Orthodox
road of the Jews and Christians. It is with new Tenets (says St. Epiphanius)
as with new ways, wherein when men are once engaged, they will proceed on with
hazard of safety, rather than return with any fear of infamy.

The LETTER.
I shall briefly speak something, concerning a separation from the Church of
England, in propounding these two Queries. First, whether ever the Church of
England was as a Nation or National Church, constituted according to the Word
of God, and Primitive Institution.

The ANSWER.
Such unnecessary Queries have discarded necessary Duties, which are become
pastimes and triumphs to our Romish Adversaries, Wounds and scandals to our
Reformed Brethren.

I shall not cavil at the terms of the Question, though justly liable to
exception (as a Nation being a civil consideration, as a Church a spiritual)
but I affirm the National Church of England to be constituted according to the
Word of God, and Primitive Institution.

I shall not act the Samaritan, Joseph. Antiq. l. 9. c. 15. l. 11. c. 8.
who would be reputed a Jew, when Judaism was resplendent, flourished; but in
its Umbrage and Captivity had no portion, no interest in Israel. Having owned
and reverenced the Church of England as a chaste Matron, as a venerable Mother
in her luster, I shall not desert, nor brand her as an impure Harlot in her
Eclipse. I imagine her pathetically expostulating with you in this Assault, as
Coriolanus's Mother (in Livy) did with her hostile Son.

The LETTER.
If it was, whether it be not so degenerated and defaced from a true Gospel
Institution, that a man cannot safely walk therein, and partake of the Holy
Things of God without sin?

The ANSWER.
Your twisted Query is a Fallacy ( Fallacia plurium interrogationum) a compound
of variety, of contrariety (at least in consequence) of ingredients. A Church
is not degenerated without a charge of the corruption, the stain of
depravation: A Church may be defaced by the freckles of affliction, by the
scars of persecutions.

The Beauty of the Piety of the Church of England is clouded, the Feature
disfigured, by the Obstructions of the times.

In this consideration of solemnity, Seges est ubi Troja fuit. But an afflicted
eclipsed is not a degenerated, depraved Church. If your self be degenerated
from her profession, your question resembles the fond imaginations of Harpaste,
who being deprived of her sight, would not be persuaded, her self was blind,
but that the room was dark.

There may be in Tertullians Judgment, Duae caecitatis species concurrunt, ut
qui non vident quae^unt, videre videautur quae non sunt. Tert. in Apol. ad Gent.
a confidence of two sorts of blindness intellectual, to discern a depravation
which is not, and not to see that perfection which is.

The Calamities of the Church of England are not to be imputed to her for
crimes. Is the less Christian, because she owns Christ's Badge, and wears his
Livery the Cross. The participation of her holy things is not unholy. It is no
sin to communicate with her in these, but to separate from her. To prevent an
imaginary guilt of Pollution by others; beware lest you incur a real guilt of
Schism (by separation) in your self. It is the wily artifice of Satan, though
probably you neither ken, nor dread it.

-- Sic notus Ulysses. Virgil.
In this nicety of severity you supererogate exceeding the Apostolical
prescription, Ephesians. 5. 11.
Have no fellowship with the fruitless works of darkness, Ergo non prohibetur
omnis consuetudo cum impiis sed omne commercium cum operibus little impiis and
tenebrosis, Zanch. in Ephesians. 5. 11.
(The works not the workers) unless you intend to quit universally all society
with the World.

The Sacred Charge (nay Charm) of a Sacred Life is cast in the same mould. 2.
Tim. 2. 19. Signainter dixit, ib iniquitate non iniquis Estius.
Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from evil. From the
quality the action not the agent, the sin not the sinner; Unless as
Constantinus reproved Acesius, Sacrat. Ecc. Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Sozom. l. 1. c.
22.
you will erect a ladder for your separation to mount Heaven alone.

The LETTER.
Touching the first Query, I have this to say: First, Primitive Institution the
first Apostolical Church, Acts 2. 42. from the verses before I gather the
matter of it, to be Converts, and no ordinary Work on their hearts neither, 37,
38, 39, verses joining all together, it holds forth that they were, and so all
to whom the promise belongs (which is a Church Legacy) ought to be called
Converts.

The ANSWER.
That first Apostolical Institution does not justify your separation, your
Argument may be retorted. Some have hence proved the lawful constitution of
those Churches you separate from. By an outward profession, which is the result
of their Communication, you allege that they were Converts. Were they real
Converts or Professional? If real, this ingrafts them in the invisible Church,
as professional they were interested in the visible Church. This Profession
claimed the Appellation to be called Converts. But you argue that they were
real Converts, because no ordinary work wrought on their hearts. It is (...):
They were pricked in their hearts: They had some sting of conscience, some
gripings of remorse at St. Peter's Sermon. Reprobates are not always destitute
of these corrosive Anxieties. Matthew. 3. 2. 27. 3.
Compunction of heart does not amount to conversion (unless you will confound
the critical differences of (...), Semper cum (...) cohacret (...) sed (...),
declarat post aliquem tem factam anxium esse, Beza in Matthew. 3.
and (...) warranted by the Evangelists) It is a preparative to it, it is not
an accomplishment of it.

In this instance it is expressed generally of all the Auditors without any
limitation, Vide Erasm. in 2 Cor. 8.
in 37 verse ( Now when they had heard this, they were pricked in their hearts)
But it is qualified, restrained, ( They that gladly received his word were
baptized) in the 41. verse.

If both qualifications of a bitter compunction, and a cheerful attention be
linked, yet they will not complete them to be true Converts. Ananias and
Saphira are computed Members of this Congregation, you will not grant a true
Conversion where there is a Recidivation. Their first Profession is censured
Dissimulation.

The LETTER.
(2.) How they were gathered into order, by withdrawing themselves, yea, and
that from a Church, not from Heathens, but from a froward Generation, such as
many professing are, as great enemies to Christ as ever they were, though not
in the same manner. For those who will not have Christ to be their King to rule
over them, are as great enemies to Christ, as those that will not have him
their Jesus to save them, Matthew. 19. 14, and 27. Phil. 3. 18, 19.

The ANSWER.
I grant they were gathered into order, though your Medium does not infer it.
The Text sets it out Parainetically (St. Peter's admonition) not Historically
(the execution the practice of it, in the 40 verse) However they withdrew
themselves not from a Church (if you intend by a Church a Christian Assembly)
but from a Synagogue.

If from a Church in this Notion, you contradict your self, this was not then
the first Primitive Institution (I suppose in your construction, first
Apostolical.) Before this numerous shole caught in the Fisher of Souls Net, the
Church after our Saviors Passion is summed up, comprehending one hundred and
twenty Members. To collect three thousand out of a Church, of an hundred and
twenty were as prodigious Logic, as Arithmetic. I pray weigh the importance
of the inference touching this Primitive Institution. They withdrew from a
Synagogue; (from Jews) therefore Christians must withdraw from Christians. They
gathered to the Church, therefore a Church must be gathered from a Church.

Such deductions are ropes of Sand, arena sine calce, as Domitian censured
Senecas concise uncemented expressions (an incoherence more laudable in
sentences than proofs) but not to digress. Matthew. 12. 34.
That froward Generation mentioned were especially the Scribes and Pharisees,
Matthew. 3. 7.
our Saviors professed embittered adversaries. Himself titles them a generation
of Vipers, and the Baptist so salutes them: It is (...) in the 40 verse, Escape
from the temporal imminent destruction of Jerusalem (like the Angels counsel to
Lot to quit Sodom) lest you actually perish in their infidelity, Genesis 19. 17.
in their impenitency.

Because those Disciples were advised to unshackle themselves of their Judaical
fetters, who disclaimed the Messiah, crucified him, who reputed him an
Impostor, a Conjurer, a Malefactor.

Will you hence conclude a separating from those Christian Brethren, who
acknowledge him the Lamb of God (both Priest and Sacrifice) and the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah; both a Savior and Avenger? But here you blast and doom our
Professors ( Many professing Christ are as great enemies as they were) Our
practical enmity (in the Church of England) is too too great, however it is in
infirmity, not in obstinacy; we humbly appeal to the Throne of Grace, of candor
with the Apostle. What we would do, do we not, and what we would not, that do
we. We dare not divorce those Attributes God himself has wedded. His Mercy is
sharpened with Justice, that we be not presumptuous, and his Justice candid with
Mercy (like a sugared Pill) that we be not chilled with despair.

We own we reverence him as a Sovereign as Christ, and when being clogged with
frailties, our obedience faulters, we have recourse to him as Jesus a Savior.

Without this Divine Sanctuary, both you and we are exposed to be condemned, as
lewd wretched Caitiffs.

The Sacred Testimonies produced by you, are miserably misapplied. The first,
Matthew. 19. 14. Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.

If you expound this literally, it is valid for the Baptism of Infants, it
strikes not us, but the Anabaptists. If you interpret it figuratively for those
that are not plumed with pride, not envenomed with rancor. This Character at
the first blush suits not with the grain of your separation. Though I shall not
charge, not revile any ( per me equidem sint omnia protinus alba) yet I would
humbly admonish all. It is not the die of meekness and lowliness, to justify
your selves, and condemn others.

Your next Testimony is Matthew. 19. 27. Behold we have forsaken all, and
followed thee. This squares better with the condition of the Church of England,
than of your separation, for that has improved, not empaired your
Temporalities. Plead this when you are Confessors, or Martyrs, not before.

Your third Testimony is Phil. 3. 18, 19. Many walk, Sub nomine Christi
Judaismum praedicantes colendum Amb. m. 3. pa. 19.
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies
to the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly,
their shame, who mind earthly things.

In the Judgment of Expositors the Apostle there descyphers Jewish Seducers or
Christians Judaising, enemies to the Cross of Christ, Inimici crucis quia ne
quid paterentur propter Christum, miscebant cum Christo Mosem, and praedicabant
necessariam esse circumcisionem, Gal. 6.
who would shelter their Religion with Circumcision to prevent persecution. Hac
in part gratificantes Judaeis. Zanch. in 3. ph. vide Aquin. Estium. Aret.
Pisc. etc.
(Judaism being tolerated after Christianity was condemned) who would not be
damnified by the Gospel, who like Cameleons assumed all shapes; fashioned their
Tenets and Principles to Emergencies, who eeked out Christ with Moses.

Though we are abundantly vicious in the Church of England, yet this guilt is
not to be fixed on our score, let it stick where it will.

I beseech you with melting bowels, do not thus dally with Gods Sacred Oracles
(as you expect the solace of present Grace, and future Bliss) let them not be
heaped but weighed. Deal not with the estimate of them, as of counters for to
signify what you fancy.

The LETTER.
(3) By the means and manner of their Conversion willingly ((...), verse 41.)
verbo non ferro, which is Gods way of planting: But Antichrists volumus;
mandamus, statuimus, by humanc Power and Edicts, so I conceive most of Englands
Converts are, the noise of axes and hammers, have been much heard in the
building, be they what they will, knowledge, grace, conscience or none, come in
they must, subject they must; and thus whole Nations become Churches, and many
Churches in a day contrary to those, Psalm. 110. 3. 2 Es. 1. 2. Zach. 4. 6. Rev.
12. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 9. 13.

The ANSWER.
My Judgment (at least my Genius) prompts me to approve much rather directive,
than coactive expedients in Religion; yet the best Worthies of the Church
Ancient and Modern, allow both to have their fit seasons and operations. The
Word is the Planting, Inoculating, but the sword is the Cutting, Pruning
Instrument. This may lop off dead branches, though it cannot graft the living:
Your instance of St. Peter's cheerful Auditors concerns the first structure, not
the repair of Religion (the Conversion, not the Restoration) We must
distinguish the constituting, and the reforming of a Church, betwixt Infidels
and Heretics; betwixt the ignorance of Unbelievers not informed, and the
stubbornness of Misbelievers, after they are convinced: betwixt those that
being erroneous vent speculative innocent Tenets, and these that broach
pestilent fundamental Heresies, or maintain practical Impieties, Enormities;
nay, Lips. in Polite*
even in these with Lipsius betwixt Errones and turbones, betwixt those that
are bono animo errantes (in Lactantius words) those that are imprudently
seduced, and those that impudently seduce.

As to some of the Branches, the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain: He may
exercise a coercive penal Power, as to the means, though not immediately to the
end; to the profession of what men believe, though he cannot constrain the
belief of what men profess.

The Mosaical Laws were capital against Idolaters and Blasphemers. This
Authoritative coercive severity in Religion, Levit. 24. 15, 16.
as it was prescribed by God, Deuteronomy. 17. 5.
so it was practiced by Nehemiah, Nehem. 13. 21, 22. By Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.
32, 2. By Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 4. Even Manasses, after he was reclaimed, was
enflamed with this Zeal. Christian Princes trod their steps.

The spiritual penalties enacted by the four first general Councils (against
Arrius, Nestorius, Macedonius, Eutyches) were ratified by temporal of Christian
Emperors. Euseh. Hist. Bech. l. 7. c. 29.
To omit Samosatenus, sentenced by Aurelianus Manes. -- But I forbear. In this
copious field, -- Inopem me copia fecit.

I shall add only the Donatists chastised by the Sanctions of Constantinus,
Constantius, Valentinus, Gratianus, Theodosius. This reiterated, reinforced
rigor against the Donatists, Aug. Iph. 48.
was at first resented by St. Austin, but upon second thoughts vindicated, it
having proved effectual for the reclaiming of many Donatists by their own
confession.

Those very men, who have bitterly inveighed at an Imperial, legal, moderate
severity against the Factors, (...)
for exploded, condemned Heresies; yet have embraced all opportunities, August.
l. 1. contra Petis. ca. 24. 27. Baron. Tom. 2. Anno 348. Sleidan. de Cottons
3d. vial. p. 19. 20.
to act tumultuous, furious cruelties upon the Assertors of the most approved
renowned Tenets. Witness the Arrians in Egypt and Palastine, the
Circumcelliones in Africa, the Anabaptists in Germany. Mr. Cotton vehemently
pressed this Divinity in New England.

I hope you will not brand all the recited precedents with the black aspersion
of Antichrists volumus, mandamus.

Converts of the Church of England, though derided in your Letter, were not
Captives, not fettered but taught, not hurried, enforced, but persuaded
preached to their Religion.

You object the noise of Axes and Hammers to be heard in the Building. This
noise is no solecism in erecting a Fabric, no nor in repairing it, and
reducing into order a beam that is starting out. But I pray unpartially
recollect your own station. How edifying is the noise of Drums and Guns? Not
the Ordinances of the Temple, but the Camp (A Church Militant without a Trope)
Had not Regiments been Arguments, and Battles Proofs, and Victories
Demonstrations, your separation might have been scanted, for Proselites in this
Climate, quickly have shifted Scenes, and like Cato on the Theater vanished as
soon as it appeared. So that the Church of England is rather conquered, than
confuted, not foiled, gladio oris, sed ore gladii.

Power and terror are the Pillars to support your separation, wealth and honor
the allurements, the embellishments to engratiate it. Such prevalent Principles
may fortify, not justify your separation. By this Martial Topic the Bible
must truckle to the Alcoran in the Greek Churches.

But you tax the Church of England for a promiscuous, ungracious reception,
compulsion (without regard of Knowledge, Conscience, Grace) This confident
Objection seconds the virulent imputation of the Romanists.

Were it so, that many Churches were like Mishromes of a days growth, that
whole Nations became Churches ((...)) by heaps, God were to be the more
magnified for so miraculous a conversion. Acts 2. 41.
Were not three thousand Souls the Converts of one Sermon.

In so numerous a Congregation there was no possibility of St. Peter's punctual
satisfaction of the personal knowledge, conscience of each. If you look back to
the Baptists Church, there appears a larger confluence. Then went out to him
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and they were
baptized of him in Jordan, Matthew. 3. 5, 6.
confessing their sins.

To close with you. Do you charge the Church of England in its first
Conversion, or Reformation. In its first Conversion there was no external force
or power (nor (...) nor (...)) no influence but of conscience, no Trumpet
sounded, but of the word, (that of Isaiah) no Sword brandished, but of the
Spirit (that of St. Paul) In its Reformation Catechisms and Sermons took place
of Edicts and Proclamations.

The Reformation was initiated by Henry the Eighth, improved by Edward the
Sixth, completed by Queen Elizabeth. The Scriptures being translated into
English, many gross Errors were gradually discountenanced, and at length fairly
discarded (Papal Supremacy, Pardons, Merits, Images, Pilgrimages) under Henry
the Eighth, Edward the Sixth made a further progress. Sanguis Martyrum Semen
Ecclesiae, Tertul.
During the storm of the Marian Persecution, the Blood of the Martyrs became
the Seed of the Church. After that Tempest was blown over, the Pious Confessors
reduced from confinement and banishment, became zealous Propagators of the
Reformed Religion. Foreign Protestant Divines were entertained in England
(Peter Martyr and Bucer for purging the Universities, that those eminent
Fountains might be no longer corrupted) Moses and Aaron both co-operated,
Commissioners assisted with Preachers were dispersed into every Canton of the
Nation (the Bench being steered by the Pulpit.) The people were instructed,
weaned, not constrained, not scared out of their superstition.

If you aim at Truth, not at Triumph, to be furnished for satisfaction, not
cavil; the Historical Narratives of Bishop Goodwin and Cambden: Foxes Acts and
Monuments will plentifully inform you, in the holy and wary steps of the
Reformation. Happy it is for the Church any way to be refined from its dross.
It better becomes us to magnify the Divine Mercy, for the effects, the Fruits
of so blessed a Reformation, than to quarrel for the Instruments, the
Formalities, punctilioes of it, and inconsiderately to gratify our common
adversary.

After your light skirmish of invectives (conscience or none, etc.) you muster
up your grand Battalio Texts of Scripture, for a more vigorous assault, Psalm.
110. 3. Thy people shall come willingly at the time of assembling.

This Testimony argues for voluntary assmbling, not separating. Such were the
crowds of the Primitive Congregations, whose Allelujalis sounded like claps of
Thunder (says St. Jerome) Thus Gods people the Jews thronged into his Temple.

Some desert our Congregations, because they seem holy; disgusting our Sacred
Public Ordinances out of their real profaneness, and others abandon them,
because our Congregations, by reason of their mixtures, seem profane, out of a
formal critical Holiness. These extremes exempted, the rest assemble with an
alacrity of piety, who are affected with David's solace to rejoice, when any
say, Let us go to the house of the Lord.

Take the Psalmist in what acception you please. Statim ad obsequium praesto,
licet violento imperio non cogantur. Calv. in 110. 3.
Because those that are regenerated, are convened, and not constrained. Will
you hence infer, that the unregenerate cannot by Edicts of Magistrates be
constrained to the helps, and requisite means that they may be regenerated.
They may be compelled to be assembled, though not to be reclaimed (to come in,
though not to worship when they are come in) Nay, unwilling Auditors may become
willing Converts. St. Aastin entered St. Ambrose Church with an itching ear to
carp, August. in Confess.
he departed with a bleeding heart to relent.

This Answer sufficiently manifests the invalidity of your second Testimony,
Es. 2. 1, 2. which is a prediction of the propagation of the Gospel, All
nations shall flow to it, in the 2. verse. They shall serve God as St. Jerome
expounds it. Both verses flourish out the solemnity of an unanimous
Congregation, not the privacy of a disjoynted separation. If you will
appropriate these Prophesies to your selves (like Homers Iliads contracted in a
Nut-shell) I pray exclude not the next verse. Swords broken to plowshares, and
spears to pruning books. The next text cited is Zach. 4. 6. Neither by an army
nor strength, but my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

This portion of Scripture is the interpretation of a Vision. Zerub. typus
Christi Jun. and Tremel. in ann. De Zerubbabil (i.) de Christo Nativitatem
Christi praedicit qui nullo opere humano sed ex Spiritu Sancto conceptus, and
natus ex virgin. Vatabl. 11. cap. 4. Zach. v. 6. Non in Exercitu neque in
multitudine bellatorum sed in Spiritu Dei reductum populum and before
reducendum and adversarios vastandos. Hier. in Zach. 4. 6,
Commentators apprehend Zorobabel, to whom the Vision was interpreted to be the
Type of Christ. It is, says Vatablus, a Prophecy of his Nativity, without
humane concurrence. ( Mary being over shadowed by the Holy Ghost) others
expound it Historically of the Jews rescued from their Captivity, only by the
Divine Power, or Prophetically of the Church, guided and guarded soly by the
Sacred Spirit. However, this does not cotton with the web of your separation,
that has a Martial Countenance and Assistance.

Whereas the Church of England has no arm of flesh to strengthen it, no Army
but the Heavenly Militia, no General but the Lord of Hosts, no Banners but the
Cross.

Your third Citation, Quot verba, tot Mysteria, Hieron.
Rev. 12. 15, 16.) is a Mystery, the Application a Riddle. I must desire you to
be your own Oedipus. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood
after the woman: that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.

What will you hence conclude, (...)
therefore compulsion is not allowable in Religion. Indeed I understand not the
inference, and blush not to confess it.

Upon this occasion, let me inoffensively become an humble importunate suitor,
that since you piously detest vain Oaths (wherein I highly commend your
severity, and passionately desire, and press the imitation among our selves) so
you would also dread the rash quotation of Scriptures. They are offenses of the
same batch, breaches of the same Precept. And if such Citations be applied to
erroneous Opinions, it is to make God a stale for Satan, to put the Divine
Stamps to the Devils Merchandise, to make Heaven a disguise, a varnish for Hell.

Your last Proof is 2 Cor. 9. 13. Whiles by the experiment of this ministration
they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and
for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men.

It is (...), For (...), hoc charitatis officio palam declarata, Beza in 2 Cor.
9. 13.
for the manifestation of compassion, God being glorified whilst the poor are
relieved, Graces being testified by Alms. Set this on the Tenter-hooks to be
racked, what deduction can you wrest to your advantage.

The Corinthians were voluntarily charitable (no extorted bounty) when they
were converted, what is this to the means how they were converted? If it were
so, yet I formerly granted the means of the first Conversion to Christianity to
be persuasive, not coactive.

The LETTER.
They are noted by their perseverance, (...).

The ANSWER.
To indulge to you, that they all persevered to the end (though that is not
recorded, and I formerly specified the revolt of some) this does not wound the
constant Members of the Church of England, nor blemish the Church for those
that are inconstant. If you object this, as a cognizance of a separate Church;
I answer, you must yet plead your innocence, and leave the apology of
perseverance (if you merit it) to another Generation. But alas, does not the
present Generation testify a daily Apostasy among your selves. Is not the
abuse of Liberty by a licentiousness of profaneness turned blasphemy.
Brownists corrupted to Anabaptists, Anabaptists to Seekers, Seekers to Quakers.
What can the next lees be? but the dreggs of Atheism, and Barbarism, unless the
Jesuit angle in our troubled Waters. I relate not this scurrilously to scoff,
but mournfully to condole. It is not the Sarcasm of my Pen, but the anguish of
my soul. Hereby God is dishonored, weak Christians perverted, the Protestant
Religion scandalled, the Church of England, which was the envy of Christendom,
become the obloquy of it.

The LETTER.
Lastly, who were added 47 verse. Those that were in an outward appearance in a
state of salvation, which we cannot say of most Parochial Churches, as yet they
live, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

The ANSWER.
If you press the same instance of the first institution, as your Method and
Conclusion imports, that addition is expressed in the 41 verse. No description
precedes in that verse, but that they willingly heard the Word, and were
baptized. And the same day were added (to the Church in Bezas translation)
three thousand souls. The next verse denotes their progress after admittance to
be Members of the Church. All those Fruits recited of Gods Sacred Ordinances.
The Apostles doctrine, Acts. 2. 42.
fellowship, distribution, breaking of bread and prayers, grow in our Parochial
Assemblies. Though these our clusters may be sower Grapes to your separate
Palats, yet we hope, being sweetened by Christ merits, they may be accepted as
delicious Sacrifices by a gracious God.

The 47. verse expressly insisted on in your Letter, relates the succeeding
daily spreading of the Gospel, and therein the recompense of the Converts, not
the appearance of their Conversion ( And the Lord added to the Church daily such
as should be saved.)

You deny most of our Parochial Churches to be in the state of Salvation. They
stand or fall to their own Master; your self must appear before the same
dreadful Tribunal. 1 Cor. 4. 5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light
the hidden things of darkness. I pray suspend your judgment till the Day of
Judgment. Then the Sheep shall be sorted, severed from the Goats. Till then
touching the damnation of others it becomes you to be a Sceptick rather than a
Critic. Those you condemn have the seed of immortality (the Word of God) they
have the Seals of the Divine Promises (the Sacraments) they invoke God for
remission, for whatever they offend him in. To prevent an eternal wrack, they
cast Anchor on the Merits of their Redeemer, ( Whosoever believes on him,
shall not perish, Job. 3. 16.
but have everlasting life.) They believe, though with much frailty; yet they
implore mercy for that frailty; beseeching God to strengthen their weak belief,
to help their unbelief, to pardon their misbelief. This is a state of
infirmity, not of infidelity.

As to your exception. There may be a doctrinal state of Salvation, where there
is not a practical evidence of Sanctification. There may be Sap in the Root,
when there is no Verdure in the Branches, as in David, who weltered in lust and
blood for the space of a year (as the Jewish Doctors compute) and yet trod not
out of the pale, even of the visible Church: How deformed would the complexion
of David's Soul appear in the glass of your censure (his lineaments being
defaced with Murder and Adultery) yet the Divine Character is a specious
testimony of approbation. A man after Gods own heart. To omit Solomon, whom
notwithstanding the uncomely hue of an unholy life, you will not confidently
exclude from being interested; owned among Gods people, nor yet in a hovering
suspense subscribe to the Academick irresolution of Petrus Tenorius, Lovin. in
Proleg. in Eccles.
who caused him to be painted in his Chapel, one half in Heaven, the other in
Hell. I shall recommend in this case to your serious consideration two pregnant
instances. The first is of Asa who is recorded by the Holy Ghost, 2. Chron. 15.
17.
That his heart was perfect all his days (or upright as most Translations
express) before the Lord (for the illustration of the Original) He worshipped
God all his days, Puro cord deum coluit. Vatabl.
with a pure and sincere heart, says Vatablus. And yet in the next Chapter,
offenses of a very black grain are charged upon him, his confidence in an army
of flesh, resting on the King of Aram, in the seventh verse his ungracious
indignation, incensed he was against the Prophet, whom he imprisoned ( Then Asa
was wroth with the Seer, and put him into prison, verse. 10.) His tyrannical
oppression ( He oppressed certain of the people at the same time, verse. 10.)
Lastly, his desertion of God in his visitation ( He sought not the Lord in his
disease, but to the Physicians, verse 12. My second instance is Lot, who in his
deportment toward Abraham upon the difference started, acquitted himself
neither humble nor charitable, whose magnified Hospitality was tainted with
impiety, an unholy overture (to be his Daughters Pandor for to be a Protector
of Strangers) that checked with the Principles of Nature, and of Grace. But his
distemper and his incest were monstrous blemishes, as if he would transfer
Sodom to Zoar; a reiterated distemper and incest, wherein his drunkenness did
not abate, but aggravate the guilt and horror of his wantonness (the cause
being directly voluntary, though not the effect.) In this addition this
cumulation of wickedness, the offense was the more heinous, because Gods
deliverance was exceeding gracious. The meditation of the burning of Sodom
should have kindled his zeal, not his lust, should have procured his Holiness,
not his dissoluteness; yet notwithstanding these Crimes and Prodigies, St Peter
recites him with no branded Epithet. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
It Is just Lot, and vexed his righteous soul, (not his incestuous.)

From these Instances I observe, that God judges not as man, not according to
the outward integrity, but the inward sincerity. A manifest offender may be a
secret penitentiary. I press this only to moderate your rigor, to allay your
acrimony in censuring, not to animate the security of others in sinning. I wish
I could write and speak like Pericles, Thunder and Lightning to terrify, to
blast their profaneness.

But you prove your black doom out of 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know you not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate persons, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Parishes I hope are not Idolaters, etc. Suppose your application to some
parochial Members. The Apostle threatened not so much actual as habitual
customary sinners, Joh. 3. 8.
as in St. John's determination ( He that commits sin is of the Devil) It Is
(...), He that drives wickedness as a trade, contrives it as a design, pursues
it as a delight. However you understand your quotation (whether of such as are
actually or habitually vicious) the menace is not fixed on the Delinquent,
unless impenitent. Our Parochial Churches cannot be pronounced by you to have
split on this Rock of impenitency.

The LETTER.
Thus far concerning that first institution, and so this practice was followed
in all the Churches, that were constituted, none admitted Members but visibles,
(I do not mean real Saints) which is only known to God, and herein the Apostles
themselves, who had a far greater spirit of discerning than we have, were
deceived, but as far as we can judge by a well guided, not blinded charity.

The ANSWER.
If your Rule for admission be rigorously pressed, how can men of different
judgments, and repugnant spirits be admitted into separated Churches? Are not
Contentions, Divisions, carnal brands? ( Whereas there is among you envying,
and strife, and divisions, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
are you not carnal?)

The visibility of Church Members and Saints is no more compatible with the
profession of gross Errors and Heresies in Doctrine, than the manifestation of
foul vices of enormities in practice.

And yet I presume you will not unchurch at once all the Anabaptists, and other
erroneous factious assemblies; nor among your selves exclude all such who have
been admitted, notwithstanding some spiritual sins, perhaps not undiscerned,
which if granted are pollutions of visible sanctity, no less than justly blamed
Carnalities.

As for the Apostolical practice objected, as a pattern not copied out by the
Church of England in admission of Members. I pray distinguish the times of the
infancy of a Church, and the proficiency, the growth of it. A proficiency of
age was required in the infancy of the Church, an infancy of age allowed to be
admitted in the proficiency of the Church (by Baptism.) For I understand no
other Church admission or imitation but that. Were persons in some measure
ripened for years and intellectuals only to be admitted Members of the Church
of England (as in the Apostles time) the dispute of a visible qualification
were no impertinency.

I pray add to this consideration the Constitution of the Church of England in
point of Confirmation (in imitation of the Primitive Purity of Christianity)
without this debarring, any reception to the Eucharist: Which to a calm
Opponent, will vindicate her admitting of Members, and embracing them. But to
return more closely to your own Track.

The first Constitution you insist on, does not prop your separation, no nor
yet the following practices you allege, but instance in no particulars
(Fallacies being fairly shrouded in Generalities.) What Visibility of Sanctity
was in Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13. He believed and was baptized, that is, he
professed, pretended that he believed.

There was no other visible Saintship conspicuous in Philip the Eunuch, before
his admission to the Church, Acts 9. 39, 40.
but a naked profession ( I believe that Jesus Christ is that Son of God.) The
Jailer and his Family were constituted Members of the Church (baptized) upon no
other sanctified account than their attention to the Gospel preached, and a
single exercise of compassion ( Washing the stripes of Paul and Silas.) Acts.
16. 32, 33.
Those additional Testimonies of rejoicing, and believing recorded in the 40
th. verse were improvements, perfections after their admission, not endowments,
qualifications before it.

It is indeed expressed of Cornelius and his Domestics, that they were
inspired, before they were baptized, ( The holy Ghost fell on them which heard
the word, Acts 10. 44.) Besides the extraordinary Season, well suiting with an
extraordinary inspiration; as for the appearing of this inspiring, speaking
with tongues, it was gratia gratis data, not gratum faciens (as the Schoolmen
distinguish) a Grace, a Gift for the edification of others, not for the
Salvation of themselves.

As touching real Saints, you acknowledge that the Apostles, who had a far
greater spirit of discerning than your selves, were deceived: They had a more
discerning, but under favor, a less condemning Spirit. Yours is the Spirit of
Eliah, not of Paul, of Moses, not of Christ: It savours of Mount Sina, not
Sion. The Apostles were deceived in misapprehending evil men to be good, but
you in misapprehending good men to be evil. They took Wolves for Sheep, because
in Sheeps clothing, because doctrinally Christians; But you take Sheep for
Wolves, because straggling, because practically Pagan. Nay, they are scarce
allowed to be Sheep, when themselves stray not out of the Fold, because mingled
with Wolves. This is the less innocent misconstruction. But you allege you are
directed by a well guided, not blinded Charity. That Charity that has the
Divine conduct is not like Lamia in Plutarch putting off the spectacles at
home, and putting them on abroad, but is dim without, Vox a Perperie fratribus
conficta quorum procacitas fabulis nobilitata.
and quick sighted within. Vaunts not it self, insults not, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
((...)) thinks not evil, Erasm. vel a nomine, (...) qu. (...), secundum
Hesych.
or imputes not evil to any (as Valla and Eras. interpret it ((...)) 1 Cor.
13. 5. Charity shall cover a multitude of faults, (1 Pet. 4. 8.) nay, an
universality; many for all, as all for many, being reciprocal Phrases in the
Scripture idiome. It has a present efficacy, does cover (according to the
Syriack and Vulgar Latin Translations.) This being compared with Prove. 10. 12.
(whence it is probably esteemed, to be transcribed) it must be understood of
the offenses of others. Charity does not light a Torch to blaze, but spread a
vail to conceal, to enwrap them in obscurity, and silence; rather resembling
Briareus with an hundred hands to relieve distresses; then Argos, with an
hundred eyes to epsy offenses. An humble merciful error (out of the Sphere of
our own Chage) is more reconcilable with a well guided Charity, than an over
severe censorious truth.

This Charity extenuates small lapses, Excusa intentio^nem si opus non potes;
puta ignorantiam, puta subreptionem, puta casum. Quod si omnem omnino
dissimulationem rei certitudo recusat, suade nihilominus ipse tibi, and dicito
apud temet ipsum: Vehemens nimis tentatio: Quid de me illa fecisset si
accepisset in me similiter potestatem. Bernard. sermon. 40. in Cantic.
aggravates not great, in doubtful cases is a candid interpreter, in manifest
crimes mourns, but condemns not. Take St. Bernards descant on your own note
(for the guidance of Charity) In the failing of others, excuse the intention,
if you cannot the action, charge it on the score of ignorance, surprizal,
casualty; If an offense be heinous, notorious, not to be defended or concealed,
reflect upon your self with this Application. The Temptation was over vehement,
if it had been in me thus prevalent, how had I been foiled. To conclude this
point, which alone may serve to unsting your separation. In your rigorous
sentencing of Parochial Churches, your Zeal may be greater than your Charity,
and that Zeal perhaps more enflamed than enlightened. Sit zelus discretus,
benevolus, constans. Gers.
Gerson requires to the temperature of Zeal, Prudence, Benevolence,
Perseverance.

The LETTER.
Parochial Churches, as confessed by Mr. Hooker and others, are not Jure
Divino, therefore of a humane constitution. I speak not of convenience but
necessity, that every one of a Parish, must be of a Church.

The ANSWER.
Mr. Hooker was a sober stickler for Unity and Uniformity, (...). But if my
memory be not a fraudulent Record, there is no such passage extant in his
Ecclesiastical Policy, though I confess it consonant to his weighty Judgment,
if rightly understood. The inconvenience of your separate Churches is a
consequence proved by your concession of the convenience of our Parochial
Churches. A convenience it is of great antiquity, and importance. I shall take
their rise in the Western Church from Evaristus in the beginning of the second
Century. Sabell. Enn. 7. l. 4. Platina in vit. Evarist. and Dion. besides the
testimony of Damas. Onuph. Polyd. Virg. de Invent.
They were afterward more dispersed and regulated by Dionysius in the year 267,
and by Marcellus in the year 305. From which date the Parochial Division was
generally embraced in all Christian Territories. Constantine the Great, the
first Christian Emperor did by a solemn Law suppress all separate Churches,
allowing no Religious Assemblies, but in Cathedral or Parochial Churches for
the prevention of clandestine Heresies and Schisms. Simplicius was round with
Victorinus, a famous Orator converted from Paganism to Christianity, but
sequestring himself from Parochial Congregations (I will not account you in the
Sacred List of Christians, unless I see you in the Church among them) A penalty
was enacted for absentors without necessary Diversions by the Elibertine
Council, Elib. Conc. Cant. 21.
the year 310. The Great Council of Chalcedon did debar any Ordination of
Ministers (...), Conc. Chalced. Can. 6.
without a particular Title, or interest, without a Parochial Charge. A
provident course (to restrain vagrant Levites) seconded, and reinforced by
diverse succeeding Councils. This was the wisdom of the Primitive Christians.
But you object, this amounts only to a humane constitution. A Parochial Church
is of a mixed nature; partly Divine, partly Humane. There is a threefold
consideration of a Divine Institution.

First, for the matter as well as the Power, the Author of it. This is Gods own
Law, simply and purely Moral, its subject being absolutely good in it self, if
commanded (in an Edict) absolutely evil in its self, if countermanded (in an
Interdict, a Prohibition.) This Law is universally reducible to a natural
dictate, a principle imprinted in the Souls of men: Of this stamp and mould are
the Branches of the Moral Law, the Precepts of both Tables.

Secondly. There is a Divine Constitution, not for the convincing equity of the
Matter, but the binding Authority of the Power, the external imposition of God,
as a Lawgiver. Such was Gods charge to our First Parents touching the
prohibited Fruit in Paradise; The eating whereof was not forbidden because
evil, but evil because forbidden.

3. Thirdly, a Constitution is Divine for the Matter, and not the Power, not
immediately, but mediately, when the Precepts of men are grounded upon the Laws
of God, on the Rules of Divine Equity.

In the present Question touching Parochial Churches, The constitution is not
entirely humane or positive (in the Schoolmens expression) It is Divine in the
third Consideration, because of its foundation. For though the circumstantial
individual respect (the present limits of Parishes as now sorted) be humane,
yet the substantial respect, that there be a regular limitation for bounds to
Ministers and People, is implicitly comprehended in these two grand
Apostolical Canons, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40.
Let all things be done to edification. Let all things be done decently, and in
order. The one being the spiritual Canon, the other the Ecclesiastical; or the
one diverting us from a pompous superstitious gayness, the other from a
disordered, unbeautified rudeness in Religion.

There is yet a more special Divine Foundation touching the substantial part.
That Pastors and Flocks should have their distinct Relations and Limits, this
being warranted by Apostolical Precept and Practice. Acts 14. 23. Apostoli
plantatas Ecclesias commiserunt propriis pastoribus, Jun. and Trem.
When Paul and Barnabas had ordained elders in every Church. They committed the
Churches they planted to several peculiar Pastors, as Junius and Tremelius
expound it. Thus St. Paul left Titus in Creet (which is titled by Homer (...),
Il. 2.
dignified with an hundred Cities, to ordain Elders in every City, 1 Tit. 5.
That so none should be destitute of its own Presbyter, (...). Theoph.
its constituted Pastor, its local settled Minister. Hereby the labor (in the
Ministerial Charge) becomes lighter, the care the exacter, says Theoph.

The Apostle knits together the mutual special tie of Duty, Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, Heb.
13. 17.
as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief, for that is not profitable for you.

These Duties cannot commodiously, conscienciously be discharged, without
distinction of charges, designation, restriction of places. Vigilance for souls
is obstructed by distance. The account also must needs be hudled, when the
charge is confused. The Apostles had a general Ecumenical commission qualified
with unparalled endowments (for Languages, for Miracles) suitable to such
dispersed, unbounded employments. The Time, Message, and Messengers were
extraordinary. This universal Embassy is not exemplary.

Our bounded Parochial Churches are but Copies of the Jewish division by
Synagogues, which though they were not of Divine Right a priori by Injunction,
yet they were a posteriori by the approbation of Christ, and the Apostles, and
of greater Antiquity, than the Temple it self. These Parochial Boundaries are
singular Expedients for Piety and Regularity, Psalm. 74. 8.
not only convenient but necessary (as to order and obedience in this Nation)
till there be a valid legal repeal of so valid and legal a constitution.

The LETTER.
If the godly in England, whether in the bound of Parishes or not, I mean
Professors in Doctrine, and Practice, though failing in some Circumstantials of
Discipline, be the Churches, we own no separation from them, but a reformation
we desire, and shall willingly sit down, and walk with such a people of such a
Parish, and then I suppose the separation lies on the other part, that have
withdrawn themselves from their first Covenant, Jude 19. there described. Such
are most of our people, Acts 5. 13.

The ANSWER.
You profess you will embrace the Society of Godly Professors in Doctrine and
Practice, though Parochial; I demand how far, perhaps for united Devotion and
Attention (for public Prayers and Sermons) not for Sacramental Duties (by the
mildest Principles of semiseparatism) there must be a Reformation of
Discipline, an exact Shibboleth, a new Covenant, a particular satisfaction for
the Holiness, the suitableness of disposition to precede, to qualify for
these. What do you indulge the most accomplished holiest Parochial Christian
more, than to a Mahumetan, an Indian, whom you will not deprive of these
Expedients for Conversion, as subservient to the collecting of a Church.

You will not separate from Doctrinal, and Practical Professors in Parishes;
but it is upon this tacit condition, that they separate from Parochial
Congregations. You will not communicate with them in such a mixture. So that
this solemn flourish, if sifted, will be resolved into the emptiest kind of
Fallacy, Petitio principii. The begging of the Question.

You transfer the separation on our Parochial Churches. This Divinity is as
Orthodox, as Copernicus his Philosophy (that the Earth moves, and the Sun
stands still) It is not unlike the Opt^ck mistake of those, that first set out
to Sea, who launching out of a Haven, imagine the Port the Shore moves, departs
from them, not they from the Port the Shore.

-- Terraeq urbesque recedunt. Virgil.
Beware lest your self be imbarqued in a floating Vessel, whilst the Church of
England is fixed on a Rock. It separates not from you, it was never a Branch of
your Tree, a Member of your Body, but you of its.

But you charge us with the cause of the separation, having withdrawn our
selves from our first Covenant. It is violated, not abrogated, though not
punctually observed, yet not absolutely renounced, a disobedience, but not a
defiance. Though withdrawn, yet we make our penitent approaches to the Throne
of Grace, to renew our Covenant of Baptism by the Eucharist.

What withdrawing do you pitch on to warrant your separating, not from
discipline: We never embraced yours. This is confessed by your selves, no
foundation of separation; Not from Doctrine: This you tax not. There remains
for the sole cause, a practical profaneness. This is a fallacious objection.
Non causa pro causa. A false cause for a true.

Were not the Sons of Eli practically vicious, 1 Samuel 2. 12.
scandalous Sons of Belial? yet the people that communicated with them, were
Gods people in the 29 th verse. Though men were induced to abhor the Sacrifices
for the Priests impieties in the 17 th verse, yet thereby they were tempted to
transgress ( You make the Lords people to transgress, Efficitis ne hic populus
veniat ad oblatas victimas.
in the 24 verse) This transgression was a separation, a deserting the
Assembly. Not to serve the Lord (according to the Septuagint) to wit, Vatabl.
(...). Sept.
publicly with the Congregation.

This visible profaneness being recorded in every visible Church, specified in
Scripture without the effect, or attempt of severing, disjoynting in
celebrating Gods Ordinances, renders your separation as unexcusable, as it is
unwarrantable.

Adams Family was the one and only visible Church ( una and unica) for a time;
therein there was a Cain as well as an Abel, both sacrificed, though both were
not sanctified.

Cains pollution was not covert. Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock,
and the fat thereof, Genesis 4. 4. (...), says Philo, the first and the best. But
of Cain it is expressed, he brought of the Fruit, not the first Fruits, (...),
says Chrysostom, what first came to hand, his oblation was scanted for the
quantity (according to the Sceptuagint, and the Greek Fathers) at least tainted
in quality. (...). Sept.
In Abraham's Family (a visible Church) there was an Ismael as well as Isaac (in
Isaac's house an Esau, as well as Jacob. Among the Patriarchs ( Jacobs Issue)
Simeon and Levi, with Joseph and Benjamin. In Noah's Ark (a Type of the Church)
there was a Cham, a Judas among the Apostles, a Nicholas among the Deacons.

To omit the manifest mixtures of the Jewish, Corinthian, Galatian, Asian
Churches (recited in the second and fifth Chapters of the Revel.) Each whereof
was a Grove wherein every Tree was not a Myrtle, an Edifice, wherein every
Stone was not a Marble. The Church delineated by the Apostles Pencil, Ephesians. 5.
27.
without spot and wrinkle, is to be apprehended as adorned by Christ's imputed
Merits, as with resplendent Robes, not as dressed with its own sordid Rags,
not as clad with its own frailties, stained with its own deformities. It Is
expressed in the front of the verse (That he might present it to himself a
glorious Church) Christ presents the Church specious, glorious in himself, but
the Church exhibits not it self thus to the World.

The Church described holy and without blemish, ubicunque in his libris
commemoravi Ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam, non sic accipiendum est
quasi jam sit, sed que praeparatur, ut sit quando apparebit etiam gloriosa.
August. Retract. l. 2. c. 8. Sine macula and ruga non est in praesentia sed
erit in die Jesu Christi. Pet. Mart. in l. Com.
in the close of the same 27 verse, is not Militant but Triumphant. The one is
a Casket of true and false Pearls; the other a Cabinet of true Diamonds and
Rubies to be selected and severed from the Counterfeit and adulterate, in the
day that God shall make up his Jewels. But of this only (...), by way of
illustration, as an anticipation of an objection.

I proceed to those Texts you cite to justify your separation, Ep. of Jude 19.
These men separate themselves, being sensual, having not the Spirit. This is
generally applied by Expositors to Sectaries. Take heed this is not brutum
fulmen, if rightly apprehended, it is not to be sported but trembled at. We may
play the Sophisters with men, but cannot delude our God.

This is a Bill to indict, no Plea to vindicate your separation; it is active,
not passive, you separate your selves, (a spice of singularity) discard others.
The Apostle shadows out the occasion of a real separation, an imaginary
perfection keeping aloof from sensual men (as refined from such dross) as being
spiritual. But the Apostle asswageth this tumor, blasts this haughty fancy,
checks it as a carnal symptom (being sensual, having not the Spirit.)

I shall recommend to you Mr. Perkins Exposition of this Testimony, Mr.
Perkins, on the Epistle of St Jude v. 9.
comparing it with his Comment to the same effect on the first Chapter of the
Epistle to the Galatians the 2 verse, and his Doctrinal Observation is this (I
shall only abbreviate that descant he has enlarged) It is a great sin for a
man to separate himself from the Assembly of Gods people, Heb. 10. 25. It is
our duty to keep Unity, Ephesians. 4. 3. Upon this Occasion he starts this Question.

Whether if there be Errors in the Church, It is Mr. Perkins express
amplification on the Epistle to the Galations the first Chapter and second
verse. Is faults appear in the lives of Ministers and People, so long as true
Religion is taught, it is a Church, and so to be esteemed, and the Ministers
must be heard, Matthew. 23. 1.
we may separate our selves? His Judicious Resolution is this. Errors are
either practical in Manners, or doctrinal in Tenets. For vicious Manners we may
not separate; Lot did it not. The Jews might not do it from the Scribes and
Pharisees, because they sat in Moses Chair.

Though we may not separate from such corrupt persons in the public
Assemblies, yet we may in private conversation, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

If the Church err in Doctrine, it is to be considered whether the error be in
a point substantial, fundamental or not? if in a point substantial,
fundamental, whether upon infirmity, or obstinacy? if of frailty, we may not
separate, as in Corinth and Galatia.

If a Church err in the foundation openly, obstinately, a separation may be
made, 1 Timothy 4. 5. (yet the error being in some, not in all, it remains a
Church as Corinth did.)

If the Error be in smaller points, not fundamental, we may not separate: They
which build upon the foundation of hay and stubble of erroneous opinon, may be
saved, 1 Cor. 3. 25.

Mr. Perkins concludes that no man can separate from the Church of England
with a good Conscience, since it teaches, obeys, believes the Doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles. In the most justifiable cause of Separation he
requires examination, conviction, censure, (or condemnation.) To separate
without examination is not Piety but Frenzy. Arist. l. 1. Eth.
No man can judge aright of that (says the Philosopher) whereof he is
ignorant. No man can well determine, what he does not well discuss. Qui ad
pauca respicit de facili pronunciat.

2. To separate without conviction is levity, to be like clouds, hovering with
every sudden gale of Doctrine.

Mr. Perkins condemns the want of Moderation in those, that condemn the Church
of England without sufficient conviction.

If any object admonition by Books; take the same Authors resolute assertion,
his asseveration for a satisfactory reply.

I say again, there are grosser faults in some of those Books, than any of the
faults that they reprove in the Church of England, and that Books are not fit
to convince, Mr. Perkins on the Epistle to the Galatians the first Chapter and
second verse.
especially a Church.

3. To separate without a Juridical Censure, an Authoritative, a Synodical
Doom, is at least a hasty irregularity.

Otherwise Separation paves a Causey to Confusion; Schisms will be endless,
Synods needless.

If two or three Members of your new Collected Church, should separate from
your Church, branding it to be a corrupt Church, not lawfully to be
communicated with; your selves would esteem those two or three to be very
inconsiderable for number or power, for to be balanced with that Collected
Church, whereof they are, or, as you allege, ought to be Members. I pray
consider, the disproportion is far greater betwixt your Collected Church, and
the National Church of England.

To wind up this bottom: That you have been prudent in Examination, shall be
(...), pass for granted; but it remains for (...), whether your conviction of
the Church of England has been sufficient, or your censure your condemnation.
Nay, it is a Question put out of all Question negatively, since that the Church
of England has not been disproved by any Demonstrative Arguments upon
Scripture Principles, to be no truly constituted Church; nor yet condemned by
any Synod. Till then I pray forbear to separate from it. I shall add by way of
Prolepsis. If you here object, that in being thus scrupulous, you may be
irrecoverably involved in guilt, for want of a Synodical Condemnation, which is
not in your power. I answer, In case of this defect there is allowable only a
partial Separation in the Church, not a total from the Church. Or a Negative
Separation, by not asserting, abetting, countenancing, owning erroneous Tenets,
or vicious enormous Practices; not a positive separation by constituting a new
visible Church, by deserting the Old in its Religious Duties and Assemblies.

The best Christians in the Church of Corinth and Galatia, nay, St. Paul
himself did separate no otherwise; when there was conspicuous in the one a
tincture of Paganism, in the point of Resurrection; in the other a spot of
Judaism, in point of Justification. They severed doctrinally (as to those
particulars) not personally, as to the sacred public Ordinances.

As to your Quotation of St. Jude, I shall fortify Mr. Perkins Judgment with
Mr. Arthur Hildershams (upon John 4. 45. Lect. 35.) Such as separate from our
Churches upon pretense of the corruptions, that are in them. These are marked
with a black coal, by Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, being
sensual, having not the Spirit. But herein Christians must learn wisely to
distinguish such as are unjustly separated by others from the Church
Assemblies; and such as voluntarily separate themselves; These deserve to be
called Schismatics, and not the others. Neither are they to be counted
Schismatics, as though they dare not be Agents or Practisers of any corruption
that remains in the Church, yet can bear and tolerate them as burdens,
without forsaking the Church for them. To this sort I will say no more, but
wish them well to weigh the Examples of Gods Servants, that have been mentioned
in this Doctrine, which frequented so diligently the public Worship of God in
Jerusalem, when there were far greater corruptions, both in the Priests, and
People, and Worship it self, than can be found in ours. What Mr. Hildersham
here winds up is unravel'd in his thirty sixth Lecture; Because the Author is
not liable to your exception, and proceeds upon Scripture Principles (your own
appeal) who has been reputed by Dr. Willet, Malleus Schismaticorum qui vulgo
vocantur Brownistae, I shall here insert what himself has dilated in his own
Language without contracting or altering it.

Upon John 4. 22. We know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews.
Hereupon Mr. Hildersham observes, that our Savior in commending the Worship
and Religion of the Jews, makes himself one of their number, acknowledges
himself a Member of their Church, professes that himself did worship God as
they did; from whence this Doctrine arises for our Instruction.

That those Assemblies that enjoy the Word and Doctrine of Salvation, though
they have many corruptions remaining in them, are to be acknowledged the true
Churches of God, and such as none of the faithful may make separation from.

We shall need no further proof of this Doctrine, than the example of our
Savior himself. If we consider of the one side how corrupt the state of the
Jews Church was in his time, and on the other, how far our Savior did
communicate with them.

For the first, what the state of the Church was in his time, we may know, if
we consider. First, What the Priests and Teachers were themselves, that had the
ordering of God's Worship. Secondly, What the people were with whom he was to
join in Gods Worship. Thirdly, What the Worship it self was, wherein he was to
communicate.

First, The Priests and Teachers were ignorant and unlearned, Matthew. 23. 16.
Secondly, They were wicked and ungodly, Matthew. 23. 3. Thirdly, They had a
corrupt and unlawful entrance into their Calling, yea, even the high Priest
himself. For whereas by Gods Ordinance he was to hold that Office during life,
their Office was bought and sold, and made Annual, John 11. 49. Caiphas was
high Priest for that year.

And what were the people? surely the most of them in all places were
notoriously and obstinately wicked. In Nazareth, where he had lived most; See
what they were, Luke 4. 28, 29. All that were in the synagogue, when they heard
this doctrine, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the
city, and led him to the edge of an hill to cast him down headlong. But were
they better in other places. He upbraided all the cities, where most of his
great works were done. Woe be to thee, Chorazin, Woe be to thee, Bethsaiada,
Matthew. 11. 20, 21. And were the people of Jerusalem any better. You shall
perceive that by that affection they showed at the Passion of our Savior, when
Pilate a Gentile made such an offer to them. Luke 23. 18. All the multitude
cried at once, Not him, but Barabbas. And Matthew. 27. 25. When Pilate had washed
his hands, and protested Christ's innocence, Then answered all the people, and
said desperately, His blood be on us and our children.

Thirdly, The Worship it self that was used in the Church, had many corruptions
in it. They used many superstitions, the observation whereof they urged more
strictly than the commandments and Ordinances of God, Mark 7. 9. The Temple was
profaned, and made a den of thieves, Matthew. 21. 12, 13. The Discipline and
Censures of the Church were shamefully abused, John 9. 22. The Jews had
decreed, that if any did confess that Jesus was Christ, he should be
Excommunicated ipso facto. The Doctrine was corrupt in many points, as you
shall find, Matthew. 5. 21, 46. Some corruptions also were crept into the
Administration of the Sacraments; for they kept a day after our Savior, who
observed the just time appointed by God, John 19. 17. The day of his Passion
was but the day of the Preparation to the Passover.

Thus have we seen how corrupt the state of the Church was: And yet mark how
our Savior made no separation from it, but communicated with it in the Worship
of God.

1. When he was an Infant, he was Circumcised, and by that Sacrament
incorporated into the Church, Luke 2. 21.

2. When his Mother was purified, he was brought into the Temple, and presented
to the Lord, and an oblation was given for him as for other children, Luke 2.
22.

3. He was content to be a hearer of such Teachers, that taught in the Church,
Luke 2. 46.

4. He was every Sabbath wont to join in Public Prayer with the Congregation
that was at Nazareth, Luke 4. 16.

5. He received the Sacrament of Baptism in a Congregation of the people, Luke
3. 21. When all the people were baptized, he was baptized also.

6. He communicated in the Passover with the People and the Priests, John 2. 13.

7. He allowed his Disciples to hear these Teachers, Matthew. 23. 12. Yea, he
commanded the Leper, whom he had cleansed, to go and show himself to the
Priest, and offer his gift in the Temple, Matthew. 8. 4.

The reasons why all men are bound to count such Assemblies true Churches as
enjoy the Word and Doctrine of Salvation, and may not separate from them for
their corruptions, are these.

1. So long as God continues his Word and Doctrine of Salvation to a people, so
long it is evident God dwells among them, and has not forsaken them. I will
set my tabernacle among you: By which he means his solemn Worship, whereof
this is a principal part, Levit. 26. 11, 12. Psalm. 76. 12. And till God has
forsaken a Church, none may forsake it. For shall we be holier, and hate
corruption more than the Lord? It is no sufficient warrant for any to separate
from a Church, because it is guilty of such sins and corruptions, as deserve
God should forsake it, and for which God has threatened in his Word, that he
will forsake it; till it may appear to us God has indeed forsaken it, and put
in execution that which he has justly threatened against it, no man may forsake
it. Though Adultery (either in Man or Wife) be a just cause of separation, and
that the Bond of Wedlock should be broken, so as the innocent party may justly
forsake the offender, yet till a Bill of Divorcement have past between them,
they still remain Man and Wife, notwithstanding that sin. The Woman, whom her
Husband has wronged in that kind, is called his Wife, Mal. 2. 15. Esau justly
deserved to loose the Prerogative of his Birthright and Superiority he had
over his Brother, when he had despised and sold it, Genesis 25. 34. And Saul to be
deprived of his Kingdom; yea, God by his Decree and Oracle had said of Esau and
Jacob: The elder shall serve the younger, Genesis 25. 23. and of Saul and David,
that he had rejected the one, and appointed the other to Reign in his stead, 1 Samuel 13. 14. and 15. 23, 26, 28. And yet till the Lord saw it good to put this
Decree and Oracle in execution, and actually to depose the one from his
Birthright, and the other from his Kingdom, Jacob acknowledges Esau his
Superior, his Lord, Genesis 32. 4, 5. and so did David Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 7, 9. So
though a Church, for the many corruptions in it be unworthy the name of Christ's
Church, and be also such as the Lord has threatened to make no Church, yet till
the Lord has put this his threat in execution, and takes away his Tabernacle
and Worship from it, it is still to be acknowledged and reverenced, as the
Church of Christ.

2. Because no separation may be made from those Assemblies, where men may be
assured to find and attain Salvation. Lord to whom shall we go, thou have the
Word of eternal life? says Peter to our Savior, accounting this as a
sufficient reason why they might not leave him, John 6. 68. But men may be sure
to find Salvation in such Assemblies, where the Ministry of the Word and
Doctrine of Salvation is continued. For the Word and Doctrine of Christ is
called Salvation here: and Heb. 2. 3. because it is the ordinary means ordained
of God to bring men to Salvation, Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Yea it is at one
time or other effectual in all Gods Elect that do enjoy it.

James 1. 21. Calls it the engraftied word, which is able to save your souls.

Use 1. To teach us what to judge of our Church, and the Brownists that
separate from it. 1. We cannot deny it, but there is just cause of fear that
God may take away his Tabernacle from amongst us, and remove our Candlestick;
Even the general decay of our first Love may cause us to fear it, Apoc. 2. 5.
And that a great neglect of the Censures of the Church upon scandalous
offenders, in respect of that the Apostle says, A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. But especially the general increase of all filthy
abominable sins in the Land, Deuteronomy. 32. 14. Eccles. 8. 6. Though we acknowledge
our Church to be a true Church, yet we may not communicate with it in any
corruptions that shall be detected or approved to be in it. Herein we have our
Saviors Example to guide us, though he esteemed the Church of the Jews to be a
true Church, and joined with it in Gods Worship, yet would he not communicate
with it in the least corruption, he would not use so much as their
superstitious purification, Mark 7. 6, 7. when they put off the Passover a day
longer than God appointed, he would not join with them in that, Matthew. 26. 17.

3. We should mourn for, and show our dislike to those things that are evil in
our Church, Ezekiel. 9. 4. So did Christ, Luke 19. 41. But we may not separate our
selves, nor deny it to be a true Church, for the reasons above alleged.

Thus far Mr. Arthur Hildersham proceeds in 36 Lect.

Your first Citation out of St. Jude has hitherto detained me, and occasioned
this copious Digression not impertinent to the main of the Question.

Your next Testimony to acquit your selves, and to brand most of our people, is
Acts 5. 13.

And of the rest durst no man join himself to them, but the people magnified
them.

None durst join in an Hypocritical way, as Ananias and Saphira did. The rest
may be expounded, either of the Church Members, who out of reverence kept
distance from the Apostles (if compared with the 11 verse) Or else the rest
were the potent Jewish Adversaries of the Apostles, who affrighted with that
severe Miracle of Judicature, no sooner pronounced than executed on Ananias and
Saphira, durst not assault or approach not (...), not close, or not encounter.
The Syriack comprehends both.

Because after so rigorous miraculous a doom, the Believers reverenced the
Apostles, or the Unbelievers dreaded, and the promiscuous multitude extolled
them: Make what rational inference you please, it is an impertinence to this
Question.

The LETTER.
I do not find National Churches promised and warranted in the day of the
Gospel, but many Nations shall come into the Church, not all of a Nation, nor
all in a Nation to be a Church, but of every People, Kindred and Nation God
would make up his Church; Acts. 10. 35.

The ANSWER.
I have been often sadden'd and amazed at the tart confidence of some of your
party in excepting, girding at a National Church, as if it were a strange
Chimera, a ridiculous Paradox (like the ancient fate of the opinion of the
avouching the Antipodes) Whereas there is a Domestical Church mentioned, Romans
16. 5. ( Greet the church that is in their house) and in 1 Cor. 16. 19. ( With
the Church that is in their house) This notion of a Church is your darling. I
pray examine with sober reason without distemper of passion or prejudice. Is
there not a gradual ascent from a Church Oeconomical, to a Church Ecumenical?
What are Cities, Kingdoms, States, but Families dilated, multiplied? A
Domestical Church is a National contracted; a National Church is a Domestical
enlarged. A Parochial intervenes, of a larger extent than a Domestical, a
lesser than a National. Such was the Church as Cenchrea. The Professors of
saving Truth, if abridged within the narrow limits of a house are a Domestical
Church, if more numerous dispersed within the circuit, the Territories of a
Nation, they are to be esteemed a National Church, though all Individuals of
the Nation were not Professors.

The pregnant Scripture Testimonies should silence all Cavils touching this
Title. Are there not recorded Churches of Judea, Samaria, Galilee? Act. 9, 31.
A Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 1. 2 Ep. 1. 1. The Church of the Thessalonians,
1 Ep. 1. 1. 2. Ep. 1. 1. The Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira,
Rev. 2. 1, 8, 12, 18. The Churches of Sardi, Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 1, 2, 10.
Why then should the Church of England sound so prodigious a name? Herein we
swerve not from the Language of the purest Antiquity, nor the Modern customary
expression (use being the solemn dictator for words, Quem penes arbitrium,
jusque est, and norma loquendi.)

You will probably retort, all of the Nation are not of the Church of England,
nor yet were all the Inhabitants of Samaria, Galilee, Smyrna, Philadelphia
Members of those Churches. Those that were, served to denominate. Inde
denominatio unde dominatio.

After Histories we need not enquire for Prophesies, to examine whether
National Churches were foretold when they are fulfilled.

That many Nations shall come into the Church, may be understood of the
invisible Church, for Genera singulorum, of the visible Church for singula
generum.

That of every Nation, Kindred and People, God will make up his Church, is true
of the Church Catholic, of which your first citation may be understood in the
universal latitude propounded. ( All nations shall flow to it.)

Your second Sacred Citation is Act. ^^ 35. But in every nation he that fears
God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.

This demolisheth the partition of Judaism, repeals the engrossing privilege
of Palestine: This invests every Nation with a capacity of some Members of the
invisible Church; it does divest no Nation of a possibility of being an entire
visible Church, even as the Jews were in an inclusive, though not as they were
in an exclusive sense.

The LETTER.
We shall bring our selves back to the Pedagogy of the Jews, from which we are
freed by Christ. We must have National Officers, National Worship of divine
Institution.

The ANSWER.
A National Profession of Christianity is no Jewish Paedagogy. It is oppositum,
in apposito. Christ's freeing us, relates to the Ceremonial, or the Moral Law.
(The Judaical Law being left indifferent to be renounced, or retained) The
Ceremonial or Mosaical Law is annulled (only the equity of it excepted) The
Synagogue is deceased mortua and mortifera (St. Austin expresses it) dead and
deadly under the Gospel.

The Moral Law is cancelled for the sting, the curse, not the rigor, the
observance. It is still a Pilot to steer, though no absolute Judge to sentence.

But this double specified Liberty acquits nor Person, nor Nation from
submission to the yoke of our Redeemer, from being visibly, professionally
Christians.

To your next Charge, I answer briefly and summarily. The Officers and Worship
asserted in the Church of England (and consequently in the Nation) are for the
grounds and essentials of Divine Institution. (when you attempt to disprove I
shall be ready to ratify what I assert) These Essentials are general for all,
the additionals only are humane, and perhaps peculiar to the Church of England:
Which additionals are accidental, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40.
ritual Ceremonial. In these Ceremonials the Apostles forecited Precepts are
piously observed, and St. Austins caveats judiciously not neglected; For number
not many (no Judaical excess) for signification most weighty (useful for
edifying as well as beautifying) for observation most easy (that they be not
plummets to depress, but wings to raise our affections in Divine Ordinances.)

The LETTER.
Our birth in the Nation makes us Members of the Church.

The ANSWER.
We avouch not the Climate, but the Parentage, the descent, a Christian
extraction in any Nation gives right to the Covenant, and seals of the
Covenant: this renders Infants capable of being baptized, and therein imitate
Church Members.

In Babes that are the issue of professed Believers, we acknowledge a federal,
though not a personal, actual holiness. They have seminal claim, a radical
right of admission into the visible Church. It is Gods promise to Abraham, the
Father of the Faithful. Genesis 17. 7.
I will establish my covenant between me and thy seed after thee.

Wherein though the invisible graces are assured to inward Believers, yet the
visible signs appertain to outward Professors, the Sons, the Heirs apparent of
Abraham: The legal Seal of the Covenant (Circumcision) being exchanged to the
Evangelical (Baptism) St. Peter builds the Jews hereditary Title, and interest
as to Baptismal reception into the Church, upon this foundation. Acts. 2. 39.
The promise is made to you and your children.

The LETTER.
I confess I have read some Historians and Writers, both Ancient and Modern,
touching the first constituting, and appearing of a Church and Gospel in
England, Annis 180, and 598, but not to satisfaction.

The ANSWER.
That in the year 598, was not the first conversion in this Climate, though
magnified by the Romanists to heighten the Saxon obligation to Rome, because
Austin the Monk was employed by Pope Gregory the first. Nor yet was the
complexion of Christianity first discernable in the year 180, though the
Jesuits own the dawning of the Gospel in the British Climate about that time,
for to vindicate the dependence of the British Church upon the Roman, because
of King Lucius baptized by a delegate from Eleutherius.

Not to carp at your Chronology, though I find not that punctual year of 180,
fixed by any Chronologer. ( Polanus mentions 188, Baron. 183. Polyd. Virg. 182.
Balaeus 179. Mar. Scotus 177. Forsedia 169, etc.) However not to insist on, or
debate that nicity. The first Evangelical appearance was of an elder date than
the time specified in your Letter (the year 180.) Gildas monachus testatur
Britannos ab initio orti Evangelii Christianam accepisse religionem, Bal. in
Cent. 1. de Jos. Arimath.
by above an entire Century of years. Gildas an ancient renowned Historian (as
cited by Balaeus Cent. 1.) does testify the Morning Beams of Christianity, to
have been darted among the Britains. Hence the British Church has been titled
Primogenita Ecclesia (the first born Church) Of all the Provinces, Britannia
omnium provinciarum primi publiciter Christi nomen recepit, Sabbell. Enn. 7. l.
7.
this is famed by Sabbellicus, for the first celebrating of Christianity.
Credible. Testimonies of Capgravius, Scropus, Polyd. Virgil. do fix on the year
63, Susceptam fidem Britanni usque ad tempora Dioclesiani principis inviolatam,
integramque quieta pace servabant. Beda Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
for the conversion of the British Nation. From which Epoch the British
preserved the luster of an uncorrupted purity, till overcast with the tempest
of the Dioclesian persecution, as Beda acknowledges.

But during this time, you will not allow a constituted Church: Brit annorum
inaccessa Romany loca Christo subdita. Tertul. adv. Judios.
As if Tertullians flourish of the British being subdued to Christ, not to
Caesar, the one having erected a Throne, where the other durst not set his foot
( Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis) had been but an empty flourish, a
windy vaunt.

Your dissatisfaction being expressed without your reason to confirm it, I need
not dilate to confute it.

The LETTER.
Concerning the second Query, lest I tire you with these at present very
discomposed things; I humbly offer. Whether the Church of England, and that
there is a divine separation, or a separation warranted in the word, Jer. 15.
19. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Matthew. 7. 6. Matthew. 18. 19. Acts 9. 18. Rev. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 17.

The ANSWER.
My Replies will much more need an Apology than your Query, wherein I have been
partly necessitated to be copious for discussion, for illustration, by
examining those Texts you quote only, unfolding what you enwrap, because I
would not like Heraclitus be entitled (...), a dark obscure Sophister. One
Scripture genuine quotation, if pertinently, demonstratively pressed shall
convince and captivate me, whereas a thousand, if loosely and inconsiderately
applied, will not startle me from my station.

There is I confess a Divine Separation, not in your notion, you raise
separation to Heaven (as Hortensius did Eloquence in Tullies Censure) to
advance your self with it.

I shall encounter with your Texts in the rank you muster them.

The first is Jer. ^5. 19.

If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth, let
them return to thee, but return not thou to them.

This is a Doctrinal, Si Sermonibus segregaveris Hieron. in Hier. 15. 19.
not a personal separation. It is Gods special consolation to the Prophet
Jeremy. If by thy Instructions, thy Sermons, thou shall separate or distingush
betwixt the sacred or the wicked, etc. So Jerome expounds it.

If by Prophesying thou discernest what is good, Si prophetando discernis
quicquid bonum a malo, and sine acceptione personarum verum do^es and falsum
abdicas, tanquam si ego ipse loquerer, etc. Jun. and Tremel. in Her. 15. 19.
from what is evil, etc. so Junius and Tremelius gloss it.

Or as others comment, Si separaveris pretiosum a vili i. e. si animas Christi
sanguine pretioso redemptas a vilitate peccati per tuam doctrinam, etc. Lyra in
Hier. 15. 19.
If thou convertest those souls that are redeemed by the precious Blood of
Christ, from vile, vicious courses, then thou shall be as my mouth, thou shall
discharge the part of Gods Ambassador ( In voce Hominis tuba Dei, as St. Austin
expresses it) In the voice of man there will be the trumpet of God. Let them
return to thee, but return not thou to them; let them be reclaimed, be not thou
depraved.

The sense and scope of this Text is an alien to the Question, it is far
separated from your separation.

Your second Quotation is at as great a distance, and needs no other solution
than the former.

Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her priests have violated, and have profaned my holy things,
they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have showed
difference between the unclean and the clean. Some Expositors understand this
of Ceremonial oblations (the Mosaical differences not observed betwixt clean
and unclean beasts and sacrifices) If this charge concerns Moral Actions; The
Geneva Fr. notes refer us to Levit. 11. 47. Indifferenter immolantes animalia
immunda and munda, Lyra. in Ezekiel. 22. 26.
God hereby reproves the Priests, Non docuerunt plebem quae esset differentia
puri and immundi, Vatabl. in Ezekiel. 22. 26.
because the Priests reproved not the people for their Transgressions.

The Priests were indeed ordained, authorized by God, Instructors of the
people, and ordinary Judges in these cases, who yet never sentenced, nor
reprehended the holy for mingling with the profane in a divine Service or
Sacrifice.

1. I grant a Ministerial or Prophetical Separation by declaring Gods
Commandments, by denouncing his Judgments.

The neglect of this is taxed by Jeremy and Ezekiel in your instances.

2. I allow a Professional Separation, which may be branched to devotion,
compunction, reprehension, by praying against wickedness, by mourning for it,
by rebuking it.

This was the frequent practice of the Prophets and the Apostles.

3. I yield an Ecclesiastical or Juridical Separation, which is
Excommunication, to be of Divine Impression.

But your local separation from those Christian Brethren you account unholy in
those Ordinances you acknowledge holy discovers no stamp of the Sacred Spirit,
no warrant out of those Prophets you cite, and therefore cannot pass for (...),
(in St. Ignatius words) for Gods current uncontrolled Coin, having not the true
image, superscription of the Sanctuary.

Your two next Quotations, Matthew. 7. 6. Matthew. 18. are repeated and reinforced
within a few lines where they shall be discussed.

The 5 th. Quotation is Acts 19. 9. But when diverse were hardened, and believed
not, but spoke evil of the way before the multitude, he departed from them, and
separated the disciples, disputing daily in the School of one Tyrannus.

After three Months ineffectual trial, not a private ordinary person, but an
Apostle (who had an immediate vocation and commission an infallible
inspiration, an universal jurisdiction) quitted, obdurate, obstinate Jews, who
undermined the foundation, (...), Act. 19. 9.
who blasted the superstruction of Christian Religion: who were branded for
notorious, scandalous, blasphemy, infidelity, impenitency. In this exigency he
withdrew the Disciples from a Synagogue to the School of Tyrannus (a sort of
Seminary of Piety and Literature, according to Maimonides) A private collegiate
Academy for the Prophets and the Prophets Sons, what will you hence infer?

Therefore you ought to separate from professed Christian Believers for their
practical defailances.

The proof fits the conclusion as well as Goliahs Armor did David's body; or
Elisha's demensions stretched upon the the Child.

The next Citation is Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues.

I shall not examine the literal restriction (as a prediction of Alaricus
Siege, Dr. Hammond in his Annot. on Rev. 18. 4.
wherein the Emperor Honorius with others escaped from Rome to Ravenna) Take
this Testimony in the most advantageous Latitude, yet there is to be
distinguished a Negative Separation of not approving, and a positive of
deserting. There may be an egress out of Babylon, not by the paces of the body,
but the affections of the souls. It is emphatically expressed (that ye be not
partakers of her sins) of her sins, not of her virtues; of her sinners, not
with her sinners, especially in those exercises, wherein they are not sinners.

I need not perplex my self to enervate the force of your Argument. This will
not prop your separation, till you prove the Church of England to be Babylon,
at least in a figurative acception to be ranked, paralleled with it for
infidelity, for idolatry. Till then your supposition is an imputation. It is
Aristotle's Maxim, One absurdity being granted, a thousand may be inferred.

Take heed lest you desert Bethel for Babel, Jerusalem for Samaria, lest like
Ixion you embrace a Cloud for Juno, lest you exchange a beautified paradise for
a Tohu bohu, a disordered Chaos; an uniform exquisite Garden for an unnurtured
confused Wilderness, lest your Flowers be not Roses but Nettles, your Plants
not Vines but Briars.

The last Citation is of the same grain, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and
I will receive you.

This as the former Testimony is a Transcript of Isaiah 52. 11. Depart, depart
ye; go out from them, and touch no unclean thing: go out of the midst of her,
be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.

This charge at the first blush is confined to the Priests and Levites. (...)
ad Judaeos ut quamprimum exeant a Babylone quod multi ^se miscuerant
Babyloniis. Nihil idolatricum assumite: ita praecones Evangelii dicunt
discedite, quod fit dupliciter. Primo cum discedimus a Babyl. spir. a Papismo.
Secundo, cum nos segregamus ah impuris confessione, conversione. Scull. in Is.
62. 11.
The Jewish Rabbines expound it as a Precept not to wave the opportunity of
Cyrus consent for the Jews returning from Babylon to Jerusalem.

The Fathers of the Church enlarge this Precept to a Prophecy (a mixture of
both) for the Christians retiring from Jerusalem to Pella, Eusebius. in Eccles.
Hist. l. 3. c. 4.
before the destruction of it (which is testified by Eusebius to have been
accomplished) The further application of it extends not to your separation.
Take the English Marginal Annotations. He warns the faithful, not to pollute
themselves with the superstitions of the Babylonians.

Junius and Tremelius interpret the departure repentance, Eripite vos
resipiscentia e tantis malis in quibus adhuc versati estis, and sanctificationi
vestrae incumbite, Jun. and Trem. in Is. 52. 11.
the separation sanctification.

What our English Translation renders, Be ye clean. The Septuagint, (...), Be
ye separated; Estius observes the separation prescribed to be for opinion and
affection.

The Geneva Divines run the same descant, Adonnez vous a sainctete. Voyez sus,
verse. 1. The Genesis Fr. notes on Es. 53. 11. and on the first referred to seras
entirement sanctifiee and repurgee de tous scandales.
that this separation ought to be purifying, sanctifying.

The Apostle does no otherwise press it to the Corinthians, Quod Apostolus
dicit intelligendum de separatione spirituali. Aq. in 2 Ep. ad Cor. 6. 17.
for a mental not a local discession; spiritual (as Aquinas distinguishes) not
corporal.

Not to touch an unclean thing, Judaei cum obviam venirent Gentili aut
Samaritano dicebant ne attingas me. Drus. in l. 6. Praec.
is not like the Jews shy distance from the Gentiles and the Samaritans; who
upon a sudden approach startled and admonished, Immundum non tangit qui ad
peccatum nulli consentit. Aug. in l. 3. contra Parm. Displicere est non
tangere. Lyra in 2 Cor. 6. 17.
touch me not: but not to touch is to disgust, to reprehend, not to gloze, not
to palliate offenses.

I pray observe the object of the separation (expressed by the Apostle, in that
sixth Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, cited by you.) It is
the Infidel in verse 15, Darkness in verse 14. for the spirits of darkness;
idols in verse 16. for idolaters, according to Theophylacts Rule of Exposition,
(...), (things for persons) Because the Christian Corinthians were required to
separate from the damned Fiends, from branded Idolaters, Pagan Infidels, in
their unrighteous, idolatrous Sacrifices and Feasts. Will you hence induce a
justification of your separation, from Professors in Christian Sacramental
Actions: It is a very lame consequence.

Lastly, it is observable what kind of mixture is taxed, prohibited in the
Apostles persuasive, invective (in the sixth Chapter of the second Epistle to
the Corinthians) It is a yoking which imports binding and linking ( jugum a
jungendo) an unequal yoking of Piety with Infidelity, of Christianity with
Paganism, like that of the Tuscan Tyrant (of the living with the dead) It is
not only expressed a participation or Fellowship, not only a Communion, or
rather Communication (...), in verse 14. but (...) not convention, according to
the vulgar Latin, but consent, not an Assembly, but an Harmony in verse 15.
like several Musical Instruments tuned to an exact melody (says Aretius) nay,
entitled (...); not barely an agreement, not merely (...); Oecumen. in 2 Cor.
6. 16.
an assimilation, a resemblance (as the old Scholiast illustrates it) but it
denotes an entire confederacy in infidelity.

This variety of Eloquence-is the Apostles pregnant Rhetoric to present an
absolute correspendence heightened to complacence of Society. This we allow not
with professed Believers, whose lives are notoriously vicious, scandalous.

But this Apostolical severity reflects upon Pagan, not Christian Professors. I
have sifted this Testimony, the rather because as it has been managed, it has
been a specious snare to men of honest upright hearts, though not of
discerning, piercing intellectuals.

The LETTER.
Who those are, and what the things are, we must separate from. I speak here of
separation from men professing, not heathens. The persons are Brethren, the
things are Offenses, scandals. The unclean were to be separated of old, Levit.
10. 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 23. 19. Matthew. 18. 16, 17. Wicked persons are called dogs,
Matthew. 7. 6. Compare this with 2 Pet. 2. 20. 22. They are apostatized, or
degenerated persons 1 Cor. 5. 7, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14. 2 Timothy 3. 5. They are
such as have a Profession and no more.

The ANSWER.
Your proofs hitherto have extended only to Pagans and Jews, for the persons to
be separated from, whom you cannot gild with the title of Professors and
Brethren; the things, or motives to be separated for, you state to be Offenses
or scandals. But all scandals are not sufficient inducements of separation, not
passive scandals (taken) but active scandals (given) nay, not active scandals,
till they are legally convicted, doomed.

Your first refuge is to the Jewish Sanctuary; But the Sanctuary being
abrogated, your argument is dissolved.

The two first Citations are of the same Judaical batch, Lev. 10. 9, 10. Do not
drink wine nor strong drink, thou nor thy sons with thee, when you go into the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest you die; it shall be a statute for ever
through your generations.

And that you put difference between the holy and the unholy, and between the
unclean and clean.

2 Chronicles. 23. 19. And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the Lord,
that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

The occasion of the Prohibition urged out of Levit. 10. is apprehended to be
Nadab and Abihus strange fire. It seems they were distempered when they
sacrificed, and were not qualified to distinguish betwixt clean and unclean.
For the Priests were obliged (...), to examine the Sacrifices, which could not
well be effected, when they were debauched. Quid hoc ad Rhombum?

The Historical Narrative pleaded (2 Chronicles. 23.) was Jehojadas act the high
Priest, who set the Porters. This may serve as a flourish for Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction for Excommunication by Authority, not as the least varnish for
separation of themselves of any under Authority.

To take a fuller survey of this double Testimony.

The first (of Levit.) is expounded of holy and profane days, of clean and
unclean Beasts and Sacrifices.

St. Austin is skeptical, hovering in suspense, whether to understand the
Persons or Oblations, the Officers or the Offerings.

Grant the persons to he unclean, according to the second Testimony (out of the
Chronicles) yet this was only a Mosaical Ceremonial pollution for the Jew,
which will not conclude a Moral, Evangelical pollution for the Christian to be
separated from.

Origin, who is titled the Allegorizing Father, is very shy, and uses a solemn
Apology, for that Allegorical plication of this legal pollution.

Perhaps you will object that these outward defilements were Types of Inward,
Moral, Habitual: However, these are but shadows of proofs, empty conjectural
resemblances, not solid substantial arguments.

But I shall gratify you so far, as to examine the typical force of your
Testimonies.

Three sorts of Judaical, Mr. Weemes in his Christian Synagogue.
eminent pollutions there were; by the Dead, by Issue, by Leprosy; and three
different Separations, or Purgations chalked out. Out of the Camp of God, of
the Priests, of Israel. These were by Jewish Doctors reputed Types of their
gradual Excommunications; Nidui, Caerem, Samatha (in the Syriack Maran-atha)
Figures of the (...), in the Greek Church; of the Abstenti, Excommunicati,
Anathematizati, in the Western Church.

This typical force being displayed in its brightest colors, its fullest
dimensions, will countenance a Separation after Excommunication, not before it.

Your next Quotation is Matthew. 18. 16. 17. But if he will not hear thee, then
take with thee one or two more; that in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word may be established.

And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church. But if he neglect
to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican.

This is (...), The apple of debate, the Helena contended for, espoused by each
party.

I conceive with submission to more learned mature Judgments, that though this
Testimony like a well drawn Picture, may seem to fix an Aspect on every
Spectator (that looks on it) yet it appears designed for a special direction in
point of particular, personal offenses betwixt the Jews: This sort of scandal
being discernible, like a vein through the whole body of the Chapter. If thy
brother shall trespass against thee, in verse 15. How often shall my brother sin
against me, in verse 21.

These Queries sound particular offenses betwixt the Jews, because of the last
result. Let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican. An expression that
suits with no other Nation but the Jew; who being then left destitute of
redress in case of injury by any that waved the Jewish, Mosaical, for the
Caesarean, Roman Government and Tribunal, our Savior chalks out a gradual
vindicative progress. First, a brotherly solitary admonition (tell him his
fault betwixt him and thee alone.) Secondly, a friendly private reprehension, a
glympse of neighbourly arbitration (then take with thee one or two more.)
Thirdly, a public judiciary convention (tell it to the Church, Calvin. in
Harmon. Evangelista 'pro seniorum collegio (...) dixit Beza in Annot. in Matt.
18.
(...), to the Assembly, it is so interpreted, Act. 19. 32, 39. 41.) This was
the Jewish Sanedrim, in the opinion of Calvin and Beza. Lastly, if he be
refractory to the Authority of the Sanedrim, then take liberty of Caesar's
reparation, of being righted by the Roman jurisdiction ( Let him be to thee as
a heathen and a publican.)

The main exception against this Comment will be, that this undermines the
foundation of Church Discipline, whereas this is elsewhere abundantly supported.

The next words of binding and loosing, do not absolutely control this sense;
for as there may be a binding of obduration by God, of Excommunication by the
Church, so of reprehension by a particular person, whose reproof binds, fetters
in guilt, when it reclaims not; as also it untwists the cords, loosens the
manacles, when it effectually reforms.

I dare not press with confidence any Exposition that is eccentrical to the Orb
of the Church, that has the least appearance of novelty, of singularity; I only
tender this sense of the Text alleged as probable, without a literal wrench,
which if admitted renders the Testimony an impertinency as to your drift.

But suppose the words in the most indulgent acception to your advantage:
Because a heinous, notorious offender, after reiterated fruitless reproofs,
having disregarded the Charity of a Brother, and the Authority of his Mother
the Church, is to be proceeded against, or reputed, rejected as a heathen and a
publican, as an alien to Religion; will you hence argue that without these
Methods of varied addresses, without admonition ratified with conviction, you a
private person may separate from the Church, whereof you were a Member, a Son,
and in effect explode the Church it self, as if it were a heathen and a
publican.

There is no Engine of Logic or Divinity will conclude it. This Text stands at
enmity with your opinion. For if a man trespassing were not to be accounted as
Ethnicus, or Publicanus, till there preceded a Dic Ecclesiae; not to be branded
or deserted, till that Authority be disesteemed; then it is unquestionable none
can separate and judge a Christian to be a Heathen, any man to be a Publican at
his own pleasure. Authority of the Church must be appealed to, and disobeyed,
or else no separation can be confirmed by this Testimony.

You charge afresh, wicked persons are called dogs, Matthew. 7. 6. The title of a
dog is a branding obloquy, a name of reproach in all Languages (as Critics
observe) Though the description, the comparison of the holy Ghost is not to be
scrupled at, yet your application may (as to Parochial Members) They may be
sheep in Gods estimate, who are dogs in yours. These dogs may be permitted to
pick up the crumbs under the Table.

Thus the Turks in a zeal of Mahumetanism debar Christians from their Moschos,
Moryson in his Travels.
reviling them to be dogs, because they do not ordinarily use Bathes.

The Donatists, Jusserunt Eucharistiam canibus fundi; non sine signo divini
judicti: nam iidem canes accensi rabie ipso^s dominos suos quasi latrones
sancti corporis reos dente vindice tanquam ignotos and inimicos laniaverunt,
Optat. l. 2.
who deemed and termed the Orthodox Christians in the Primitive Church dogs, in
a haughty contempt and contumely, flung the Sacred Elements of the Eucharist to
dogs (in a literal sense) which dogs enraged flew upon the Donatists, and tore
them in pieces, for to revenge so horrid an impiety and indignity. To return to
your Argument.

The Text you urge, forbids that which is holy to be given to dogs. That which
is holy is there unvailed by the best Commentators to be the Evangelical
Doctrine: This debats Sermons (as well as Sacraments) to Parochial Members,
which you allow to those whom you account dogs. St. Chrysostom and Euthymius
understood these dogs to be Infidels. In this Notion it is not fit to take the
childrens bread, Matthew. 15. 16.
and to cast it to dogs, who will not regard, but revile it.

St. Paul and Barnabas exasperated by this snarling reception deserted the
Jews, Acts 13. 46.
and applied themselves to the Gentiles.

You reinforce your assault, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 22. to fix the aspersion of dogs on
Parochial Members, being apostatized, degenerated persons. Without further
discussing of the Texts, I confess as Infidels are compared to dogs for
barking, and tearing; so are Apostates for a recidivation of trangression, like
dogs licking up what they disgorge. But since a reiterated offense does plead
no absolute incapacity of repentance (that was the condemned Novatian
disconsolate Heresy.) A lapsed, relapsed sinner, if allowed to be a penitent,
is not restrained, but in capacity to be a communicant.

Our blessed Savior prescribes remission to St. Peter seventy times seven
times. Matthew. 18. 22. Vicibus innumerabiliter innumerabilibus, Aug.
Origin understood it literally, but the rest of the Fathers expound it
siguratively: A definite number for an indefinite, for an infinite. This is the
duty of an earthly Brother, which is much exceeded by the transcendent mercy of
an Heavenly Father.

His Candor is the perfect Pattern, ours the imperfect Copy. Be you merciful as
your Father is merciful. As for similitude, though not for equality, As no less
in an extensive than intensive consideration; no less for frequency than
sincerity.

Your next Citation, 1 Cor. 5. 7. ( Purge out therefore the old leaven) verse
13. Put away from among you the wicked person, prima facie, at the first blush
has the appearance of an Ecclesiastical Censure, and is generally so
interpreted by Commentators; that the doom which was determined, pronounced by
the Apostles, should be executed by the Corinthians. This proves that an
incestuous person and such scandalous offenders are to be excommunicated, and
separated from, being excommunicated, but not before. If Separation be
precedent, Excommunication needs not be consequent. It were a superfluity of
severity. -- Stat magni nominis umbra. I pray observe that the incestuous
person was a member of the particular Church of Corinth, Qui nisi in Ecclesia
fuisset tolli ex ea non poterat. Heins. in 1 Ep. ad Cor. 5.
till he was excommunicated, otherwise he could not be ejected out of it: As
Heinsius rationally observes. For to be excluded, undeniably presupposes to be
interested. The consequence is the same, for every heinous sinner, who is a
professed Believer till sentence to be excommunicated.

Your double succeeding Testimony, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. ( That you withdraw your
selves from every brother that walks disorderly) verse 14. ( Note that man,
and have no company with him) amounts to the same single force of
Excommunication, if most Commentators rightly understand it, Here note (says
Aquinas) the sentence is inflicted for disobedience. Zanchy raises as a
doctrinal observation, whom the Church should excommunicate. (...), A Military
Metaphor for disordered, disbanded Soldiers. There is an Admonition precedent,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
Warn them that are unruly. A second Admonition, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
We command and exhort you by the Lord Jesus. Aquinas collects conviction, and
manifestation from the charge. It Is no ordinary mark, not (...), but (...),
set, as it were, a mark on the forehead. It is a note of Excommunication, says
Beza.

Some few Expositors understand a Prohibition of familiar conversation, (...),
not to be mingled, incorporated.

It denotes the entire conjunction of Wedlock or Friendship, Familiaritas cum
Excommunicatis est vitanda, Jun. and Trem.
Junius and Tremelius link both Expositions. The familiarity of the
excommunicated is to be eschewed.

Your last Citation, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, from such turn away: Whence you collect, they are such then as
have but a profession, and no more.

This is indeed the Character of a Hypocrite, who is like a Swan, that has
white Feathers, but a black Skin. The Hypocrite must be unmasked (as the Swan
unfeather'd) he must be convicted, before separated from. Till then the
semblance of innocence (the form of godliness) ranks him in the visible Church.
Lyra glosseth this formal Piety to be a sacramental society of pure and impure
professed Christians. Habentes speciem quia eadem Sacramenta cum piis, Lyra in 2
Ep. ad Tim. 1. 3, 5.
I need not add more weight to this Position, since your passages of your
Letter admit the Hypocrite.

Take the close of your Quotation ( From such turn away) in its largest
capacity, as relating to the black Catalogue in the former verses (2, 3, 4.) It
is not (...), avoid, according to the Remists; but (...), Turn away; not
affording the least countenance, or connivance. This denotes a high disgust, a
resentment of their vicious courses, a distance for a defiance; an aversation
for a detestation, not of the men, but of their corrupt manners.

Grant this to be applied to the persons, that acted the abominations ( from
such turn away, or according to the Syriack, Remove such far from thee.) This
discards a private carnal conversing in the Chamber, not a public spiritual
communicating in the Church. That we receive not those into our houses, into
our bosoms, that we entertain them not for our intimate Friends, who proclaim
themselves to be Gods obdurate Enemies. In this sense the Apostles caveat tends
to prevent the insensible catching, infection of a pestilent, ungratious
conversation.

Uvaque contactu livorem ducit ab uva. This Caution may be byast with a further
scope, more peculiarly reflecting upon Timothy; that he should turn away from
such offenders of steeled faces, that being habitually depraved, obstinately
hardened, they should not ineffectually be exhorted, argued with. The patient
may be quitted, when the cure is despaired. Junius and Tremelius thus descant
on the Caveat. Non est quod ludetur opera Jun. and Tremel. in 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Estius parallels it with the Apostolical Precept to Titus 3. 10, 11. A man
that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition reject: Hic locus ex
alio interpretandus (Tit. 3.) neque existimaverim idcirco hoc praeceptum dari
Timotheo ne colloquiis inficeretur, sed ob causam Tit^ communem. Estius.
Knowing that he that is such is subverted and sins, being condemned by
himself.

The LETTER.
We cannot communicate with those whom we are commanded by God to separate from
without sin.

But scandalous and offending brethren are such as we are commanded to separate
from -- 1 Cor. 5. 11. If not to keep company in the lesser, as ordinary
commerce, and eating, much less may we in the greater.

The ANSWER.
Distinguish betwixt Separation in Communion and Conversation, and there will
evidently appear four Terms in your Argument, which will discover it not a
Fallacy only in Divinity, but a Prodigy in Logic.

The Major Proposition is true only, as to separating in Communion: The Minor
Proposition is true only, as to separating in Conversation.

To prevent Ambiguity, Amphibology. I shall crave leave to new mould your
Syllogism.

We may not communicate with such, whom we are commanded by God to separate
from in Communion.

But from scandalous sinners we are commanded by God to separate from in
Communion.

Therefore we may not communicate with scandalous sinners.

I deny the Minor Proposition. This you assay to confirm by the Apostles
Prohibition, 1 Cor. 5. 11. ( With such a one no not to eat) you hence fortify
your Argument.

If not to keep company in the lesser, as ordinary commerce, and eating, much
less may we in the greater.

I answer. The Topic Canon, from the Lesser to the Greater, is a valid proof,
when both are of the same Tribe (of the same stock and nature) when they are
clothed with the dress of the same circumstances. But your instances are not.
Take the illustration from Calvin. Respondeo in liberate nostra and sacultate
positum esse, an familiariter versemur cum sceleratis* quo fit ut unicuique ab
eo sit abstinendum. At non est ita in nostro arbitrio positum, an caenam
recipiamus necne. Itaque diversa est ratio. Notemus ergo, si Ecclesia hominem
indignum ferat and toleret, probe facturos eos qui talem noverint, si ab ejus
consuetudine abstineant, idque quoad poterit facere debere, modo ne schisma
ullum, aut separationem in Ecclesiae communicatione inducat. Calv. in instruct.
adv. Anabap.
The one is arbitrary, it is in our power not to eat with a scandalous Brother.
The other is necessary, to communicate with him (in the Lords Supper) He can
till excommunicated, plead an interest in the Lords Table, (which is secund^
post naufragium tabula, the second plank after Shipwreck) He can plead no
interest in yours. If the Church (says Calvin) tolerate an unworthy person; it
is commendable to be shy of his society, so far as may consist with a man's
duty; so that hereby no Schism, no Separation as to Church Communion be
introduced.

Aretius manifests the fallacious abuse of your Topic Maxim by this reason.
Privatus convictus corrumpit mores conversantium non perinde communis
Sacramentorum usus. Aret. in 1 Ep. ad These. 3. 14,
Private familiarity of repast with the wicked may taint in point of
conversation, at least tempt, molest, but not so for the public Piety of the
Sacrament. In the one the holy encourage the impiety of the profane: in the
other the profane countenance the piety of the holy. Their access, if
impenitent needs not scare, nor divert your approach if penitent, (a foil to
set off your luster of Religion) your joint Prayers and Graces may be helps to
purge them; their defect and blemishes cannot annoy and soil you in the
Sacramental Devotion. Like a Be you may suck Honey out of that Herb, out of
which others like Spiders extract Poison. As the fragrancy of that Ointment
deadens the Fly, which enlivens the Dove. The Principle, Quicquid recipitur
recipitur ad modum recipientis, is no less appliable to a Sacrament than a
Sermon: Both admit different repugnant Operations, according to the capacities
of Auditors, and Receivers. As a reverent Auditor is not less edified, because
of irreverent Auditors in the same Church, so a faithful Communicant is not
less sanctified, because an unfaithful dissolute Brother, partakes of the same
Table.

Remember the Apostles Caution, wherein (in the judgment of Expositors) he
pricks the bladder of Pharisaical censure, Gal. 6. 4, 5.
Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have cause of rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another. It is (...), not against another, says St.
Chrysostom, to tax, to condemn him. The Apostle enforces this caution with a
prediction, which may unplume any spiritual Arrogance, and turn the edge of any
censorious rigor. For every man shall bear his own burden.

This personal clog of guilt has weight and terror enough to cause you and me
to sigh and tremble for our selves. Alas, there needs no panick affrightment of
being loaded and polluted with the corruptions of others, in incorrupt actions,
unless such only as are committed to our charge, whose vicious courses may
reflect stains, if promoted by our neglects, by our defaults.

The LETTER.
It is called a Communion, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 21, 22. I suppose meant a Communion
of Saints, as far as our charity guided by the word may discern, but to say,
That a company of ignorant Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath breakers are Saints, is
contrary to the word of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 1 John 1. 6, 9. Matthew 7. 8. Let us
take heed of it, Esa. 5. 20. Prove. 17. 15. They profess Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15.
17. Therefore such make not the Communion: A mixed Communion is not for Christ.
His Members must be homogeneal, or else a monster, 2 Cor. 6. 14.

The ANSWER.
To prove a Communion of Saints in the Eucharist you cite, 1 Cor. 10. 16. ( The
cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ, the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ) This relates to the matter of the Communion, not to the quality of the
Communicant.

You add ( verse. 20, 21. But I say that the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God, I would not that you
should have fellowship with devils.) The Apostle here brands the oblations of
depraved Gentiles to damned Spirits, and forbids those that communicate in a
Christian Pious Sacrament to partake of a Pagan Idolatrous Feast, This is
remote eccentrical to our question. I hope your judgment as well as your
charity better guided than to rank those you separate from with Heathens,
Idolaters, or to repute their sacrifice of thanksgiving to God, to be an
offering to Satan.

You aggravate it as a Soloecism in Religion, to say, that a company of
ignorant Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath breakers are Saints. Is this your best
Character to descypher a Parochial, In his possumus esse pariter copiosi sed
nolumus esse pariter vani. Aug. adv. Petil.
Ecclesiastical Assembly. The sharpest invectives are the slightest proofs. It
was but a frothy confutation of a fiery Spirit in Lucian -- (...) Thou cursed
wretch. We may in these, says St. Austin to Petilianus, a Donatist, be alike
copious, but we will not be alike vain.

As if like those of China you fancied your selves only to have two eyes, (of
Reason and of Religion) and the rest of the World but one, your first brand is
Ignorant. I pray set down what proportion of knowledge is precisely requisite
in a Communicant, and how far that phrase of discerning of the Lords Body is
necessarily to be extended. After constant Catechisms and Sermons in Parochial
Churches, men's ignorance is not so great in not knowing what to practice, as
their profaneness in not practicing what they know. Where Catechisms and
Sermons are not frequent, where the Expedients of saving knowledge are not
tendered, your Charity may determine this ignorance of a pure negation, not of a
depraved disposition; an involuntary necessitated, not a voluntary affected
ignorance.

However you deem, there is a gracious high Priest, after the order of
Melchisedeck, who can have compassion on the ignorant, (...), Theophyl.
Heb 5. 2. It is (...), which according to Theophylact imports commensuration,
compassion, condescension, condonation (to match, to melt, to bend, to stoop,
(so the Syriack) to pardon) This compassion is not confined to the ignorant,
but extended to the Delinquent. ( And on them that are out of the way) It Is
(...), such as swerve deviate from the narrow Path of integrity; such as are
seduced by the wiles, the impostures of Satan. This notion comprehends your
description of the black rabble, (Swearers, Drunkards, etc.) especially if the
transgressions be not predominant, if the transgressors be not impenitent. They
may be titled Saints professional, though not actual, for their Tenets, though
not for their Lives; as to the outward Administration of the General Covenant
of Grace, though not as to the inward special Participation.

Yet in the strictest consideration they are to be enrolled Saints, till they
are convicted to be miscreants: Till then, though they are not such really in
themselves, yet they are judicially in the Eye of the Law, in the Censure of
the Church. Not only by the Rule of Charity, but Equity; every man is presumed,
supposed to be good, till he be legally proved to be evil.

To twist together your objections of ignorance and profaneness (drunkards,
etc.) which you press as inconsistent with Saintship; I confess not
reconcilable with practical, yet reconcilable with federal sanctity to be
interested in a visible Church. The Israelites were charged for ignorance, Is.
1. 3.
worse than brutish ( The ox knows his owner, Is. 1. 10.
the ass his masters crib: But Israel has not known, my people has not
understood) So universally, signally corrupted for conversation, the whole
Nation is decypher'd, branched out to be Princes of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrah, and yet titled the Children of God in verse. 2. The vineyard of the
Lord of hosts in Is. 5. 7. yet the fruits were not delitious, Oppression in
verse. 7. Covetous in verse. 8. Drunkenness in verse. 11. 12. Security and
Impenitency in verse 12. Deliberate, obstinate iniquity in verse. 18, 20.

Though Sodom and Samaria were outvied in guilt by Israel, Ezech. 16. 48, 51.
yet were they a people relating to God by Covenant, though forfeited by their
defailance, disobedience; yet by Gods indulgence, not deserted, disclaimed by
himself ( I will remember my covenant made with thee, Hos. 4. 2, 3.
in the days of thy youth) It is Hoseah's black enditement, No truth, no mercy,
no knowledge of God in the land. By lying, and swearing, and killing, and
stealing, and whoring blood touches blood,) and yet it is appropriated, My
people in the sixth and twelfth verses of that Chapter; Nec tamen ironice
appellavit cum suum populum, sed vere quoad externam adoptionem.
Not ironically, but truly as ( Zanchy expounds it,) in regard of an external
adoption, of outward Symboles expresses of Religion; which served as public
badges and cognizances to manifest the Jews Ecclesiastical visible privileges,
not to be a people uncovenanted, unchurched.

Suppose this Nation more depraved than Sodom and Samaria, yet is it but
balanced with Israel; and it is no greater Soloecism in Scripture Language to
entitle this Nation to be Saints (for its Parochial Members) for the profession
of true Religion, than to entitle the Jews to be Gods people on the same
account. They are like parallel lines proportionable, suitable to each other.

The people of Israel were sanctified by a federal relation, were circumcised;
they owned Gods Oracles, but disobeyed his Laws. The scene of Circumcision
being shifted to Baptism, our case holds resemblance (as to a visible Church)
as face answers face in water.

I shall add by way of surplusage, The Apostles themselves were not absolutely
acquitted from ignorance of scandal; even in a remarkable conjuncture,
notwithstanding the celebrating of our Saviors last Supper, and the
approaching of the last scene of our Saviors Tragedy, they were contentious,
and ambitious, tainted with pride and variance. Luke 22. 24.
( There a rose a strife among them, which should be greatest.) Ignorant they
were of the saving mysteries of Christ's Passion, his Resurrection;
notwithstanding the predictions of the Prophets, the Sermons of our Savior,
yet they understood the Scepter only, not the Cross of Christ, the apprehension
of a Temporal, not a Spiritual Messiah fluttered in their brains, yet were
still listed, reputed Disciples, Apostles. Nay, Matthew. 26. 25, 26, 27.
Judas himself, Mar. 14. 23.
when he was declared, Luke 22. 19, 20.
pointed out a Traitor (being not excommunicated) was not debarred the name or
the seal of a Disciple (the Sacrament) as it is recorded by three Evangelists.
A truth written radio Solari, in Tertullians Phrase, with a Sunbeam, manifest
to discerning judgment, not dimmed with prejudice or cavil.

Since that Judas (his treason being discovered, but not doomed) was reckoned
among Christ's Disciples, why may not vicious persons uncensured by the Church,
who profess Christianity, as to that profession be named Saints.

You pretend this is contrary to Gods Word, 1 Cor. 6. 9. This Text has been
already sifted. As to your present application of it, I answer, This debars
such offenders from being Members of the Mystical Church, of that part of it
which is triumphant in Heaven, not of the Church Militant, so far as it is
visible here on earth.

Your next Text is, 1 John 1. 6. ( If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.) This excludes practical,
habitual Malefactors (such as walk in darkness) from being comprehended in the
Catholic invisible Church, not in a particular visible Church. The next verse
points out as an evidence of this innocence ( Fellowship one with another) an
united Congregation, not a disjoynted Separation.

Your third Citation is Matthew. 3. 7, 8. And when he saw many of the Pharisees
come to his baptism; he said to them, O generation of vipers, who had warned
you to flee from the wrath to come. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance.

This by way of Analogy (betwixt Baptism, and the Eucharist) proves that every
Communicant ought to be a real penitent, not that we ought not to communicate
with him, who is a real impenitent.

You seem to deal with these Texts, to form and fit them to your opinion, as
Procustes did with his guests, to proportion their dimensions to his bed; some
he hacked and cut shorter, others he racked and stretched out.

You annex a Caveat, Is. 5. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good
evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter.

I pray God be merciful to any of either party ( Tros Rutulusve fuit) who is
justly liable to this Commination. When ever your separation is demonstrated to
be good, when your Doctrine is manifested to be light, I shall not presume to
misname, nor disesteem it.

But if the blaze of Comets be accounted the splendour of Stars; if a new Light,
that diverts to Schism, extinguish the old Orthodox; if division, distraction,
confusion in Religion be gilded with the title, the varnish of Reformation, if
Sects that are to be bewailed, lamented for, be applauded, gloried in (as some
Ladies imagine their little black spots to be grand beauties) then this Caution
affords a retortion, and may be weighed by your selves.

You enforce this Caveat of Isaiah with Solomon's Aphorism, Prove. 17. 15. He
that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, they both are
abominable to the Lord. Whether this is to be interpreted of public
judicature, or private censure, I shall not discuss.

If you appropriate the Epithet Just, as you do Saints to your selves; we honor
whatever has the true savor of Sanctity in you: we are ready to embrace you
in our Bowels, in our Church.

Upon your aversness we condemn not the Separatist, but the Separation, because
erected upon an unwarrantable foundation, upon a Pharisaical presumption. If
you apply the wicked, mentioned Solomon, to a Parochial Assembly formerly
asperst by you to be a company of Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers; I am
no Advocate to plead for any crimes or scandals. I resent, bewail, and detest
them, and upon all fit opportunities shall present the guilt and horror of them
to the consciences of the Offenders, in the sharpest accents: Though when ever
acted, they are sufficient grounds for the Ministers general reprehension in
the Pulpit, yet not of your particular Separation from the Lords Table, till
they are declared, sentenced by the Church.

You proceed. They profess Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 17. (Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of a harlot? God forbid, verse 15. But he that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit, verse. 17.)

The Apostle does here by the elegant charm of Sacred Rhetoric dissuade, deter
the Christian Corinthians from lasciviousness, being the darling sin of
Corinth, Herodot. in Clio. Strabo, l. 8,
where a thousand beautiful Damsels were the votaries of Venus (as Herodotus
and Strabo testify) so that (...), became proverbial to be wanton: The
spreading contagion of uncleanness there occasioned the Apostles piercing
Expostulation, for a searching, healing, at least a preventing Physic, You may
hence argue, that fornication severs a professed Christian inwardly from Christ,
when ever committed, and not repented of, but not outwardly from the Church,
without conviction and promulgation.

You object such make not the Communion, because a mixed Communion is not fit
for Christ, his Members must be homogeneal, or else a monster.

This Argument is fallacious, Ab ignoratione Elenchi.

Wicked men so far as they are Christ's Members, are homogeneal, to wit, in
profession, though heterogeneal in conversation, wherein they are not Christ's
Members. Your Objection is not ejusdem secundum idem.

Real, actual Believers are Members homogeneal inwardly, sincerely: verbal,
professional Believers are Members homogeneal outwardly, formally. If this
Professional consideration will not serve, how do you confess Hypocrites to be
Members of the Church, since they are no otherwise homogeneal, than a glass
eye, or a wooden leg is to a true body, than a painted face is to a genuine
complexion, than the fucus, the Paint of Art is to the Beauty of Nature.

Lastly, you conclude the Church, if not homogeneal, a Monster; whereas,
impiety in Church Members is not monstrosity till emproved to impenitenoy: such
Monsters are to be cut off, to be excommunicated.

Your Citation in the close, 2 Cor. 6. 14. has been already discussed.

The Apostle there forbids the Corinthians to be yoked with Pagan Unbelievers,
because of the professed Idolatry: Therefore you will be separate from Christian
Believers for their practick iniquity.

The LETTER.
A mixed Communion may do no hurt, what is it to me, what others are? Ans. Yes,
it will be hurt to him that commucates with scandalous brethren, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
It is not meant there the sin, but the incestuous person. The danger is in
verse. 6. so Gal. 5. 9. which is, it may become sin to me in neglecting my duty,
if I have not endeavored the casting out of a scandalous person, as far as it
lies in me, and in following the rule, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17.

The ANSWER.
You plead it noxious to communicate with scandalous Brethren, from 1 Cor. 5.
7. compared with verse. 6. I have already vindicated this Text from your gloss,
being to be understood of Excommunication, not separation without it* You add,
Gal. 5. 9. ( A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump) It is a recital of the
same maxim, but not with the same scope, (...), Theophyl. in Gal. 5.
or drift. In the fifth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, it is
applied to the incestuous person, but in the fifth to the Galatians, to the
infection of Circumcision, a contagious Doctrine.

It is our Saviors Lecture. Matthew. 16. 6. Luk 12. 1.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. Their singularity, their hypocrisy
like leaven had a double influence, to swell and sower (Arrogance and
Virulence) If this leaven be entirely purged out, the question of separation
will be completely stated, absolutely determined.

If we will separate from the Pharisee, in the secret mortification of our own
bosoms, we cannot separate from the Publican, in the public pious devotion of
the Temple.

This primary duty being conscientiously observed (of purging the corruption of
our own hearts) the secondary duty will much more dexterously he discharged to
endeavor so far as in us lies (within the compass of our own Sphere, our
calling) to cleanse the Congregation of its corruption (a scandalous person.)

The Rule proposed, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. has been copiously examined, though
by your selves scantily observed.

The LETTER.
If I have gone so far by professing and witnessing against it, I discharged my
duty, or else I sin, and if the Church will not do it after long patience and
waiting, I know no warrant to continue in such a diseased body, that will not,
nor cannot purge out its infectious humors, that wants such a precious
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, of separating the precious from the vile, Hag. 2.
12, 13, 14. That the unholy do defile, and unhallow the holy in such a way, as
I said before, so that to communicate in such a way is sin.

The ANSWER.
It ought to be our prime care in this exigency, not to partake of the sins of
other men (when they are vicious and scandalous) not to be engaged in them by
Precept, or Precedent, by advice or example, by assistance or countenance, nay,
not by connivence, silence.

If the Church does not excommunicate, yet are not we commissioned to separate.
But you know no warrant to continue in a diseased body that cannot, will not
purge out her infectious humors. The desire of the Church of England is
fervent, though impotent for her power; impotent not in actu primo for
constitution, but actu secundo for execution. Ecclesiastical censure is not
imposed, because opposed. Will you charge outward impediments for inward
defects of the Church.

You tax the want of the precious Ordinance of separating the precious from the
vile, to be a ground for your separating and offer for a proof.

Hag. 2. 12, 13, 14. If one bear holy Flesh in the Skirt of his Garment, and
with his Skirt do touch Bread or Pottage, or Wine, or Oil, or any meat, shall
it be holy? And the Priest answered and said, No.

Then said Haggai, if one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these,
shall it be unclean? And the Priest answered and said, It shall be unclean.

Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this people, and so is this nation
before me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, and that which
they offer there is unclean.

The Judgment of the Priest was not erroneous, if any unclean person touch
bread, it shall be unclean to him that is unclean, not to him that is clean.
Thus an impenitent person polluteth what he receives to himself in the
Communion, not what the penitent receives. To the pure all things are pure, 1
Tit. 15.

This Testimony of Haggai concerns a Judaical, Quibus typis innuit Deus illorum
judiciorum causas quae in Judaeis hactenus exercuerat, nimirum quod nullam
sanctitatem in uncto aut rebus sanctificatis Deo percepissent, quia impuri
animis suis fuerant non minus quam illi qui ex cadavere impuritatem
contraxerant. Jun. and Tyem. in Hag. 2. verse. 12, 13, 14.
Ceremonial, Ritual Defilement; which is not directly argumentative to infer a
Moral, an Evangelical. As for the Application of it, the Prophet manifests the
Sacrifices of the Jews to be impure, because their hearts were; resembling them
to those that contract impurity by the dead. Thus Junius and Tremelius
understood it. This Text admits no consequence, no inference to your advantage.

If one unclean by a dead body, etc. This might be so covertly managed, that it
might be concealed, not discerned; and yet the thing he touched was unclean.
Whence what can you deduce except it be that even Hypocrites undiscovered do
pollute the Sacraments, and render them unclean to every one that communicates
with them? (A Position you will not assert) If from some men's uncleanness the
holy Institutions of God should be defiled to others, who can be unsoiled. God
help us, with whom should any man communicate to assure himself of exemption
from this pollution.

Yea, but I know the man is unclean. That I cannot peremptorily determine,
because of his being present, his desire and design to receive the Seal of his
Salvation in Charity induces me to a persuasion, at least prompts me to a hope,
that he is penitent.

Hezekiahs candor deserves a serious consideration, a pious imitation (For a
multitude of people, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19.
even many of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed
themselves: yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. But
Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good Lord pardon every one, that
prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not
cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary.)

This Prayer, that abounded in Charity, was not scanted for success. A great
compassion of man was owned, and crowned by a greater of God. It Is recorded in
the next verse, And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles 30. 20.
and healed the people. Though our Congregations are not cleansed according to
the purification of the sanctuary, yet I wish you would rather commiserate,
than separate, exercise yearning bowels to bemoan, rather than branding
Epithets to doom; that you would rather pray for us, than censure; This will
neither hallow our people, nor your self.

But ( a Diverticulo ad viam) to return to your Objection, the rational force
whereof is Sophistical, non causa pro causa. The want of Excommunication in the
Church of England, is no sufficient warrant for your separation. This at most
imports an imperfection, not an abolition. I appeal to Calvin's Judgment. Si
hic ordo (scil. Excom.) alicui Ecclisiae desit, imperfectione eam, and prava
macula notatum esse, sed, non to minus pro Ecclesiae ipsam habemus, ac per
sistimus in ejus communione, atque affirmamus singulis ab ea segregare non
licere, Calv. adv. Anabap.
We do no less esteem it a Church (for this defect) we persist in its
Communion, we aver it not lawful for men to segregate, to separate themselves
from it.

This also is Paraeus decision, Nec censuras Ecclesiasticas sive superiorum
iniquitate sive populi pervicacia habere possunt ad patientiam sese cum
prudentia Christiana hoc modo componant; ut primo quidem defectum disciplinaram
docendi officio ac sedulitate pensare studeant cogitentque ex ore Dei beatos
esse qui esuriunt and fitiunt justitiam quia sacurabuntur. Deinde caveant in
eam ire sententiam aut venire opinionem, quasi Ecclesia esse non possit, aut
non sit, ubi nulla est excommunicationis disciplina. Haec Permeniani and
Donatistarum olim erat pestilens opinio. Paraeus in 1 Ep. ad Corinth. cap. 5.
where Ecclesiastical Censures cannot be obtained by the iniquity of the
Governors, or the obstinacy of the People, he recommends Prudence and Patience
to all, to Pastors a special diligence (to support the of want rigorous
Discipline, with the power of vigorous Doctrine) considering our Saviors
consolation. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be satisfied. But he admonishes to shun the pestilent opinion of
the Donatists, as if there were no true Church, where there is not this severe
Discipline.

Polanus confidently resolves, Non propter disciplinae Ecclesiasticae neglectum
aut cessatioinem statim Ecclesia est neganda. Polan. in synt. l. 7. c. 8.
That a Church is not immediately to be disavowed upon neglect or cessation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. To omit other numerous Testimonies, Quanquam errores
and defectus nunquam sunt dissimulandi: in quibuscunque tamen fundamentum and
summa doctrinae Apostolicae retinetur, eoque nulla manifesta commititur
idolatria cum lis caetibus tanquam vtris Christi Ecclesiis pacem and
communionem colendam esse sentimus. Tanti facienda est unio Ecclesiarum. Zanch.
de Christ. cap. 24. sect. 10.
I shall add only Zanchies determination (the reformed learned Schoolman) in
what Churches soever the Fundamental Summary of Apostolical Doctrine is
retained, and therein no manifest idolatry admitted, Peace and Communion is to
be regarded with those Assemblies, as the true Churches of Christ.

So greatly is Ecclesiastical Unity to be esteemed.

Were this sober moderate Rule assented to, it would put your separation to the
blush; which it self alone, (being the fertile Womb of a various prodigious
issue of Sects in this Climate) is a greater scandal to the Reformed Religion,
than all those vicious, notorious practices, (not punished with Church
Censures, whereby it is pretended to be justified.)

This is the harmonious opinion of Reformed Divines.

If these (...), these inartificial Arguments, if their Authority sway not; I
shall add (...), artificial from the grand Topic, the end of Excommunication,
which spreads it self into three eminent Branches, (1. That the Church may be
vindicated. 2. That the Offender may be reclaimed. 3. That others may not be
infected.) Neither design is advanced by Separation.

The Church of England is by you unjustly scandall'd, Si damnaremus
excommunicationem aut suaderemus inutilem esse and supervacaneam tunc
murmurandi adversum nos occasionem haberent. Calv. ad. An.
branded (being indeed not corrupted in its self as rejecting Excommunication,
but disabled, restrained from executing it.)

Offenders are hereby more exasperated, tempted to be more depraved, being
deserted in those acts, wherein they are not Offenders, being doomed unheard,
unsummon'd)

Lastly, others are more endangered to be infected, being abandoned
unwarrantably by those, by whose exemplary Graces they might be preserved
untained.

The LETTER.
So then I conclude thus. That to communicate with such persons, and in a
Church that generally consists of such as we are commanded above to withdraw,
and separate from, is sin.

To communicate in and with the Parishes of England, is so to communicate,
therefore it is sin.

The ANSWER.
I have already discovered the invalidity of your Major, in those instances
produced; whence it is collected.

I deny your Minor Proposition. To communicate in and with the Parishes of the
Church of England, is not to communicate with those we are commanded by God to
separate from, your proof is Fallacia Accidentis. The wickedness wherein we are
to separate is extrinsecal, accidental to the holiness wherein we communicate.

Were our Parishes such as you decypher them, yet were it no sin to communicate
in and with them for acts of necessary duty, of piety; but of unnecessary
familiarity, intimacy, impiety. It is no sin to communicate with such sinners
Sacramentally, whilst such sinners are not excommunicated.

The LETTER.
A Church that generally consists of ignorant, profane and scandalous persons,
and scoffers therein, is a degenerate Church, and not safely to he communicated
with, when other lawful ways are offered.

But such are generally the people of the Parishes of England and Wales, as sad
experience testifies, and so a degenerated Church.

Therefore not safely to be communicated with.

It was Gods controversy with the Church, Rev. 2. 20.

The ANSWER.
I may except against your Major Proposition. For a Church is not to be
estimated by the Errors, the Erailties, nay, the enormities, the prodigies of
some Members, but by its own Laws (establishments, acknowledgements) and by the
manners, Ecclesiae non ex quorundum erroribus, infirmitatibus, flagitiis, sed
ex legibus and sanioris partis moribus aestimanda. Pet. Mart. in loc. Com.
the practices of the better, the sounder part, says Peter Martyr.

The bent of your Argument is fallacious, Ecclesiae aestimandae ex eo quod
communissime and latissime tenetur. Whitak. de Not. Eccl.
A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, whilst you tax the constitution
of the Church for the corruption of its Members.

However, I deny your Minor Proposition, which is illogically expressed, and
helps to shape your Syllogism a Paralogism by excrescence of terms. I shall
crave leave to rectify, to regulate it.

Let [testified by sad experience] be inserted in your Major Proposition. A
Church that, testified by sad experience, consists of ignorant, profane,
scandalous persons, is not safely to be communicated with, when other lawful
ways are offered.

Let your Minor be thus framed. Such are generally the people of the Parishes
of England, as sad experience testifies, when other lawful ways are offered.

I presume it was not your inadvertency to omit this Clause (when other ways
are offered) being in this Controversy of special importance.

Your Minor Proposition being thus enlarged, contains a charge of the Church of
England, and a discharge of your selves from its Communion, a redress by other
lawful ways offered.

The first part is not so properly a Proposition, as an Aspersion. This is to
calumniate, not demonstrate (The Church of England generally consists of
ignorant, profane, scandalous persons and scoffers.)

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. The Jesuit will congratulate
and applaud this invective, Ex Haereticis nullus est bonus. Res ipsa est
notissima. Bellar. de not. Eccl. l. 4. c. 13.
which partly justifies Bellermines censorious condemnation. It is notorious
manifest to all, that among Heretics (he means Protestants) there is not one
good gracious person.

You here reinforce your former impeachment of ignorance, as if a separate
Church were the Goshen of a new sacred Light, and the Church of England were
like the rest of Egypt overspread with superstitious darkness. I have already
endeavored to vindicate it from this imputation.

To ignorant you add the brand of profane, scandalous scoffers, as if your
separation were like Gideons Fleece, besprinkled with the dew of Heaven, whilst
the Church of England is parched with barbarism of infidelity.

Be it so, Romans 11. 20.
yet be not high minded, but fear; lest your spiritual tumor alter the Scene,
remove the Candlestick. Pride tainted Adam in Paradise, the Angels in Heaven
(once blessed Spirits, now damned Fiends.) Remember the second part of the
Miracle, Gideons Fleece partch'd, all about it bedewed. Mary Magdalen, who was
once possessed with Devils, was afterward replenished with Graces. These
scoffers you tax may (by Gods Grace) mourn for their scoffs: Those profane
persons, who overflow in their cups, may overflow in their sorrows, and
exchange a deluge of distempers for tears, their frequent oaths and
imprecations, for penitent prayers and supplications. And though the outward
fruit be blasted, to your eye; yet there may be secret buds and blossoms
discernible to God, and acceptable in Christ, notwithstanding those apparent
witherings. There may be deep sighs and sobs of spirit, passionate yernings,
and pantings for Grace, where there are no manifest effects of it. Will you
deny the balm of Gilead to these bleeding wounds of Souls? The sound have no
need of the physician but the sick. Matthew. 11. 28.


Our captivity interests us in a Redeemer, our iniquity in a Savior, who
summons, attracts, those who are heavy laden, clogged with their
transgressions, to be disburdned of this weight and pressure, who came not to
call (...), just persons, who justify themselves; but (...), heinous,
scandalous sinners to repentance; that so where sin abounds (for apprehension,
conviction, as well as commission) there Grace (of remission) may much more
abound.

To conclude, as to the first part of your Minor Proposition: Homo sum de area
Christi* hujus ar^ae ventilabrum non est lingua Petiliani. Aug. contra Petil.
l. 1. c. 10.
Those ignorant profane persons in the Church of England, are of Christ's
visible floor, your pen is not the fan of that floor, to dispel, to reject them
as chaff; nor are they to be deemed so by you, till doomed so by the Church.

The second part of your Minor Proposition asserts other lawful ways offered
besides communicating with the Church of England degenerated.

Separation is no lawful way, this is Petitio principii, the begging, not the
proving of the Question. This loud vaunt of other lawful ways is not unlike the
Cyclops clamor in Homer, (...). It is but an empty sound. It is the grave
Caveat of Dr. Kellet, Dr. Kellett in the first b. of his Miscel. chap. 8.
take it in his own expression. Reasons more than ordinary, will be expected by
God and good men from him, who leapeth out of the Church, in which he was born
and bred, kicking at the breasts of his Mother, running with the bit in his
teeth, his own ways. He chalks out these paths as the most lawful ways, and
expedients. First, Integrity, Jer. 4. 14.
To wash the heart from wickedness. (A Church is ill contradicted by ill
depraved men.)

2. To pray for, and practice humility. First cast out the beam out of thy own
eye, Mat. 7. 5.
and thou shall see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye, ( so
likewise out of thy Mothers eye.)

A second Expedient is conference (without prejudice) with learned pious
Pastors of a different Opinion; that truth (not interest or faction) may
impartially be promoted. If our addresses be made to, our discourses held only
with those, who are byast with our own Tenets, we must expect to be soothed,
applauded in our judgments, not informed and rectified.

If after these assays having been sanctified, humbled, having conferred we
remain yet unsatisfied, he prescribes a retired mourning and silence; wherein
he pleads the current judgment of Jerome, Ockam, and Dr. Field.

Thus without separation may the peace of the Church, and our own innocence be
secured inviolable.

Thus with Unity and Humility of spirit may we uprightly renounce the Errors
and Vices of any Members of the Church, but not renounce the Church it self for
the Errors and Vices of any of its members.

Lastly, you affix to your Conclusion, as an appendant to your Argument, as a
corollary naturally resulting (though of a far different Extraction and
Lineage,) Rev. 2. 20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because
thou suffer the woman Jesabel, which calls her self a prophetess to teach,
and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed
to idols. I shall not dispute whether the woman Jesabel be meant Helena (Simon
Magus lascivious darling) or Priscilla, the wanton Minion of Montanus, or any
Gnostick unchaste favorite (wherein learned Expositors vary in their
conjectures) Beza and Junius understood fornication in that verse, to be an
idolatrous sacrifice or worship seconded expressly with an idolatrous Feast, to
eat things sacrificed to Idols. Because the Angel of the Church of Thyatyra is
reproved for permitting idolatry; will you hence conclude, that the Church of
England is not to be communicated by a private person in her Sacramental Piety.

You object, it was Gods Controversy. I grant a Controversy it was, not a
Judgment, ('it is lis sub judice) no sentence past, no Bill of Divorce, no
Separation. This instance is very inconsiderately obtruded. How gentle is the
Controversy ( I have a few things against thee,) It is no sharp Indictment. In
the immediately precedent verse, God vouchsafes a high Elogy. I know thy works,
Revel. 2. 19.
and charity, and service, and faith, and patience.

Though Jesabel was suffered, connived at, yet others were not corrupted, not
counseled to separate from the Church for that permission, but their
perseverance in good is instructed, and a recompense promised, verse. 24, 25, 26.

Blemishes are recited in other Churches, specified in the same Chapter, but
the unblemished are not advised to a Separation, to a Schism, for any stain or
corruption.

The LETTER.
God never instituted such a Church, wherein his whole Worship, and all his
Ordinances might not be enjoyed.

But some, if not many of the Parishes are such, that all his Ordinances cannot
be enjoyed.

To prove this, I will instance in the Ordinance of Excommunication. If all
should be excommunicated, as the word requires, I could make it appear (though
I heartily desire it were otherwise) that most, if not all, in many Parishes
should be excommunicated, and then where will the Church of England be, and
other Ordinances enjoyed.

The ANSWER.
This Argument is liable to Logical Exception (the terms being varyed, and
thereby multiplied.) But I shall not scruple at the form, but answer to the
matter of your Syllogism.

The Major Proposition is not absolutely true to be granted, nor absolutely
false to be denied, but ambiguous to be distinguished.

Gods Ordinances is an equivocal expression. Some Ordinances are essential,
requisite to the constitution, the very being of the Church, others are
accidental Ornaments to conduce to its perfection, its well being: Of the first
sort are the preaching of the Word only, and the administration of the
Sacraments (in the judgment of the best reformed Worthies, in direct
opposition to the Romanists.) Of the later sort is the Ordinance of
Excommunication.

That Church which entirely wants the former sort, is not of Divine
Institution, or Approbation: In the later we must distinguish betwixt not
approving Excommunication to be practiced, and not practicing it, being
approved; and in the not practicing, there is a vast difference betwixt a
willing consent, and an unwilling restraint. This last is the case of the
Church of England, which desires to enjoy the Ordinance of Excommunication,
according to the Primitive, Apostolical Purity, and vehemently bewails its not
enjoying. So that the substance of your Argument is a Sophism, A dicto secundum
quid ad dictum simpliciter. From an outward impediment, to an inward defect in
the Church of England; from its disaster, to its default; from its calamity, to
its impiety, its nullity.

I may tender the retortion of your Argument for its refutation.

God never instituted such a Church, wherein his whole Worship, and all his
Ordinances cannot be enjoyed. But some, if not all, of the collected Churches
are such, that all his Ordinances cannot be enjoyed. Therefore.

To prove the Minor, I will instance in singing Psalms, reading the Scripture,
baptising Infants, which are not allowed, nor practiced in some collected
Churches. I only hint this retortion, and proceed to your illustration, which
is over severe like Dracos Law written in Blood, accented with horror; that you
could make it appear, that if we should be excommunicated, that the Word
requires, that most, if not all, in many Parishes should be excommunicated.
Tertius e coelo cecidit Cato -- Give me leave to allay your rigor, as a prudent
Senator did Cato's, that he expected a Platonic Commonwealth in the dreggs of
Romulus.

Here you sentence most, if not all, in many Parishes, to have merited
Excommunication; in a former objection you widely, expressly charge the Parishes
of the Churches of England generally to consist of ignorant, profane,
scandalous scoffers. You have been no Vicar General to visit all the Parochial
Churches, having resided in a nook of the Nation, and cannot in that Angle
judge exactly of the whole, like him who discovered the measure of Hercules
body by his foot. But it is not in point of quality of actions, as of quantity
and dimensions. The Body Natural, Political, and Ecclesiastical are not alike
discerned.

Your harsh censure has its foundation in conjecture or rumor; neither will
warrant its stability, or integrity In such cases, if false, your judgment
perverse; if true, it is precipitate, it is rash (as Aquinas state it.)

God examined, endicted before h^ doomed Adam, Genesis 3. 9, 11. Genesis 4. 9, 10.
or Cain, Though the sin of Sodom was heinous, and clamorous, ascended from
Earth to Heaven though it pierced the Clouds, and was conspicuous in the face
of the Sun* yet God resolved to descend from Heaven to Earth, to proceed to
inquisition, before condemnation ( I will go down and see) Genesis 18. 21.
though not to satisfy himself; Cum omnia nuda and aperta sint mala, tamen
Sodomae noluit ante judicare quam probare nos instruere ne mala hominum ante
presumeremus credere quam probare. Greg. Hom. 17. in Evang.
yet to instruct us. He prescribes a singular exemplary, legal candor, in Deuteronomy.
22. 23, 24, 25. A Damosel guilty of actual uncleanness in the City is
condemned, but charged with that impure act in the Field is acquitted, because
if she had cried, opposed in the City, she might have been heard, relieved; but
in the remote Field (the case being doubtful) with a mixture of Equity and
Charity, it is decided that she cried, was ravished, because not evidently to
be disproved.

The Rule of the Civil Law is not inconsistent with the Evangelical. In
doubtful cases the milder interpretation is to be esteemed the better. If you
will still persist with confidence to brand our Parishes upon the experience,
perhaps of others; I shall reply only, St. John's Gosp. chap. 8. verse. 7.
Let him that is without sin (exempted from the present iniquity, and future
capacity of it, as the pregnancy of the word (...) imports) cast the first
stone, -- Iliacos intra muros pecatur and extra. --

I must confess with horror and anguish of soul, that the practical
corruptions, the abominations of many in our Parishes are too great, which
calls for the sharpest contrition of our souls in groans and agonies; with the
vilest humiliation of our bodies, the most abject prostration in Sackcloth
and Ashes. Yet we are not the sole offenders.

There is little, too little sincerity of Christianity among the sons of men;
who make choice of opposite Virtues and Vices to serve secular interests, to
satisfy sensual appetites.

I wish from my soul your separation were as guiltless for spiritual
trespasses, as our Parishes are guilty of carnal:

That the maturity of our iniquity (as you urge) may prevent yours, that there
were no tincture, of avarice or malice out of our Parochial Congregations: That
the voice being Jacobs voice, there might be no hands of Esau; that you were
all endowed as well as titled Saints, to be heavenly men, according to the
Greek Etymology, sequestered, refined from earthly dregs. But the detestation of
our gross offenses is no privilege, nor plea before Gods dreadful Tribunal,
for the prosecution of your own, though spun with a finer thread.

I pray God of all hands pierce us with a deep mournful apprehension of our own
personal offenses; that our Parochial Assemblies may be more sober and devout;
and that your separate Churches may be more humble and charitable.

Before I quit this Argument, let me admonish your candor and suspense in point
of Excommunication.

-- Tantae ne animis caelestibus irae? It is no prudent soul Surgery; Nulli
Christianorum facilis communio deneganda, Leo Ep^ 87.
nor innocent, to be too busy tampering with the saw. The Spiritual Sword of
Excommunication, is not hastily to be unsheathed, It savours of the Papal
violence to thunder out Anathemaes against whole Reformed Churches. St.
Iraeneus justly blames Victor for his fierceness of spirit, his proneness to
excommunicate the Churches of Asia. The Primitive Church herein proceeded with
much wary weighty deliberation (says Tertullian) as in the solemn presence of
God. Nam and judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu. Tert.
adv. Gent.


Paraeus advises special moderation, Qui habere possunt moderate ea utantur,
and caveant a rigore, quia ob infirmitatem humanam eventusque dubios, medicina
est ut valde dolorifica, sic admodum periculosa. Par. in 1 Cor. c. 5.
because of humane infirmity, and contingency of dubious Events; it is a
corrosive Medicine, as very grievous, so very perilous. In this particular, --
Fas est and ab host doceri.

It was a good sanction, Quamvis excommunicatio^^s gladius nervus sit
Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae, and ad continendos in officio populos valde
salutaris, sobrie tamen magnaque cum circumspectione exercendus.
though of no good Council (that of Trent) Although the Sword of
Excommunication be the sinew of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and very wholesome
to contain the people in their duty, yet is soberly, and very circumspectly to
be exercised.

Since experience tutors us, Cum experientia doceat, si temere aut levibus ex
rebus incutiatur, magis contemni quam formidari, and perniciem potius parere
quam salutem. Cont. Trid. Sect. 25. c. 3.
that if managed with rash passion upon light occasion, it is rather contemned
than dreaded, rather destructive than preservative.

Father Paul the Venetian (the Author of the excellent History of that Council
of Trent) reputed this Canon worthy to be engraven with Letters of Gold.

It is in effect confessed both by Primitive and Modern Divines, that obstinacy
against the Authority of the Church is causa primo movens, Spirituali gladio
superbi and contumaces necantur. Cypr. li. Ep. 11.
first moving; Pertinaces esse excommunicandos tantum idque cum pertinacia
eorum toti Ecclesiae nota fuerit facta. ait Zanch. in quartum Praecept.
at least promovens, promoting Excommunication. Your own Arguments frequently
intimate it.

If so, what greater contumely, contumacy against the Church of England, than
of her own separated Members (in whom her just interest is not cancelled,
though not esteemed) If she proceeds to Excommunication you disclaim, spurn at
it; If she proceeds not to Excommunication, you quarrel for this neglect.
Separation is (in some respects at least) more excommunicable, than
profanation, Schism than distemper. A debosh'd man, if discreetly reprehended
(otherwise it is a reproach, not a reproof) will blush or tremble, but a
separatist disdain, insult; he disturbs the peace of the Church, tears its
Unity: the other perverts himself, disquiets his own conscience.

The Apostle so passionately resents the wound of Ecclesiastical faction, Gal.
5. 19.
that he burst out. I would they were even cut off that trouble you. It Is
(...), that are unsetling, removing you from your first station in the Church.
Est noanihil emphaseos in conjunctione (...) (i.) amputentur, sive reiecentur,
non solum judicentur, sed etiam Anathema siant. Erasin. in Gal. 5.
That they were cut off that trouble you. It Is (...), the Greek Phrase in the
Primitive Church for Excommunication.

The Apostle prescribes a recess, Romans 16. 17.
a distance as from excommunicated persons. (...) est attente, diligenter quasi
hosts e specula observetis, Beza in Romans 16. 17.
Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine you have
learned, and avoid them: (...) is to observe diligently, to ken them, as
Enemies from a watch Tower; and when they are discovered, (...), decline, wave
them; Theophylacts gloss is (...), recoyl. The Method is observed by St.
Chrysostom, and Oecumenius: First, Divisions, That you exclude them as profane
out of your public Assemblies by Excommunication, Diodati on Romans 16. 17.
(...). O^cum. Romans 16.
then Scandals, Division being the prime subversion of the Church. Whilst it is
united, Satan is not admitted, Scandals are not started. These offenses are
expounded Heresies by the same Fathers. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Heresies are in the Apostles carnal list, Pet. 2. Ep. 2. chapter v. 1.
as well as sensual vices, they are alike execrable, titled damnable by the
holy Ghost.

It is an Apostolical constitution, never to be abrogated. Gal. 1. 8.
Though we, or an angel from heaven preach any other doctrine, than that which
we have preached to you, So accounted by Is. Casaubon upon Athenaeus.
let him be accursed. Not that an Angel from Heaven can preach any heretical
Doctrine, but mortal men on Earth may, Anathema sit, id est segregatus,
separatus, exclusus. Vincent. Lyrin. adv. Haeres.
who pretend an Angelical heavenly sanctity: If any such be, the doom is
determined. Let him be Anathema. It is a sort of Excommunication, Hesychius,
the first Christian Grammarian glosseth it by (...), excommunicated. Are not
all the doctrinals of Christian Religion exploded by some or other separated
Members, who in this Climate, in a few years have vented more heresies and
blasphemies than any age, perhaps more than all the ages since the Apostles.

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. I never yet heard of any excommunicated
for a Heretic out of any separate Church.

Even in point of practical conversation, Indulgentiam sibi invicem tribuerunt,
ut crimina in silentium mitterent sua, vitam infamare conati sunt alienam,
Optat. l. 1. de Schis. Donat.
The Donatists, who pressed the same objection against the African Orthodox
Churches, yet embraced in their own vicious and scandalous Gildorinians,
Primians, Circumcelliones, indulging each other in impieties, obscuring their
own crimes by defaming others. I shall not offer to revive any such black
impeachment, that may reflect on the present separation.

-- Per me equidem sint omnia protinus alba. I have enlarged this meditation,
not out of the least desire that the Church of England, if in its full power
and luster, should exercise its severe jurisdiction toward those of your
opinion, but only to blunt your keen edge, and allay your rigor. I am no
Boanerges, no Son of Thunder toward any that are conscienciously erroneous.

Lastly, because the defect of Excommunication is the main hinge of your
separating from the Church of England, I pray recollect your self, and consider
the true tenor and rigor of Excommunication, with the ancient practice of it.

That which you account Excommunication, is rather to be named Excommunion.

That spreading Generation of men, which reject all Sacred Ordinances, do not
dread but deride this doom.

It is not to them a Thunderbolt, but a Rattle.

Those profane persons in the Church of England excepted against (and for them
the Church it self) are either such as resent their ungracious courses, relent
for them (these being not justly to be excommunicated) or else they are
habitual obdurate Offenders. This sentence (as you seem to understand) is to
them an indulgence; it serves to gratify, not terrify them, depriving them of
that Sacrament, whereof they deprived themselves.

If you cast an eye upon the Judaical, and the Ancient Christian Discipline
(Ecclesiastical) This appears but the first gradation of Excommunication, nay,
scarce that.

The first step among the Jews was Niddui, ^. Juda in Si. Mos. 95. 1. Buxtorf.
in Just. Epist.
which signifies separation (twenty four causes whereof are recited.) This was
in some measure and degree a remotion, not only from Ecclesiastical, but Civil
and Domestic Society, such was not to be approached to within four paces, of
this sort probably was Cains Excommunication. Those who were excommunicated,
were the Menudde, who were discerned by their lips covered, and confined to the
gate of the Mourners, not admitted to the gate of the Bridgegrooms. This is
that separation mentioned, Luke 6. 22. The exclusion putting out of the
Synagogue, John 9. 22. the 12. 42. and 16. 2. This was a limited censure for
three days. Such was the restraint of the Abstenti (mentioned by St. Cyprian)
But the Offenders persevering obstinate, there was a second gradation, an
aggravation of censure, without limitation of time.

Cherem with the addition of solemn Mosaical execration, without capacity of
being Rabby or Disciple (neither being debarred in the former gradation)
without liberty of access to any part of the Temple or Synagogue.

This judgment proving ineffectual, the delinquent persisting impenitent. The
third Gradation, Samatha, (or Schammatha) is an entire proscription, a
banishing from any Society of Gods people, an ultimate appeal, an immediate
surrender to Divine vengeance.

The Canonists and Schoolmen distinguish a lesser, and a greater
Excommunication (how warrantably as to Scripture Rules I discuss not) the
lesser is a suspension from the Sacrament; 1 Cor. 5. 5.
but the greater from all holy Assemblies and Duties (as Prayers and Sermons in
the Congregation. 1 Timothy 1. 20.
) This is a delivering to Satan to be destitute of the Spiritual Armory, for
resisting, Si quis deliquerit ut a communicatione Orationis, and conventus and
omnis sancti commercii religetur. Tert. in Apol. adv. Gent. and cap. 39.
rejecting Satan, and in the Primitive Apostolical Church to be outwardly
afflicted, corporally tormented by him.

This greater Excommunication does dispriviledge the living from legal
Judicature, Excommunicatio minor separat tantum a participatione Sacramentorum;
Major Excommunicatio separat hominem and a Sacramentis Ecclesiae and a
Communione fidelium, Aquin. in suppl. 3. part. Qu. 23. Act. 1.
and the dead from solemn Christian Sepulture^, not admitting the
excommunicated till absolved into the Church for any act of Communion,
Devotion, or Attention: Not into Civil Courts for any Testimonies, not into
private Houses for repast (unless in special exigencies and relations) allowing
them neither the Commodity of Commerce of Traffic, nor the familiarity of
converse, Vide formam Excommunicationis in Council. Fransic. and apud Gratian.
11. 9. 11. Canonica instituta (A Gremio sanctae matris Ecclesiae, and a
consortio totius Christianitatis elimnamus.)
of discourse (there being a glimmering resemblance hereof among the Heathens
in Orestes Adrastus, in the judgment of Melanchthon.) The Schoolmen express
these restraints in a Poetical summary.

Si pro delictis Anathema quis efficiatur,
Os, orare, vale, communio, mensa negatur.
Even in relaxation of this severe censure, there was in the Greek Church a
gradual progress chalked out before a plenary absolution. The first Station is
(...), To be weepers without the gate of the Church, Vide Canonem, Greg.
Neo-Caesariensis de ^ loc. Penit. (...). Orig. contra Celsum l. 3.
in a doleful note to supplicate for the Prayers of those that enter in (who
passionately mourn for them, says Origin, as for the dead.) The Second Station
is (...), To be Auditors within the gate. The third Station is (...), for an
Humiliation of Devotion to pray, and depart with the Catechumeni. The fourth
Station is (...), to be ranked with the faithful in the Congregation. The last
Station, the perfection of the rest, is (...), to be readmitted to the Sacred
Encharist.

These gradual abatements, and inhancements of judiciary severity, may be
singular restraints to curb the loose reigns of profaneness in those that
retain any reverence to the Ordinance of Church Discipline. However, to be
debarred Civil Enfranchising, and Domestic Offices will bridle the most
insolent extravagant Offenders* who have the least ingenuity of Nature. To
conclude this point insensibly spun out beyond my intention.

-- Currente rota -- As for your objection of whole Parishes that have deserved
to be excommunicated, Supersedendum est Excommunicatione quando tota plebs
eodem laborat morbo. August.
St. Austin does not approve the Excommunication of a community, a multitude,
because such a sentence will fail of obedience, it invites contempt, and rather
steels and hardens, than scares and saddens Malefactors. Nunquam tota
Communitas excommunicari debet, ne cum loliis and zizaniis simul eradicetur and
triticum. Aquin. in suppl. 3. part. Qu. 22. Act. 5.
Aquinas seconds St. Austin with this reason, lest the pure ear be rooted up
with the tare.

The Canon Law fortifies the same caution, lest the innocent be exterminated
out of the Church, together with the delinquent. When in a Community all are
engaged in the act of wickedness, yet not all alike in the guilt; some
primarily interested, others secondarily: some with delight, others with
regret. However a vicious multitude professing Christianity, if uncensured, is
not Unchurch'd.

The LETTER.
There are scandalous persons in Corinth, yet a Church. What they were in the
first constitution appears, 1 Cor. 1. Where the Apostle brings them back to the
consideration of, as if he should have said: Is it not a shame you should be
thus and thus now, consider what you were, and upon what account you were
received at first.

2. Its true, there were wicked men among them, but they were enjoined by the
Apostle to cast out those wicked men, and if they did not do it, it was their
sin, and they were defiled by it, so that they remained such a Church still as
might excommunicate their corrupt Members.

The ANSWER.
You start an Objection, and quickly startle from it, as willing to be rid of
it; it is propounded to its own disadvantage, contracted and disfigured: like
one who contrives the disesteem of a choice piece of Tapestry, by discovering
the wrong side, and that not folded but rufled. You could have displayed it in
a fuller measure, for proportion, in a brighter luster for view.

The whole Church of Corinth was discomposed (in its Members corrupted) for
Doctrine, Discipline, Practice.

The Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 35.
a Principle, a Fundamental of Religion contradicted, 1 Cor. 5. 1.
scoffed.

A heinous prodigious incest not only not censured, 1 Cor. 1. 12
but not mourned for. 1 Cor. 3. 3.


Carnal stains of Animosities, 1 Cor. 11. 18.
Parties, Sects.

Contentions, 1 Cor. 6. 6, 7, 8.
injurious Suits, scandalously prosecuted before Pagan Tribunals.

Intimation of Christian Liberty abused, 1 Cor. 6. 12, 15, 16*
Chastity violated.

The wounding of Consciences. 1 Cor. 8. 12.
Spiritual Murder, baning of souls.

Idolatrous Pollutions. 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21, 22.


The Decency of Ecclesiastical Ceremies slurred. 1 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.


The Piety of Ecclesiastical Assemblies blemished. 1 Cor. 11. 17.


Disorderly riot, 1 Cor. 11. 20.
and distemper recorded.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper profaned, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30.
and the diffusive guilt evidenced by a diffusive Judgment.

Ohe lassatum juvate posteri! The Church of Corinth was an Augean stable to be
purged.

Can any Separatist point out the Church of England with a more uncomely
feature.

Indeed the Church of England does not discover more scandal, than that of
Corinth, but you express less Charity than the Apostle. He entitled the Church
of Corinth thus depraved, the Church of God. To this Objection you frame a
double resolution. First, as if the Apostle had reflected on their first
constitution past, not their present condition and qualification.

This is (as Bembus blasphemed) to make Scripture a nose of Wax.

You confidently boult out an unwarranted, uncountenanced gloss; unwarranted,
because it checks with the literal Grammatical expression. It is to the Church
of God in (...)* a Participle of the present Tense, nor is there the least
plausible plea for a tropical evasion to flee to an Enallage temporis.

Since the holy Ghost vouchsafes the same title to the Corinthians of Corinth,
in the 2 Ep. v. 1 of Galatia, Gal. 1. 2. of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 1. of Pergamus,
Rev* 2. 12. of Thyatyra. Rev. 2. 18. of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1. of Laodicea, Rev. 3.
14. And yet all soyl'd with scandals.

Do not your self vindicate an Authority of Excommunication at Corinth, when
this Epistle was written? Where there was a true power of Excommunication, you
must grant a true Church. The consequence is infallible. Though there may in
some Cases, which I have already manifested be a true Church, where there is
not the Exercise of Excommunication (the terms being not reciprocal) yet
wheresoever there is a lawful exercise of excommunication, or a lawful right
for that Exercise (though diverted) there is true Church.

As your Exposition is unwarranted, so uncountenanced by Primitive, by
Reformed, or even Romish Commentators.

Produce but one of any repute, and your strained gloss shall pass more smooth
and solemn. In the mean time I shall subscribe to the universal Comment. Omnes
fallunt neminem, nemo omnes, Plin.
All deceive none, none deceive all (says Pliny.)

The Fathers generally flourish out the description of the present condition of
the Christians at Corinth (the Church of God) as a persuasive spell to conjure
their Unity, Hunc titulum Corinthiis reliquit quod scilicet sic Dei Ecclesia
cum tot erroribus laboraret, etc. Facit id contra eos qui puram quaerunt
Ecclesiam in terris, quam cum non reperiunt, omnibus caetibus solent nomen
Ecclesiae adimere and alios damnent. Non tam rigidus censor est Apost. aqud
Corinthios. Aret. in 1 Cor. 1.
not to be divided, and their Piety not to be defiled, depraved.

Reformed Expositors raise as a natural genuine observation on this title, a
reproof of your Church separation.

Your second Answer closes with the former. Sed mirum Paulum agnoscere
Ecclesiam Dei (sanctificatos) quos paulo post ut schismaticos carnales
reprehendit; sic vero testatum facit ubicunque nomen Christi invocatur, ibi
Ecclesiam Dei agnoscendum esse charitatis judicio quantumvis naevis and morbis
caetus ille laboret. Par. in 1 Cor. 1.

Ecclesia Dei quae magnis vitiis laborat, modo admonentibus pareat. Jun and
Irem.

Though among many faults, worthy reprehension, yet the Apostle does
acknowledge them to be a Church, Diodat. in 1 Cor. 1.


For if they must cast out, then they must be a Church, and the scandalous then
of the Church (till ejection, excommunication) for else they could not be cast
out.

As for the excommunicating of their corrupt Members, the Historical evidence
is very scanty; the sole instance is the incestuous person: wherein the
judgment was determined, the sentence pronounced by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 3.
but recommended to the Church of Corinth, to be attested, to be effectually
executed.

Some eminent Divines, both anciently and lately have conjectured, That at the
writing of this first Epistle to the Corinthians, the Apostle St. Paul had not
fully established the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the Church of Corinth, but
retained the reins of Government in his own hands.

However, I shall not obtrude that opinion, not question the Commission of the
Church of Corinth for excommunication: nor can you justly the Jurisdiction of
the Church of England, which I have amply cleared from administering any cause
of just desertion upon this account, though there may be vented an unjust
imputation.

Whether the Church of Corinth might excommunicate its own corrupt members, is
not controverted betwixt us. But whether (these being not excommunicated) the
sound part was bound to separate locally from the unsound in religious
Exercise. Let it be proved that this was effected at Corinth.

-- Et eris mihi magnus Apollo. The LETTER.
Object. Can there be a perfect Church on Earth, it is compared to the Tares
and Wheat, a draw net, a barn floor. Answ. Grant it be the Church meant there,
which is to be proved, for the preaching of the Gospel is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, but how came in the Tares, not by Gods allowance, but by the Devil, and
by the carelessness, and negligence of the keepers of the Field, Matthew. 13. 39.

2. They are Tares, that is something as most Expositors have it, as I have
been acquainted with, very like to Wheat, that they could hardly be discerned
from the Wheat, without endangering it, and so far close cunning hypocrites may
be left alone: but that there should be no way left to cast out those that are
venomous weeds, which do hurt and mischief, I deny. I would answer particularly
to each of these, but I shall say only this, if Christ should allow of the
wicked to be taken into his Church, he would contradict himself, as has been
proved.

But Christ does not contradict himself, ergo.

The ANSWER.
The double Answer to this Parabolical Objection is like Mephibosheth, (...),
halting with both feet.

First, you mince it as an unnecessary concession, that it is to be proved by
me, and assayed to be disproved by your self. In other passages, in other
parables, recited in this Chapter the Kingdom of Heaven is the Church, why not
in this? Regnum Caelorum (i.) status Ecclesiae militantis, Gl. Ord. in Matthew.
13. 24.
This is the ordinary gloss, this is the Exposition of the Primitive Fathers,
(the Donatists excepted) But you offer rationally to evince the contrary. The
Church is not the Kingdom of Heaven, because the preaching of the Gospel is.
This Exception is ignoratio Elenchi. Both may be so titled in different
considerations. The Church on Earth is the Kingdom of Heaven initiate, and the
Kingdom of Heaven is the Church consummate; the preaching of the Gospel is the
efficient instrumental cause for propagating the Church on Earth, for promoting
to the Kingdom of Heaven, and may Metonymically be so named.

After this Objection you Question (But how came in the Tares?) it concerns not
our Controversy to sift the Original, for the admittance of the Tares, but the
peril of their continuance: Or whether a Field, because it has good Ears,
ought to be quitted, because it has Tares intermingled? I shall dismiss this
curiosity, touching the Original of the Tares, as St. Austin did an enquiry
touching Original sin, with the pert reply of one plunged in a deep pit,
Cogita, quomodo hinc me liberes, non quomodo huc recid^rem quaeras, August. Ep.
29. ad Hier.
who being demanded by a passenger the occasion of that disaster: He replied,
Be sollicitous how I may be rescued out of this pit, not how I came to be
ingulfed in it.

The second part of your Answer observes the likeness of Tares to Wheat, scarce
to be discerned. It Is true, in the blade, but not in the ear. The Text does
manifestly assert their manifestation. Matthew. 13. 26.
( But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then the tares
appeared also.) They were not permitted to be served before Harvest, not
because they were obscured, not sufficiently discovered; but lest the pure
grain should be hazarded to be rooted up, being so intermingled with the Tares.
When this mischief of a promiscuous extirpation may be prevented, Tares ought
not to be suffered, (I confess) but Tares do often improve to be so numerous
and vigorous in such strength and multitude, that they prevail above the Wheat,
in this case both must be reserved till Harvest to be separated.

Should the Church of England address it self by Ecclesiastical severity, to
root out the Quakers, Ranters, Anabaptists, etc. whom you will allow to be
Tares, it were a fruitless attempt, a frenzy of piety.

There being so populous an increase, they must be suffered to grow together
till the Harvest.

This demonstrates, That the Church Militant is not exempted, acquitted from
Tares, and that the Wheat grows with them in the same Field.

I shall not examine for the literal sense, whether these Tares are to be
understood Thorns (as Aretius imagines) or spreading Plants (as Diodati
fancies) peculiar to the soil of Palestine, noxious to Corn; whether parched
Corn on the same stalk, with the purest grain, or a distinct cockle, a kind of
darnel or eaver.

-- Cynthius aurem vellit. It is Isidore Pelosiots caution, not to take (...),
not scan syllables and circumstances in Parables; wherein only the scope is
properly argumentative.

The three Parables couched up in your Objection, are like different lines that
meet in one and the same Center, the same drift or design to discover the mixed
condition of the Church Militant, of various colors like a Rainbow: The
season of separation of condemnation, being the day of Judgment, which as the
Italian speaks of the day of death, Quia zizania cernimus in Ecclesia non ideo
recedendum est ab Ecclesia, Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 3. ad Max.
( leva tutte lemaschere) takes of all Masks. St. Cyprian hence infers, because
we discern Tares in the Church, we must not therefore depart from the Church.

It is the observation of Junius and Tremelius translated exactly in our
English Marginal Annotation. Christus docet nunquam penitus liberam fore
Ecclesiam ab offendiculis tum in doctrina and moribus, etc. Jun. and Trem. in
Matthew. 13.
(The Church shall never be free from offenses, both in Doctrine and Manners,
till the day appointed for the restoring of all things do come; and therefore
the faithful have to arm themselves with patience and constancy. This instructs
an humble, holy* toleration, not a stern, haughty separation.

In the conflict betwixt the Reformed and the Romish, when the Romish
Disputants object these three Parables to confirm that Reprobates are Members
of the Catholic Church; our Reformed Champions do unanimously reply, That
these Parables are Hieroglyphics, Representatievs of a particular visible
Church, not to be stretched, and applied to the Catholic and invisible. If you
question the truth of my recital of this responsal, I will produce for your
satisfaction a full particular Catalogue.

Instance at present only in Whitakers determination touching these three
Parables. We do not deny in the floor, Nos non negamus in area, id est, in
Ecclesia quaquae visibili, esse paleam cum tritico mistam. Sed cum Aug. tamen
dicimus, in Ep. 48. Ecclesiam in frumentis dominicis conservatum esse non in
pal^is; and Ecclesiam crescere inter zizania, sed non esse agrum zizaniorum.
Whitak. in praelect. Contr. 7. qu. 1. c. 7. de Ecclesia.
that is in every visible Church, there is Chaff mixed with the Wheat; but
notwithstanding, we aver with St. Austin in the 48. Epistle, the Church to be
preserved in the Lords Grain, not in the Chaff, but with the Chaff, that the
Church grows among the Tares, yet is not a Field of Tares.

In the renowned dispute the Carthage, betwixt the Catholic Bishops, and the
Donatist Bishops, assembled by the Edict of the Emperor (our Controversy
being then in solemn agitation) The Parable of the Net collecting the good and
bad Fish being pressed by the Catholic Bishops, the Donatists were pinched so
far, as to confess good and wicked persons to be in the Church, but the wicked
only covertly, as in a Net in the Sea, whilst the good Fish are not
distinguished from the bad: But the Catholic Bishops reinforced their
Parabolical Argument. The Church is not only compared to a Net, hut also to a
Floor, wherein the Chaff is more apparent that the Corn. The Donatists, though
convinced, yet were not silenced, but clamor'd. This were to constitute two
Churches, one on Earth mingled with sacred and profane: the other in Heaven
severed, sanctified, refined from dress and mixtures.

The Catholic Bishops vindicated the Church to be one and the same, but not in
one and the same state Militant and Triumphant. The Church may in some
considerations be expressed mortal, because consisting of mortal members on
Earth, but immortal in Heaven: As Christ himself was mortal before his Passion,
but immortal after his Resurrection. Hereupon the Donatists reviled rather than
argued, and triumphed (or rather vapor'd) when themselves were conquered; as if
a strange Paradox had been vented in asserting the Church is mortal. The
Catholic Bishops heartily reply: Times ought to be distinguished. The Church
in its present condition admits corruptible Saints, in its future
incorruptible; when a mortal dress shall be exchanged for a robe of
immortality. Confutatos a Catholicis Donatistas omnium documentorum
manifestatione pronuncians, Aug. in op. Brev. Collat. cum Donat. in fine 3.
diei coll.
The Judge (or Mediator) herewith satisfied, set a period to the debate in that
particular, and in the final close of that grand disputation, the said day he
pronounced, that the Donatists were manifestly confuted by the Catholic
Bishops.

But you are still unsatisfied, that though Tares be permitted (as undiscerned,
covert Hyppocrites) yet that no way be left that pernicious weeds should be
ejected. I grant they may be rooted out by excommunication, but I deny a
separation without it. The wholesome Herbs and fragrant Flowers in the Garden
are not to be neglected, abandoned, because some pestilent weeds are not rooted
up. Beware left your separating be the weeding of our Garden.

If you wave Humility and Charity, your selected Flowers are but perfumed
Thistles; like the Ibides in Alexandria, which exclude one stench, but create
another.

Lastly, you Syllogise.

If Christ should allow of wicked men to be taken into his Church, and to be
continued in, he would contradict himself, as has been proved.

But Christ does not contradict himself. Therefore,

Not to except against the illogical composure of your Syllogism in an
Hypothetical form, which being reduced to Categorical (the Logical exactest)
its want of genuine artifice will be evident* But not to sift punctilioes of
Art, of Mood, and Figure. I answer, your major proposition is a false
supposition, you obtrude a tenet which we own not, That God allows the taking
and continuing of wicked men into his Church. I pray distinguish betwixt
permission and approbation; and for the admittance and continuance of the
wicked, betwixt the visible and invisible Church: This permitting in the
visible Church is not the acquitting of the men, but the protracting of the
doom.

If your Major be understood of the approbation of wicked men in the invisible
(the Catholic Church) it is an impertinence, we disclaim any such assertion.

If your Major be meant of the toleration of wicked men in a particular, in a
visible Church, it is an inconsequence: Christ does not herein contradict
himself. So that the force of your smart proof is but the flourish of
Sophistry. It Is fallacia consequentis.

The LETTER.
Object. Let a man examine himself, and look to himself. Answ. It Is true, for
his own particular benefit, he must look to himself especially, but I am so far
bound to look to him, as to keep my self clean, if any thing offends me, I am
bound to go to him, and deal with him according to the Rule of Christ; if he be
wicked, I am bound to see him purged from the Congregation, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 12. I
am not to suffer sin to lie on my brother, much less on my self, Levit. 18. 17.
It was the speech of Cain, Am I my brothers keeper?

The ANSWER.
Though the Argument you slightly propose has not efficacy enough to
demonstrate, yet it wants not probability to persuade, unless interest or
prejudice suggest that of the Comoedian.

(...). Aristoph.
The concurrence of Texts and Circumstances renders the Apostolical Precept (
Let a man examine himself 1 Cor. 11. 28.) more pregnant and important. Primum
disce, probationem nostri non alterius requiri. Aret. in 1 Cor. 11. 28.


The subject of the latter part of this Chapter, from the seventh to the end,
is the reprehension of the profanation of the Lords Supper, a reproof of
mental abuses at Corinth) wherein, notwithstanding spreading notorious
corruptions, yet the Apostle prescribes only a self examination, without
reflection upon others: This emphatical restriction of the object (himself) is
repeated, reinforced, not only in point of scrutiny, of search; but in regard
of penalty, of peril in verse. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, and in verse. 30. If we judge our
selves. It Is our selves exclusively of others. (Otherwise it were a spice of
arrogance, not repentance.) From the limitation himself thus varied Calvin
raises a double observation. In quibus verbis duo sunt observanda: primum
indigne panem domini edere non esse cum iis qui indigni sunt communicare, sed
non rite praeparare seipsum, nec expendere fidem propriam and paenitentiam.

Alterum cum caena recipienda est, ne initium facimus ab aliis quo examinemus
ipsos, sed nosmet ipsos probemus, and certe si accurate considerentur omnia,
qui ita otia abundant, ut inquirant in alios, saepius in re sua sunt
negligentes and obliviosi. Calv.

Curiosi ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam. Aug. in
Cont. l. 10. c. 3.


1. To eat the Lords bread unworthily, is not to communicate with the unworthy,
but without due preparation of ones self, without discussion of ones own faith
and repentance. 2. When we intend to be Communicants, let us not take our rise
abroad to sift others, but our selves. Certainly (says the same Author) if all
things be exactly considered, they who have so much vacancy to be inquisitive
after others, are frequently negligent, and forgetful as to themselves, their
own lapses, the sharpness of their intellectuals and memories, being exercised
at distance, out of their own Sphere.

You answer, 1. You are bound to look to another, to keep your self clean, that
is by not partaking of his uncleanness, by act, or by consent, direct, or
indirect. 2. You are bound to deal with him, if he offend, according to the
Rule of Christ.

I have already copiously discussed that Rule, and cleared it from your
misapprehension. 3. If he be wicked, I am bound to see him purged from the
Congregation, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 12.

This objection has been formerly debated, and satisfied. 4. I am not bound to
suffer sin to lie on my Brother, much less on my self. That sin may not lie on
your self, you ought to prevent the Commission, if not thus to be a Prometheus,
yet to be an Epimetheus by contrition and reformation. That sin may not lie on
your Brother (as you express it) you ought at fit opportunities to reprove, and
to pray that your reproof may be effectual; if it be ineffectual, you ought to
mourn, not to depart.

God vouchsafed an Asterisk, Ezekiel. 9. 4.
a mark to be set upon the foreheads of them that mourn, and are sorry for all
the abominations that be done in Jerusalem; yet those holy mourners separated
not from the persons of those that acted the abominations. The Testimony you
cite, Levit. 18. 17. ( Thou shall not discover shame, etc.) relates to Nuptial,
not to Sacramental Union or Separation; it concerns affinity in Marriage, but
has no affinity, no consanguinity with our Controversy.

You object Cains Language, Am I my brothers keeper, an answer more horrid than
his Murder in Gregory Nazianzens Judgment, an aggravation of his crime by
expostulation. To be a deserter, is not to be a Brothers keeper, much less to
be his accuser.

It Is Satan's title and office, the accuser of the Brethren. Schism is no
spiritual guard, Separation no brotherly protection, unless like the Parthian
Soldier, you will make your flight a defensive fight, and will vindicate your
Brother, whilst you retreat, you separate from him.

The LETTER.
Gods Ministes are to put a difference, Jer. 15. 19. It is their charge, Matthew.
7. 6. They kill souls if they do it not, Ezekiel. 13. 19, 20. Jer. 8. 10. 11. They
are like good Stewards to divide the word aright, and to give every man his
portion, 2 Timothy 2. 15. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, 3. Gods Church is to look to it, 1 Cor.
5. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 2. 6.

The ANSWER.
Gods Ministers ought Doctrinally to decypher the Sheep and the Goats, not
judicially to discriminate to sever the Sheep from the Goats, this being the
censure of the last day.

They claim a discretive Judgment in Religion as Christians, a Directive as
Ministers (to borrow Occhams distinction) but not absolutely a decretive
Judgment, much less an executive to proceed disorderly to execution (to
separate) before the Church has proceeded to condemnation (to excommunicate)
your Scripture Citations have been already examined ( Jer. 15. 19. Matthew. 7.
6.) You object, they kill souls, if they do it not, Ezekiel. 13. 19, 20. And will
you pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread,
to slay the souls that should not die, in lying to my people that hear your
lies? Wherefore, thus says the Lord God, Behold I will have to do with your
pillow, wherewith you hurt the souls to make them to fly.) This is entirely,
(...), an impertinency. This primarily concerns the Female predictions of
Female Sorcerers, whose magical deceits were cheap Merchandise among the Jews.
If by the wrench of comparison, of allusion you make application of this to the
Clergy of the Church of England; I shall answer only, that we may, and ought to
refer it by appeal to the judgment of the grand Session, and of the Universal
Monarch, whose Ambassadors we are to determine, whose Prophecy is most sordid
and mercenary, (Hinc panis fumusque domi --) Yours or ours. I pray God be
merciful to any who that day shall appear guilty, when our hearts shall be as
visible as our faces: when we shall not list nor dare to Canonize our selves,
nor Anathematize others.

Your next Testimony is Jer. 8. 10, 11. ( Every one from the least even to the
greatest is given to covetousness, and from the prophet to the priest, every
one deals falsely. For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people,
with sweet words, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.) If you intend
this Citation as a Proof, it is not pertinent to the Controversy, if you
intend it as a charge, as an invective (given to covetousness) I shall not
retort it, and shape one calumny, an Apology for another (like the Scorpions
inwards prescribed, a physical cure against its sting) but I shall pray, that
you and we may purge both our hands, and our hearts from this guilt. That
neither of us may sacrifice our souls to our fortunes, nor ever repair a
subsistence with the least breach of conscience.

As for the next impeachment of Levites that turn Parasites ( saying, Peace,
peace, when there is no peace) we tax your own to applaud schism, whilst you
separate from our Parochial Congregations; you indict us as accessories to
profanation, whilst we do not separate. I shall not dismiss this debated
Problem, with the Rabbinical dilatory evasion in such disputes, When Elias
comes, he will resolve us. In the mean time, we are countenanced by the
uncontrolled practice of the Synagogue and Temple of the Jews, of all Christian
Churches in all ages, excepting such as have been universally resented and
recorded for Schismatical at least, if not Heretical.

You argue, that Ministers are like good Stewards to divide the word aright,
and to give every man his portion. In this you bicker only with your own
shadow. I shall not discuss the confirmation by Text, 2 Timothy 2. 5. 1 Cor. 4. 1,
2, 3. Since I grant the whole assertion. It is their duty to divide the word
aright, or to handle it, according to the Remists. (The Latin Fathers calling
their Expositions, Tracts, as the Greek Tomes) To preach the Word aright
(according to the Syriack.) To preach with life and voice (says Primasius)
when the Conversation is a constant Sermon. (...) imports artificial exactness,
and spiritual uprightness, like a Mathematician to draw a straight line (which
can be but one (says Euclid) betwixt two points, but many oblique, bending) To
chalk out the straight way to Heaven, to cut out the direct path, or like a
Cook to prepare, and temper, and proportion viands to all sorts of guests, or
like a Steward to give every one his portion, to the wounded conscience, a
lenitive (consolation) to the festred, ulcer'd soul, a corrosive (reprehension)
But can you resolve the Apostles Interrogatory, 2 Cor. 12. 16.
Who is sufficient for these things? This requires singular ability, and
integrity, the mixture of Endowments, Seraphims and Cherubims. These
Meditations should excite sorrow, and anguish, and astonishment, no Motives of
Justification, of Separation. We may be faithful dispensers of Divine
Mysteries, and yet not be deserters of Christian Assemblies for offenses not
convicted.

I may apply that to my self for the Sacramental Communion (which is especially
started at) what Averroes spoke of his Physic; That he never administered a
Purgation, but his heart trembled some days before: And though I would neglect
no Sacred Expedients to prepare and qualify others, to promote the penitent,
and to deterr the impenitent; yet after all assays, I apprehend my self the
greatest offender in the Congregation.

Being most acquainted with the corruptions of my own heart, being bound to be
a severe Inquisitor in my own bosom (not in other men's) my depraved condition
being aggravated by my sacred Function; which renders the indifferencies of
others my infirmities, the frailties of others my crimes and prodigies (there
being as large a Sacrifice prescribed in the Mosaical Law, for the Priest, as
for the whole Congregation) so dilated, multiplied is my guilt, chargeable with
that ignorance I inform not, with that negligence I rouse not, with every
offense I reprove not, with every error I confute not (within my Domestical
and Parochial bounds at least) So that approaching to the Lords Table, with
these searching perplexities, and agonies of spirit, I doom my self more
unworthy to administer, that (...), (as St. Chrysostom expresses it) that
dread mystery, than any Christian Communicant to receive it at my hands.

You conduct my Pen from the Ministers to the Church, alleging Gods church to
look to it, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. This objection has already past the Anvil. Neither
the active care nor cure of Ecclesiastical Discipline does properly belong to
the whole Church collectively, nor to the particular distinct Members severally
and individually, as to subjectum adaequatum. This Exercise of this power does
appertain to those, that stear, that guide in the Pinnace of the Church, not to
those that tug and row: unless you will consound the Helm and the Ore. The
submission enjoined by the Apostle, Heb. 13. 17. ( Obey them that have the
oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls) is
not to be confined to their spiritual Doctrines; but extended to their
Ecclesiastical censure.

As to your objection. Grant your own expression in your own interpretation
(that the Church is to look to it) This warrants the Church to censure its
Members, it does not justify the Member to censure the Church, to separate
from it.

Lastly, you add, 2 Cor. 2. 6. It is sufficient to the same man that he was
rebuked by many. It Is (...), under, or in the presence of many, which is a
gloss best reconcilable to the phrase of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 4. ( You
being gathered together) It Is by many, because of the public Solemnity
attested by the whole Congregation. However you expound it, this confirms a
jurisdiction in the Church, not a discession out of it.

The LETTER.
Much more I might say and enlarge on every particular going before. I
purposed, and have cut some things short, lest I should over-trouble you with
my tediousness, knowing you are able to judge by little, and hoping you will
accept of all kindly, and in love, as it is offered. I confess I had but little
time to recollect my thoughts for the composing of it, yet as it is I present
you with it, desiring to hear and receive your judgment upon it, for which I
shall not only be thankful, but shall promise to weigh it in the balance of
the Sanctuary, and endeavor to bend my conscience to receive and embrace
whatever is of Faith and bears the Scriptum est. However I shall be persuaded,
I shall truly love you and remain,

March 12. 1654. SIR, Your Christian Friend and Servant, in the Work of the
LORD. P. L.

The ANSWER.
That you are brief, suits with the grace and artifice of an Epistle, which if
voluminous is monstrous.

My over copious answer needs your ample candor to excuse it. I would not be
concise, because I might not be too obscure.

-- Dum brevis esse laboro
Obscurus fio --
Having aimed to unty each knot, not to cut it, not to evade but satisfy. If
it appear so material, prove so effectual, as in the least degree to procure
the end designed, I shall account this reply compendious enough. Vide quot
versibus Homerus, quot Virgilius arma, hic Aentae, Achillis ille describat,
brevis tamen uterque est, quia facit quod instituit, Plin. Ep. l. 5. ad
Apollinarem.
This being Pliny's plea for the prolixity of Homer and Virgil, setting out the
Arms and Exploits of Achilles and Aeneas. If in this my intention is
frustrated; this is much too profuse of ink and time. It wants brevity, if it
wants efficacy. Yet in this case, Vna litura sat est.

Give me leave in the close friendly and brotherly to advise, That you beware
of new Tenets; they are like new Wines; they sum up to men's heads, make them
light and giddy.

It is the Apostles grave charge, Heb. 13. 9.
(...). Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines.

Or if you look back, do not dote on that part, that blemish of Antiquity,
which the Church of Christ has in all ages exploded for Heresy.

I pray examine well before you determine or censure, without some grains of
holy compliance you will not edify aright. It is an Italian Proverb ( Duro con
duro non fa bon muro) Rough stones will never make a firm structure, without a
yielding material, without cement to close them. The Apostle dictates
moderation toward all men. Phil. 4. 4.
It is (...), lenity, gentleness in opposition to (...), to exactness of rigor.

You may live to acknowledge my words Prophetical: When future years and
various occurrences shall improve you spiritual prudence and experience
(especially if God shall vouchsafe a sanctified calamity) you will confess the
Unity, the Peace of the Church, to conduce more to the saving of souls, than
the most specious Sects varnished with the most pious, glorious pretenses.

You cannot be to cautelous in rending the Church of England. If you dissect
her bowels, sift her Articles, her Constitutions; you may perhaps discover more
Beauty of Purity, Nesciebam mihi adeo pulchram fuisse matrom Xiphilin. in vita
Neronis.
than you imagined (like Neroes acknowledgment) However cast not dirt upon the
Dugs that gave you Milk (the sincere Milk of the Gospel) Tear not the Womb of
your Christian birth by Baptism.

Let me recommend to you the Apostolical charm, Ephesians. 4. 3.
Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace. It is
(...). Hastily endeavoring, lest the wounds of a bleeding languishing Church
become uncurable.

Let me censure you with Abraham's powerful Rhetoric. Let there be no strife
between me and thee, Genesis 13. 8.
for we are brethren. The precedent words enforce, enliven the spell of this
sacred Eloquence. Moreover the Canaanites and Perezites dwelled at that time in
the Land. Then said Abraham to Lot, etc. There are men of Romish principles in
the Land, lately titled Recusants, but now I am to enquire how to name them:
Non sint Collegae, si noluit, tamen fratres sunt. Frater meus igitur
Parmenianus, etc. Optat. de Schism, Donat. l. 1.
Consider whose hands you weaken, your Brethren: So you are to us as
Parmenianus was to Optatus.

Recollect your self whom you fortify, our common Romish Adversaries. The
Eclipse of the Church of England is their Splendour. They are united by our
divisions, justified by our mutual Reproaches; our Scandals and Schisms
objected, proclaimed by our selves, are their renowned, gloried Victories and
Triumphs:

I hope in these Cautions, and all other passages, I shall have no cause to
revive Theodorus complaint; that what is tendered with the right hand, is
received with the left.

You have my judgment requested, sincerely discovered without any wily, windy
collusion; as weighing, I must pass an account on the dreadsul day of
Judgment, for every word has past my Pen in this debate.

As to your promise of weighing this in the Balance of the Sanctuary, I am not
diffident of your performance, but I pray remember in Phocylides expression
(...), let the Scales be held even, not bended with a singular prejudice. For
in Scripture, as in a glass, our prejudicate Opinion discerns only its own
complexion.

Like the indulgent fancy of that Athenian Thrasilaus, who walking on the Key
of Athens, conceited that every ship which arrived was his own.

As to your engagement of embracing whatever bears the Scriptum est; I shall
only offer to your consideration St. Austin's Maxim. There is no Exposition of
sacred Writ proceeded from the holy Ghost, unless it tend to Charity: And if
you please to annex to this Canon the same Fathers pithy Ejaculations. That in
perusing and citing the Scriptures. Grant, O Lord, Ne fallar in iis, ne fallam
ex iis. Aug.
that I my self be not deceived in them, that I deceive not others by them.

Lastly, I shall assure you of a reciprocal Love. Our Affections may be linked,
though our opinions are not. And though we are not both members of a separated
Church on each; yet I hope (by the sacred Merits of our blessed Redeemer) we
shall be both in the same Congregated Church in Heaven: Where in a full Quire
of Angels, all Notes shall be tuned to an exact Harmony, no jar of Faction, no
Descant of Division, but entire Unisons: where our Anathemaes shall be
exchanged to Anthems, our Censures to Allelujah.

Laughern December. the last, 1655. SIR, Your truly affectionate Friend to serve
you, William Thomas.

Non ego tibi sed causae causa respondit. Hier. ep. 18. Aug. Aug. 27. Edict.
Et si culpa est respondisse quaeso ut patienter, audias, multo major est
provocasse. Sed facessant istiusmodi querimoniae. Sic inter nos pura
germanitas, and deinceps non quastionum sed charitatis nos scripta mittamus.
FINIS.

