A VINDICATION OF Scripture and Ministry: In a Rejoinder to a Reply not long
since published by Thomas Speed, formerly (but unsutably) Merchant in the City
of Bristol, and Preacher; lately (but more sadly) Merchant and QVAKER.

Wherein sundry Scriptures are explained, diverse Questions (relating to these
times) discussed, and the truth asserted against the exceptions of PAPISTS and
QVAKERS.

Whereunto is adjoined a Postscript, reflecting upon, and returning Answer to,
diverse passages in Thomas Speed his last Pamphlet.

By William Thomas Minister of the Gospel at Ubley.

Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. -- He gave some -- Pastors, and Teachers, For the
perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ -- Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and in the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of
the fullness of Christ.

Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. Si autem ii qui humanas domos corrumpunt, morte
plectuntur, quanto graviores poenas dabunt qui moliuntur Christi doctrinam
adulterare, pro qua crucem and mortem sustinuit Dominus Jesus unicus Dei Filius?

London, Printed for Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at his house in
Green-Arbour, 1657.

The several Heads of this Rejoinder.
1. QUakers Quaking detected and refuted. 2. That the Scriptures are the Saints
rule, is proved. 3. Ministers taking of Tithes justified. 4. A general
Scripture command for Infant Baptism asserted. 5. That the Scriptures are the
ground of faith is more largely maintained. 6. That life is to be had in
Scripture is manifested. 7. A brief account of the word Sacrament. 8. The
Ministry, the Calling of Ministers (together with Imposition of Hands in
Ordination) Vindicated, and more fully spoken to. 9. Calling to the Civil
Magistrate for punishing the open enemies of Religion, declared from Scripture.
10. The point of Conscience-liberty discussed. 11. Something concerning inward
and common light observed and opened. 12. Our Justification is declared to be
by a righteousness without us, not by a righteousness within us.
The Epistle to the Christian and considerate READER.
READER,
COncerning the rise of the present business between my self and Thomas Speed,
be pleased to receive this relation; About two years ago or more, I did (upon
importunity) give way to Mr. Speeds Preaching in my charge; I confess it was
not without reluctance, because he had been so long a public Teacher, and yet
no Minister; that is, not called to that office in the way of Christ; yet I
knew not but that he might (in a further time) be so called, he being in such a
tendency to that Office: but while there were hopes of him that he might do
some good service in the Church of Christ, there comes news that he had joined
himself to those whom they call Quakers. The report at first was very strange,
but when it was found to be so indeed, it troubled me much that I should be
induced to admit one to Preach in my place, so poorly principled, and of so
inconstant a spirit, as to close with such a company, and be wafted over
suddenly to so senseless a Sect.

Hereupon, after many debates with my self, I resolved to write unto him about
the Quakers way; for I had not reason then to think him to be a Scorner, but
rather hoped that some good might have been done upon him, and that he was not
so far gone and hampered in Satan's snare, but that possibly he might, by a
mild admonition, be recovered out of it; at least, I did not know but that
there might be so much ingenuity left, as to return unto a calm and friendly
Letter, a fair and civil Answer. But how far he was from any such humane
frame, his rough and Quaker-like Reply to my first Letter, did more then
sufficiently manifest. Yet because in that his first return (amongst a great
deal of rudeness) there was something that looked like reason. I wrote my
second Letter in way of Answer to his first; but that high spirit of his that
could not receive an admonition in my first Letter, could not bear an answer in
my second, but must needs tumultuate in Print; and by this means our
Contestation is come into public view. In which regard it might have been
satisfactory to have published the Letters that passed between us; but being
that they were so large as that it would be tedious to print and peruse them;
and his Reply (together with this Rejoinder) will present (in good part) the
substance of them, therefore I have resolved to publish no more but only my
first brief Letter; whereby it will appear (I think) how little cause this
angry Antagonist had to fall into so hot a combat. For this was the Letter:
Mr. Speed,
THough my acquaintance with you has not been much, yet since (by providence)
there has been some, and that also a Pulpit-acquaintance, by your Preaching
not long since in my place and charge; I presume you will not take it ill if I
shall a little more then ordinarily impart my self unto you upon the report
that I have heard from diverse (who know you, and are like to know your way) of
your closing (though how far I know not) with those that own the name of
Quakers: I have read but one of their Books, viz. The fiery Darts of the
Devil quenched; but therein I find enough to make it strange that any that
has known and owned, much more that has held forth Gods Scripture way, should
have any correspondence with them in theirs.

1. For the Scriptures, though they do not professedly reject them; yet really
they do, whilst they hold and witness;

1. That they are not the rule of Saints, contrary to these Scriptures, Gal.
6.16. Jam. 2.8. Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. 2 Pet. 1.19.

2. That they are not the ground of faith, contrary to Joh. 20.31. Romans 16.26
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17. So that the
word of God was ever the ground of Faith, even before it was written as now it
is (for though it were not written, yet it was revealed) And now it is written,
Christ directs us to look for life in the Scriptures, because they testify of
him, to wit, as the person on whom our faith should rest for salvation, Joh.
5.39, -46, 47.

2. For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. They acknowledge a command of Christ
for it, to stand for a time and no more; when Christ tells us his death is to be
showed therein till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

3. For the Ministry. As they deny there was any true Church since the
Apostles days, (which is as though they should say, Christ has had no body
upon earth since the Apostles days, for the Church is his body) So they deny
any Ministers, unless called as the Apostles were; when we find Titus
ordaining Elders in an ordinary way, Tit. 2.5. and that Christ (the Apostles
and extraordinary officers being gone) has appointed Pastors and Teachers for
the work of the Ministry, and the edifying of Saints to the end of the world,
Mat. 28.19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

4. They assert, That the light within leads to Justification those that are
taught by it; when the Scripture says, that We are justified freely by the
grace of God, through the redemption and righteousness of Jesus Christ, which
is not within us, but without us.

Now all these things (that I may speak of no more) being so contrary to the
will of God revealed in his Word, let me seriously advise you (and while I say
so, I think of that great God to whom shortly we must be accountable, and with
whom there is no trifling) I say, let me seriously advise you, to take heed of
the society and ways of such men. Remember and read what a strict rule the
Apostle gives us concerning them that bring not right Doctrine, 2 John 10, 11.
God has given you ability to do good, take heed, I beseech you, of losing your
self, or endangering others in a way of error; Who knows, if a man shall give
way to opinions so dangerous as these are, how far he may go; yea, how far God
in his just judgment may suffer him to run on in a soul-destroying way? My
intent in these lines is to tender a Christian admonition for your spiritual
safety. As it is only between you and me, so I desire you to keep it to your
self, to prevent further trouble and contestation. The Lord follow it with his
blessing. I rest,

Yours in Christ, W. T.




Now considering what and how this un-malleable man has written since. It may
(perhaps) seem strange to some (or to many) that I should bestow so much time
and pains upon an Adversary whose ability and reputation reaches not so far
(as one would think) as to win upon Christians who have any skill in Religion,
or bear good will to the ways of God. And I confess that such apprehensions
have often given a check to my proceedings. But yet (on the other side) being
called to by name, to speak in this cause and controversy, I have been carried
on so far as (after the publishing of my late Answer to his Epistle) to Rejoyn
also to the body of his Book; and that for these Reasons.

1. Because it is the duty and safety of Gods people to cry for, and against
the abominations of the (...) Ezekiel. 9.4. Isa. 58.1. Ezekiel. 20.4.

2. Because it is the duty of a Minister to do that sincerely by his utmost
endeavor, which God will do effectually by his power, that is, to magnify the
Law and word of God, and make it honorable, Isa. 42.21.

3. As the servants of the Lord ought so to live and carry themselves as that
the Ministry may not be blamed justly 2 Cor. 6.3.
: So to plead vigorously according to all the strength that God has given
them, that it may not be blamed unjustly; whereof the Apostle Paul is an
eminent pattern, who is still arguing for his Apostleship, that the efficacy of
it might not fall with the estimation.

4. Because it is too evident by sad experience in these injudicious,
licentious, and Apostatising times, that many professing Religion, are more
caught and carried away by the subtilty and sophistry of erroneous men, then
kept or established by those demonstrations of the Spirit of God; which they do
or might receive from sound and Orthodox Teachers; which (though it be a thing
exceedingly to be lamented, yet) is not so much to be wondered at if we
consider how few ^here be in the Church that belong to God, to whom alone it is
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 11.13. with Mark. 4.11.
and withal, how Satan and the world without, and a world of corruption within,
helps the Seducer to do his work; whereas (on the other side) none but they
that are transformed by the renewing of their mind, are in a capacity to prove
what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2.

5. Even they that have grace want growth, and are not so wise but that they
may be bewitched, Gal. 3.1. therefore these things are written (as with a
desire to undeceive them (if possible) that are already entangled so) with a
purpose to arm those weaker ones that are yet uncorrupted, that they may be
steadfast and constant in the right ways of God. Hereupon I have been more
large in opening some Scriptures, as intending not only to Answer this Replyer,
(which might be much more briefly done) but to inform less expert Christians,
who for want of a right understanding of Gods word, are exposed to the wiles
and wills of seducing men. For the same reason also I use more words and
circumlocutions then are needful for, or grateful to, men of more
understanding, as knowing my self to be a debtor to those that have less.

After all this, I can truly and sincerely say (notwithstanding any sharper
expressions wrested from me) that it would be a singular comfort to me, if this
sometimes hopeful person (with whom I have had so much to do) might be brought
yet back again 1 King. 28.37.
; And what cannot that God do, and what cannot that God undo, that pulled Paul
out of the hands of Satan, who was so long educated, and so deeply principled
in a damnable belief, that he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth Act. 26.9.
; and that it was his duty to do hell service? O that that God (whose free
grace none can fathom) would be pleased to put to his hand in the like
miserable case, for the like eminent mercy! But if that may not be (wherein I
confess I am at a stand, but knowing from whence my first writing to him
arose) will not despair) yet I shall account it a great happiness, and an high
reward of my poor pains, if any one or other may be won from, or kept from such
pernicious ways.

However, according to my time and talent, I have done mine endeavor, which
(God assisting) shall be followed with the earnest prayer of him who much
needs, and much desires the prayers of the generation of Seekers; and in whose
heart it is to approve himself

A lover of every true lover of the truth of God in these holiness-pretending,
and truth-deserting days, William Thomas.

A VINDICATION OF Scriptures and Ministry. IN A REJOINDER TO A REPLY, published
by Thomas Speed, Merchant in Bristol.
I shall begin with his Epistle to the Reader.

T. S. REeader, thou may understand that I writ a former Letter to my
Antagonist, in answer to one sent me by him; from whence he raised Reports
touching me, which were both untrue and scandalous; for which cause it is
principally that I have caused this Reply to come to the Pres^.

W. T. A. 1. If I said he denied the Scriptures (not in words, but) really,
whilst he denied them to be the Rule of Saints, and the ground of Faith (and
that I said more, he shall not prove) that I say still; and its neither untrue
(as I hope this rejoinder will show) nor scandalous; or if he account it any
way scandalous in regard of himself, himself has made it so.

2. I very much doubt whether he speak really and as the trurh is, when he
declares that to be the principal cause of putting his Reply to the Press;
what need so large a Plaster for so narrow a sore, and a printed Book for a
few private words? But let his Epistle to the public Teachers of this Nation
speak whether the great end of putting out his Book, were not (I do not say to
be revenged upon my self, an inferior Minister, for a feigned wrong; but) to
shoot his Arrows, even bitter words against those whom he calls (with a bad
conscience) the Chief Priests, that is, the Ministers of the Nation, as a
bloody crew and company of men, such as they were that crucified the Lord Jesus.

3. However, I shall join with him in leaving it to those that fear the Lord to
judge betwixt us, and am glad to hear so good a word come from him.

T S. Both his and my former I would have printed with this, but that this
wou^d thereby have increased to too great a bulk, which would have caused it to
be unto thee more tedious to read, and costly ^o purchase.

W.T. He should have dealt fairly for all that, and not have mangled my Letters
to draw out what passages he pleased with passing over principal things. Had he
left out all his insolent and injurious Passions and Aspersions, and kept in
all his Reasons especially his Right Reason, he might have printed my Letter;
and yet this dear Book would not have sweld so much as to become a costly
purchase.

I proceed now to the Reply it self.

In this Reply there be many passages which are nothing else but misrelating of
my words, or pervertings of my meaning. I shall instance in that which comes
presently to hand.

T. S. THis is no judging from you, presently to conclude that man a Brute (for
so he is that has lost Piety, Humility and Civility) that does not presently
bow down and cry Hosanna to the mutable directions of the Pulpit.

W.T. 1. Here he will needs conclude himself a Brute, when I neither did so,
nor gave him occasion to do so; for I did not say, as my words show* Which were
these, When you have got more Piety and humility, you will have other
thoughts; and when you have recovered your civility, you will write other
Letters.
that he had lost Piety, and Humility, and Civility; but that when he had got
more of these (which did rather imply, then deny that he had some) then he
would write other Letters. Now he that will thus mis-represent what is before
his eyes, deserves a Reproof rather then an Answer, and therefore if I say
nothing to diverse such things, I presume I shall be excused.

2. We do not expect that men should stoop to the mutable directions of the
Pulpit; but require them to submit to the immutable counsel of God, which we
deliver as Ezra did, out of a Pulpit, Neh. 8.4.

3. What need he to name the Pulpit? for he was not spoken to out of the
Pulpit, nor in any public way; but Pulpit-hatred cannot be hid; nor will the
device of mutable directions cloak it; for that which we preach there, and
desire alone should be taken notice of from us (as binding the conscience) is
Gods Word, which is not yea and nay, 2 Cor. 1.19.

Of Quakers quaking.
T.S. IT suffices for me, that you grant the thing I intended, viz. That the
Servants of God of old did, and still occasionally do quake and tremble before
the Lord; but you say, they received no denomination from it, nor made a trade
of it; did I ever assert either of these things?

VV.T. A. I did not say he did assert them; but my self had reason to speak of
those things, to show the difference between their quaking and that mentioned
in Scripture, by which they would protect themselves; therefore I said, that
they in Scripture received no denomination, or were not named from it, as these
men are; for I know not from what else they own the name of Quakers. I said
also, that they made no trade of it, as these men do, diverse of whom have left
their Trades and Callings and betaken themselves to a Trading in the quakers
Employment.

Now that there is no sufficient protection for their quaking from the
trembling of holy men in Scripture, I shall express (in general) in the words
of a Church and company of godly Christians, better acquainted with them then
my self. In a Letter from the Elders and some brethren of the Church of Christ,
meeting at Stopport, in the name of the rest, Sam. Eaton.


Their words are these.

That which most satisfies us, that neither they nor their quakings are of God,
is because though some particular persons, upon some particular and sudden
appearances have trembled and quaked; yet there is nothing in all the Scripture
that makes out the meetings of many people together in a constant way and
course, waiting or expecting to see or hear something that casts them into
Tran^es, and brings upon them quaking and trembling, and in a kind of order
also, as first on^, and then another, etc.

But to show the difference more particularly.

1. The trembling we find ordinarily in Scripture, denotes an inward
reverence, humility and lowliness of mind, expressed by a trembling spirit.
Isa. 66.2. Psalm. 2.11. 1 Cor. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 7.15. Dan. 5.6.
Ephesians. 6.5. Now theirs is an outward bodily quaking which may reach as high as
Belshazers did, without any spark of the fear of God in the heart.

2. As for any outward bodily tremhlings of Saints in Scripture, they arose
from weighty and extraordinary occasions, expressed in the word of God,
together with their trembling. Psalm. 119.120. Hab. 3.16. Dan. 10.7.
Let these men therefore if they look to have approbation from that Word show
that their quaking is not a device to put a color and a countenance upon their
newfound way, by declaring such reasons for it, as the Scriptures, that make
mention of such trembling, relate and express.

3. They that know their quaking, relate it to be such as the Scripture knows
not; neither for the manner of it, nor the end of it.

1. Not for the manner of it, viz. A trembling of all the parts of their body,
as though their flesh must part from their bones and ligatures; with grovelling
upon the ground, foaming at the mouth, roarings and perplexities, that one
would think there could not be more torment on the damned spirits, then is upon
them at the present.

This is related in the Book, called, The Perfect Pharisee, page 41. and by Mr.
Skip^e that was one of them, Worlds wonder* p. 22.23. I do not say the quaking
reaches thus high in all; but thus it is among that company, which in
Scripture we find not unless where the foul spirit has taken possession*
Mark 9.18* 20.

2. Not for the end of it; which is declared to be, 1. For purification; for
they say, they are brought into so great sufferings, agoni^s and passions, as a
fiery work to burn up in them and take off their hearts from hanging after old
dispensations, ways and discoveries; Worlds wonder, p. 17.
So that in this way they look to be purged from that which they have received
formerly from the Truth and Ordinances of God. 2. It is conceived from their
own words to be for their justification; for they say, They must be brought to
suffer as Christ did; and to undergo as great a sense of wrath as Christ did
when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Thus reckoning (says
ehe Relator of these things) as far as I am able to determine, that upon this
account they must be justified before the Lord, Worlds wonder, page 23.

Now let all men judge what agreement there is between this and
Scripture-quaking.

4. I wonder that among all the quaking which they would have us suppose
arises from the fear of God, they did never tremble in conformity to that
Scripture, wherein God himself says, Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak
against my servant Moses? but in stead of that, are still inveighing against
men of Moses his mind and Office, Numb. 12.8.

Whether Scripture be the Saints Rule.
T.S. NO Scripture says so in terminis.

W. T. 1. That is Scripture which is necessarily deduced from it, though it be
not in so many words expressed in it: Our Savior to show that the Scriptures
hold forth the Doctrine of the resurrection to all knowing men, produces this
Scripture, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Mark. 22.29, 32. Now
shall a Quaker come to our Savior, and say, Your proof is nothing, because the
Scripture you bring says not in terminis, There shall be a resurrection?

2. That in Deuteronomy. 5.31, 32, 33. is all one to a rational man, as if it had been
said in plain terms, You shall walk perfectly according to the Rule and
direction of my word.

3. Add hereunto that Gal. 6.16. the word Rule is expressed to show the
Doctrine laid down there, is the Rule they must walk by that look for peace and
mercy. Hence Scriptures are called Canonical, because they are a Canon and Rule
to walk by.

T.S. Let me ask you and many others who have been Teachers, were those things
that you have taught so many years together necessarily deduced from
Scriptures? if not, then by your own confession you have taught falsehood; if
they were, then all that you have so taught is infallible; for you say it is
Scripture, and the Scripture is infallible.

W.T. A. Here is an horned Argument, wherewith he pusheth hard, but wants
strength. One horn is this, If the things you have taught were not necessarily
deduced from Scripture, then by your own confession you have taught falsehood.
To which I answer, That what he says had something in it, if it were not a
falsehood that I made any such confession; I was not so lost as to confess that
to be a falsehood which neither my self, nor any man well in his wits ever
thought to be so. Was all that Moses learned from the Egyptians, or Daniel from
the Chaldeans, a mere falsehood? A Minister may have occasion to deliver diverse
things for peoples help, not necessarily deduced from Scripture, and yet very
true; as Paul said of what a Poet said, Tit. 3.12, 13. This witness is true;
yet what we have taught people to believe and practice as the mind of God, that
we have proved to them out of the word of God.

But now the other horn seems stronger.

T. S. If they were necessarily deduced from Scripture, then all that you have
so taught is infallible.

W.T. A. So it is; but not because we taught it; but, because it lies in, and
was necessarily deduced from that Scripture which is infallible.

T.S. Why then do you not adjoin all your Sermons to the Scripture? for if
necessarily deduced thence, they are Scripture, and a part of the Saints Rule;
but what a sad condition would many poor souls be in, whose small Estates would
not amount to the purchase of a Bible, so voluminous would it be, etc.

VV.T. A. When it is said, why do you not then adjoine all your Sermons to
Scripture? See an answer to an Epistle of T. Speed, p. 67.
that (sure) is something simply spoken; for what need that be adjoined and
added to Scripture that is already in it, as all is that is necessarily deduced
from it? for how could it be gathered from it, (and that necessarily) if it
were not in it? Nihil dat quod non habet.
who can take any thing from thence where it is not to be had? The poor souls
therefore of whom he speaks, need not trouble themselves about the purchasing
of a bigger Bible; any more then of another well in the place of that living
Fountain, from whence water has been drawn (which when it was drawn was that
well-water) this hundred or thousand years.

T.S. Whereas you quote Christ his proving the resurrection of the dead* etc. I
answer, That what Christ spoke was infallible, he neither did nor could err in
what he said.

W.T. A. It Is true, that what Christ spoke was infallible; but this he says to
no purpose; for Christ does not speak there as one that would press them to
receive what he delivers upon his bare word* but as one that would convince
them of the truth of what he spoke by Scripture; that is, by his necessary and
unanswerable reasonings from it: He does not say, Ye do err, not knowing me to
be an infallible Teacher, whom you ought to believe upon his word; but, not
knowing the Scriptures and the Power of God; both which plainly prove that
there shall be, and may be a resurrection.

T.S. Were you as infallible in those meanings and interpretations which you
force upon the Scriptures, as he was in what he spoke from the Spirit of the
Lord, I should readily close with them as the Oracles of God.

W.T. A 1. If all Pastors and Teachers were Apostles, then these men would
presently be Converts: This is like them that said to our Savior, Let him now
come down from the Cross, and we will believe him: but they who contemn that
means which God in his wisdom ordains, and will do nothing without that means
which they in their folly demand, justly perish.

2. Neither is this device of any value; for the question is not whether we be
infallible in our meanings and deductions; but whether that which is deduced
and drawn from Scripture, that is, necessarily, and upon supposal that we are
not deceived in the deducing, be Scripture, or a thing truly contained in
Scripture, which I affirm it is. Let him not talk to no purpose, but keep him
to his work, and prove the contrary.

T.S. Either say to the people plainly, that you are infallible, or else say
that you are fallibles that so they may take liberty of proving both your
actions and Doctrine.

W.T. A. We willingly acknowledge we are fallible or men that may be deceived
and therefore do not only give liberty, but give counsel to people, and exhort
them to examine what we say, and to see whether God in his Word do not say it
also; and according as it agrees or disagreeth with that Word, so to receive
it, or lay it aside. But withal, two things may be considered: 1. That it is no
untruth, nor immodesty to say, That the Ministers of this Nation be as
infallible as other Teachers are; so that the matter will be brought to this
issue, Either there must be no Teaching, and that's against Scripture, which
declares Teaching to be a perpetual Ordinance, Matt. 28.19, 20. and (as it
were) the Churches Inheritance, As Deuteronomy. 3.4.
Isa. 59.21. or else there mast be found in these days infallible Teachers,
and that is against experience; (none pretending to infallibility but the Pope,
or they that are like him) or else we must be taught, (and that is the truth) by
men that are fallible. But, secondly; Notwithstanding this, we affirm^ that
what we collect by sound natural and necessary inference from Scripture, that is
infallible, though we be not. Is it not an infallible truth that there be three
Heavens, though we do not read in Scripture (that I remember) of a first and
second Heaven [I mean in express words?] if there be a third Heaven (which the
Scripture expressly assures us of 2 Cor. 12.2.) then there must needs be two
more, though the Scripture name them not

T.S. Take six of you that esteem your selves the most able Doctors, and a
portion of Scripture being given you to interpret, shut your selves up in six
several Rooms, and after some time give your interpretations thereof to one
that shall receive them from each of you apart from the rest; and perhaps not
two of the six shall agree in the same interpretation; and would you have poor
people adventure their souls on the truth of such men's deductions from
Scripture, who dwell in such vast confusion and difference in their deductions?

W. T. Here Is the old Popish Argument against the Protestant Religion, whereby
the Franciscan Friars may observe them to be pretty well prepared for the Pope;
See the way to the true Church, by John White, in answer to a Jesuit, page
161. v. 36.
for Papists declare, we must needs want unity, because we do not acknowledge
one chief Pastor, to wit, the Successor of Saint Peter, and wholly submit to
his definitive Sentence. In this declaration of the want of Unity, the quakers
join with them; how hopeful therefore is the invitation? Come from those
dissenting men that are called Ministers unto us; for we have one infallible
proponent of Truth, the Successor of Peter, in whom we are all perfectly
united: But how well the Papists agree, has been showed to their shame: And
suppose they did agree in that which is evil, they are thereby in greater
danger; as they may understand from one that was a Pope himself (but of a far
better mind then his Successors) who tells us, (and the Quakers if they please
may hear it) that, Sicut esse noxium solet, si unitas desit bonis, ita
perniciosum est si non desit malis, quos tanto mag^s incorrigibil^s quanto
unanimes facit.
As it is very hurtful if Unity be wanting to the good; so it is pernicious if
it be not wanting to the evil; who are so much the more incorrigible, by how
much they are the more unanimous, Greg. Moral. in Job Lib. 33 c. 33

But to come nearer to the matter:

1. I shall relate what one has answered them already, which is this, They
speak of Unity; but it is young days as yet, they are but learners and
imitators; yet they branch themselves to walking, singing, naked and
Virgi^-quakers. Some Queries proposed to Quakers, by Francis Harris.


2. I answer more particularly, (and it is that which is plain to those that be
not partial) that though the faithful Ministers of this Nation be not only
shut up in several Rooms that is confined to several stations; but also live
many of them in parts far distant one from another yet people hear the same
things from them all in their several places; I mean, as to the substance and
saving Truth of Religion: If in some less things we differ (God having not
given to all the like light, Phi. 3.16.) or, if the distemper and loosnesse of
the times have more then ordinarily diversified us, yet there is enough of
that, wherein we generally agree to guide the feet of the Christians into the
way of Peace.

3. It is not yet resolved that the Quakers do agree in all things among
themselves; for consider how high and how horrid their expressions are; One
said that he was equal with God. Another that himself was as holy, just and
good as God. Another she-quaker (in hold at Reding) being convented, and asked
her Name answered, I am that I am, and stood to it. These and many more the
like, you find (with the proofs) in the Sober Answer of the Ministers of
Redding to the Epistle prefixed to this Book; to which I add what is published
in answer to Mr. Ny^, Mr. Goodwi^, etc. which is this, That Christ is God and
man in one person, is a lie. Another of the quakers said, that it is alike for
to take a Sentence out of their Letters (that is the quakers Letters) and to
preach from it, as to take a Sentence out of Paul's Epistles. See this in the
Faithful Discovery of a Treacherous Design, page 33.

Now if this Writer and his fellow-quakers be all of this mind, and close with
those other of their way in the fore-recited things, then there is a good
company of them; if they do not, then they also want Unity.

The Truth is, It Is incident to all to agree in Error (the Devil and corrupt
nature furthering that conjunction) it is of the Grace of God that they that
are right hold together. Yet that Protestant Ministers and Churches do so, let
the Harmony of Confessions witness: And that the public Teachers in this and
the Neighbor-Nation do agree, let the late Confession of Faith, framed and
concurred upon by the Assembly of Divines, testify.

T.S. Next you urge that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. viz. You shall not turn
aside to the right hand or the left etc. Could Moses intend this in relation to
Scripture, the greatest part of which was not then written?

W. T. Answ. Though the greatest part of Scripture was written after, yet the
ten Commandments (in reference whereunto Moses spoke those words) were written
then; Deuteronomy. 5 22. Exodus 24.3, 4. Now by the same reason whereby the Scripture
written then, was a Rule then; by the same, the Scripture written since, is a
Rule since; to wit, because it is the word of God after which our steps ought
to be ordered, Psalm. 119.133. But the Reader may observe, that he leaves out
the Explication of that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 5.31, 32, 33. whereby I showed it to
be a Rule; to wit, because, Ye shall not turn to the right hand or the left, is
equivalent to this, Make your Rule exactly to walk by; and then asks, Does this
Scripture say that the Scripture is the Saints Rule? To which I answer, That it
says so to his reason and conscience (if he have any) if not in Sillables, yet
in Sense.

T.S. Because the word [Rule] is expressed, Gal. 6.16. Is therefore the
Scripture the Saints Rule?

W. T. Answ. Here he puts down a word or two of what I spoke, leaving out the
rest, and then makes as if I had spoken that which I never spoke; for I never
said, that because the word [ Rule] was there, therefore the Scripture is the
Saints Rule; but the force of the Argument lies in this, That the very word [
Rule] is expressed there for the end and purpose, to declare and hold forth the
Scripture to be a Rule: For here is an happy end, Peace and Mercy; and a walk
prescribed for the attaining of that end, and a Rule revealed to guide that
walk, to wit, that Word of God which is written in the two verses immediately
going before, viz. v. 14, 15. wherein all men are directed to glory in the
Cross of Christ, v. 14. and that so as to become new Creatures, v. 14, 15. that
is, they are guided to faith, accompanied with holiness, as the sure way to
happiness.

For the further opening and confirming whereof, let it be observed, that the
Apostle does, in the close of this Epistle, knit up the Doctrine of the whole
Epistle, yea of the whole Gospel, yea of the whole Bible* (whereupon this is
justly extended by Divines to the whole Canonical Scripture) and the Doctrine
is this, That we are to look for Justification and life not in the works of the
Law (either without Christ, or with Christ) but in Christ crucified alone;
apprehended by Faith; and yet that faith is not alone, but appears in the
novation of our nature within; and in working by love without, in the keeping
of all Gods Commandments.

This is apparent by v. 14. where Paul professes his glorying in the Cross of
Christ alone; that is, his contentful and triumphant confidence in Christ
crucified; the rather for the blessed effect thereof, which he found in
himself; to wit, The worlds being crucified to him, as he was to the world;
that is, whereby he was made a new creature; which is a thing so considerable,
that (if we reckon of things as Christ does) all outward privileges and
preheminences are nothing, v. 15.

Hereupon it follows, v. 16. As many as walk according to this Rule; that is,
this Scripture-Doctrine, which teaches men by faith to rest on, and rejoice in
Jesus Christ crucified, and crucifying; that is, so working on, and in them by
their believing in him, as that they are crucified with him, and become new
creatures; Peace shall be upon them, Romans 5.1. and mercy, 1 Timothy 1.14. whether
they be Jews or Gentiles; when otherwise nothing will avail either the one or
the other for peace and life.

Now, if any shall say as this Writer does, (who gives forth a meaning himself,
when he cries out upon other men for doing the like) that the Rule is the new
Creature; (meaning thereby the Law and Direction of the Spirit in the heart of
a person regenerated) this falls in with the former; for the Spirit suggesteth
no other Rule to the heart, then that which it expresses in the Word.

But the Apostle sufficiently decides this matter, and interprets himself, Chapter
5. v. 5, 6. where handling the same Argument, viz. Resting on Christ by faith,
for righteousness and life; and bringing in the very same reason that he does
here, he does a little vary the words, and instead of the new Creature (named
here) puts Faith working by love. So that the Rule is plainly this, To look for
salvation by Faith in Christ Jesus working by love; which is the character of a
new creature, who first is in Christ by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.17. and then, that
Faith works by love and in holiness, because the new creature is Gods
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works Ephesians. 2.10.

W.T. Saints must walk by one Rule or another; I ask then what is the Rule if
Scripture be not the Rule?

T.S. I know no new Rule, nor own none but the same that Abel, and the rest of
the holy men of God walked by. And by the same touchstone that those holy men
proved the Light they walked by, whether it were of God or no; the same and no
other do I own still.

W.T. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, had the Word of God for their Rule, delivered
to them as God pleased in those times: Moses, David and Paul had the same thing
for their Rule; that is, the Word of God; but committed to Writing for the
Churches use in their times.

To that Word [new] I answer* That the Rule is the same still; that is, the
revealed will of God; there is nothing new but the Writing, and that is now old.

But what is this to my question, which was, If the Scripture be not the Rule*
what is the Rule? Hereunto he gives a crafty, but no clear Answer; he seems to
say That Is the Rule which the holy men of God (whose Names he puts down) walked
by. I ask him again, But what was that Rule which they walked by? If he think
it to be the Word of God (whether revealed without writing as at first; or
written, as afterward) why does he not say so, and so yield that the word
written is [now] our Rule? If he think the inward Light (which Quakers dream
of) to be the Rule, then I ask him again* How shall we try whether that
pretended Light be a Rule to walk by? For he is a fool that believes every
thing. Now this he huddles up, and speaks something (to no purpose) generally
and guilefully, but nothing determinately. All he says is this, That by the
same Touchst^ne that those holy men proved the Light they walked by; the same,
and no other do I own. q. d. By the same Touchstone whereby my neighbor tries
his coin, the same I own.


Here I shall not examine whether this Author (that is so exact in Grammar in
the latter part of his Book) speak so good sense as he should do; I leave that
to the Reader.

But since he speaks of Holy Men's Touchstone I shall propound unto him the
approved Example of the Bereans, who proved Paul's Doctrine, as Paul was willing
they should prove it, to wit, by searching the Scripture. Let him prove his
Light by the same Touchstone that these holy and noble persons did, and it
shall suffice. If he say Paul proved not his own Light so; I reply, 1. That
there is a great difference between (...), that received his Light immediately
from Christ, and himself and Quakers, who too much manifest that they have not
received their Light from him, either immediately or mediately. 2. It is enough
that the Spirit of God commends that way of proving Paul's Light by others that
were his hearers; for thence it will follow, either that that Scripture-search
is the way to prove every man's Light that professes he receives it from
Christ, or else the commendation of the Bereans for doing so is not a
sufficient approbation of the wisdom of that course; and so we shall come to
question the spirit of God speaking to their praise in that portion of
Scripture. Cum Thessalonicenses laudat spiritus Dei, in eorum Exemplo regulam
nobis praescribit. Calv. in Acts 17.11.


T.S. When you say indefinitely, they (i. e. the quakers) reject the Scriptures
(not quoting any particulars) whether can it be any other way taken, but that
they throw them off in general?

W.T. A. If I spoke indifinitely (and what I said my Letters show) yet this
Scholar was so long in the University (I think) as to know there is a
difference between an ind^^^nit^ and an universal Proposition. He is said to
reject the Scriptures [truly] that rejects any part of them, as the Jews do the
New Testament; when Christ says, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, does
not he tax them truly, though there were some part of Scripture that these men
did know and acknowledge? to wit, because they did not know, but denied, or
ignorantly perverted the Scriptures testifying of the resurrection.

T.S. That you did intend the rejection of the whole Scrip^ture, I prove thus;
The Scripture as the Saints Rule you say they reject: Now whether is a part of
Scripture, or the whole the Saints Rule? If the whole, and you go about to
prove they reject the Scripture because they deny it to be the Saints Rule;
then nothing more plain then this, That they reject the whole Scripture.

W.T. He Is a great Undertaker, that assumes so much to himself, as to discover
a man's intentions. But to the thing I answer; The whole Scripture is the
complete Rule; and the several parts of Scripture are the Rule in part:
Whereupon I add further, That he that rejects all Scripture, rejects the whole
Rule; but he that rejects but a part, is truly said to reject Scripture; for
every part of Scripture is Scripture. The quakers therefore denying the
Scripture to be the Saints Rule, really reject the Scripture; that is, they
reject those Scriptures from which it is necessarily concluded that it is their
Rule. Now for his Argument its true; That they who reject any Scripture (as A
Quatenus ad omne valet Argumentum.
the Saints Rule ^ (which I said not of them) reject the whole Scripture; that
is, they reject the whole as a Rule; yet upon some other account they may
retain it. Let himself and the quakers look after his Argument, and see how
they will answer it.

T.S. However we will take your own words, with your own Interpretations, by
which you give us to understand, that they whom you call quakers do not reject
the Scripture in gen^ral.

W.T. I do not give any man to understand, that they do not reject the
Scripture in general; for though I did not say they reject it wholly, nor meant
to say so; yet I think they reject it wholly in a very high degree, whilst
they deny it to be the Word of God, See the Quakers quaking, by Ier. Ives, p.
6. The blind guides, the Priests of England, they do teach the people, and
say, Hearken to the word of the Lord, as it is in a chapter and a verse.
and reproach it, as if it were nothing but Ink and Paper, as we shall see
hereafter. All that I did give men to understand, is, That I did not say they
rejected the Scriptures in general; neither did I say, they did not. How glad
is a man in his necessity to catch at any thing? but yet it is but a folly to
catch at nothing.

Of Ministers receiving Tithes.
T. S. BY what Rule in Scripture do you receive Tithes for preaching?

W.T. I did, and do answer him, That with respect to our Labor in Preaching,
we receive a maintenance from these Scripture Rules; 1 Cor. 9.14. So has the
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.
Gal. 6.6. In special, Luk 10.7. with 1 Cor. 9.9. The Labourer is worthy of his
hire; which Scriptures he is so wise as to take no notice of: I answered
further, That we received Tithes because (for present) that is the allotted
maintenance. It being the Scripture-Rule that Ministers should be maintained,
suppose that no particular way of maintenance be prescribed, yet that Rule does
evince the Righteousness of any lawful way, such as that by Tithes is. Till he
prove that an unlawful way of maintenance, we still plead the Scripture-Rule,
which requires a maintenance.

T.S. A Father puts his Son to the University for some certain years, to
learn the Trade of Sermon-making, etc.

W.T. This general profane fancy, I leave for quakers and quaffers, and
athiests to make merry withal, and come to his self-pleasing particulars.

T.S. If any man dye possessed of a rich Parsonage, how many of you have
presently a call to it? then days of fasting and humiliation must be kept,
pretending to seek God, to know who has the clearest Call; and though you are
all resolved in your hearts beforehand to get it if you can, yet the Name of
God, and the Prayers of some well-meaning people must be made use of by every
one of you as a cloak, lest your deceit should be too plainly discovered. I
know you will call this clamor; but I speak plain truth.

A. 1. There may be just reason for the exchanging of a man's place by the
judgment of the Church of God, out of respect to the benefit of the Church,
and the advantage of Jesus Christ. And a man may be duly called from a place
where there is less maintenance to another where there is more, to wit,
because there is more work there (which rebukes the affecting of the
maintenance.) Now, if any change ungroundedly, or pass into any place
disorderly (whereof here is no proof) for that I shall not plead.

2 It is not very like that they who betake themselves to fasting and
humiliation, are the persons that are guilty of such mis-removeals;
self-seeking and God seeking do not well agree together: nor is it like that
Gods people will come together to fast and pray upon a worldlings call; sure
they take him to be a godly Minister with whom they join in such an exercise;
and if he prove otherwise, so public a course will make his sin the more
observed, and so will turn to his greater shame. If he be wise therefore,
though he be not good, it is not probable that he will walk in that way; mean
while this helps to cast a profane contempt upon Gods highest course in
difficult cases, and teaches Atheistical people what to say when they see a
Minister humbling his soul (together with Gods people) to seek resolution from
him. Fasting and prayer they will acknowledge to be good in it self; but when
any Minister (sought to for a removeal) comes to practice this course, they cry
out against it, for this man tells them (and they be glad to hear it) that there
is nothing but hypocrisy in it. So all fasts for Ministers direction (in case
of their call from one place to another) become a matter of derision.

3. This [Poetical] Relator says it is thus: But how shall we know that he
speaks truth? Is it certainly true that Ministers that seek to God to clear up
their call, are [resolved] and [all] resolved, and all resolved [in their
hearts] before hand, to get a rich Parsonage if they can? How does this man
know the resolution of all Ministers hearts? I do not think he knows the men's
names that do so, (nor can name any one man upon whom to lay that imputation
justly, which he lays flatly upon all) but yet he knows their hearts; will any
man think (that has any thing of charity, or Christianity in him) that [all]
the Ministers in this Nation that fast and pray in this case, are thus
resolved? I will not call this ^lamo^, (as he says I will) but slander; nor is
it (as himself calls it) a ^lain truth, but a plain and shameful untruth, as I
shall now show.

T.S. If r^port be not an (...), ^ou d^d strenuously endeavor to show your
self a faithfu^ Minister, by your preaching rather at Wells for Tithes, then at
Ubley for soul.

W. T. Here I must desire the Reader to turn from his Winter-tale, and hear the
story of Wel^^-business.

The Inhabitants of the City of Wells (namely, they of Cuthberts Parish) were
Petitioners Anno 1646. to the Parliament then sitting, that since the Parish
was of so vast extent, comprehending within its Precincts above ten thousand
souls, they might therefore obtain the favor to be supplied with Pastors
suitable to so great a people; This Petition was granted, and by an Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament, Mr. Samuel Oliver and my self, (for whom, and to
whom, the People of that forenamed City and Parish were earnest Suitors) were
constituted and appointed to be their joint Pastors: And the sum of three
hundred pounds (beside the Vicarige there) was assigned to be paid out of Dean
and Chapters Lands, for our maintenance: Hereupon, so considerable a
congregation as this is being destitute of provision, our call being so earnest
and so unanimous to it, and yet our own charges (wherein we were settled before)
needing our help, we resolved for a year to bestow our paints at W^lls in our
turns, every Lords day, (our own people being willing to want us every other
Sabb. that that great place might be supplied) Now for this year the
maintenance assigned by the Parliament belonged to us. Wheref^^^ I took for my
part fifty pound, not meddling with the rest (which was near 100l.) but leaving
it to one that had more need of it then my self. But all this while we were
solicitous what to do in regard of the solicitations at Wells, and the
necessities and interests of our own charges; And did thereupon make known to
our people, and to others, our purpose of keeping a day of Humiliation to seek
the Lord for our direction. They that knew Mr. Oliver, and that have any fear
of God in them, will not judge him an Hypocrite, that is, one that resolved
before hand what to do, and then came to ask counsel of God. He is with God out
of the reach of Revi^ers; for my self, I know mine own heart, and (I thank God)
can say in the presence of that God that knows it better then my self that I
walked with much fear and trembling in that business. He says here, You are
[all] resolved before hand to get a great living if you can. I bless God I am
able to say that he speaks most untruly in it, and as one that makes no
conscience of what he says; For I not only could have had Wells, and above
150l. per annum there (when the maintenance in mine own place was never
accounted but 50l. per annum, and is now much less) I say, I not only could
have had Wells as being nominated and designed unto it by the authority of
Parliament, and called to it by the people, but I was most earnestly importuned
to have taken it and resided in it, not only by the desires of Christians
there, but by letters from sundry considerable Persons, moving much to accept
of the place for the public good, which I confess made me at a stand in it:
yet, in remembrance of the nature of my first call to my own charge (which was
more then ordinary) the present desires and pressing of my People to detain me,
and the difficulty of providing a faithful Minister for them, I left Wells
returned to them, and have now well nigh 40 years lived amongst them.

But why does this man, whose calumny has constrained me thus far to trouble
the Reader, speak so hatefully of the maintenance we take, when it was reported
of him in a Sermon preached in the City of Bristol, and therefore the report is
not like to be so egregious a lie as his has proved to be? I say it was
reported and related of him before the whole Congregation, soon after he had
published this Book that he being asked by a known and approved Minister in
that City, why he left his public teaching, having ability for it? his answer
to him was, that it would not give him a maintenance; to which the Minister
that asked him the question replied, that he would preach the Gospel while he
was able if he had never a penny for it.

Now let all men judge what reason he has to calumniate other men in the
matter of maintenance, that has been found so intent upon it himself?

W. T. Neither do Ministers take Tithes for preaching, etc.

T. S. They take not Tithes for doing nothing; and is not preaching the
consideration for which they take them?

W. T. Their labor in preaching is the consideration for which they take them;
but maintenance is neither the cause of their preaching, nor the end of their
preaching nor that which guide^, and orders, and regulates their preaching.

W. T. Ministers take Tithes because that for present is the maintenance
allotted to them.

T. S. But by whom? not by Jesus Christ, etc. and therefore they ought not to
take them.

W. T. Not by Jesus Christ immediately; but yet by Jesus Christ by those
Magistrates whom he has appointed to be nursing fathe^s to his Church, Isa.
49.23. and therefore to provide that the Ministers of the Church may not want
maintenance, that the children of the Church may not want milk.

T. S. 1. qu. Whether Christ was not the end of the Levitical Priesthood?

W.T. A. Yes, but we read of Tithes before there was any Levitical Priesthood,
and before L^vi was Heb. 7.9, 10.

T.S. Qu. 2. Whether he that uph^ldeth that which is to have an end in Christ,
does not deny Christ to be come in the flesh, and consequently is Antichr^st?

W. T. A. Tithes, as received by the Law of the Nation, upon the general
account of Maintenance for a Gospel Ministrey, are no Appurtenance of the
Levitical Priesthood; See a sober answer to an angry Epistle, page 25.
nor are they any necessary Appurtenance at all, as being paid before there was
any Levitical Priesthood. Nor does Ministers taking of Tithes uphold that
Priesthood any more then does their having of houses to dwell in, and glebe
Land for their Cattle, as the Levites formerly had Cities, with their Suburbs
for the same ends, Numb. 35.7. So that this quaery is to no purpose; for the
question here is not whether he that upholdeth that which is to have an end in
Christ, deny Christ to be come in the flesh; but whether taking Tithes be such
an upholding; which we deny, and he shall never be able to prove.

T.S. Qu. 3. Wheth^r they that claim the Maintenance partic^larly appointed to
the Priests and Levites, are not to do their work, viz. Prepare the Sacrifice^,
sl^y Oxen, Sh^ep, Goats, etc.

VV.T. A. 1. We take not the Maintenance particularly appointed to the Priests
and Levites; they had a far greater proportion of Maintenance then the Tithes
we take, and of another kind also.

2. The Priests and Levites work was not only to prepare Sacrifices, and to
instruct about Jewish-Rites, but also, 1. To open the Scripture, and teach the
good knowledge of God generally; Deu. 33.10. 2 Chro^. 30.22. Neh. 8.8. Mal.
2.7. 2. To bless and pray for the people, Numb. 6.23. Joel. 2.17. 1 Samuel
12.23. The Ceremonial part of their work we do not, because we ought not, it
being abolished (yet while we minister the Gospel of God, we are still
sacrificing spiritually, as ^aul did, Romans 15.16.) The two other parts which we
ought to do, those we do, and so receive Reward for our service, as they did,
Numb. 18.^1.

3. Melchisedeck received Tithes, and yet did no Levitical Work, Heb. 7.6 and
in him Christ's Priesthood is represented, whose ^inisters we are, and therefore
may take maintenance in that way, without doing that Work.

Of Infants Baptism.
THe next thing is Infants Baptism; in the defense whereof I us^d this
Argument; Christ by the Apostle Paul, co^ma^d^ to render to all their a^^s,
Romans 13.7. Bu^ bapti^m is an Infants (...). Ergo.

T.S Was it ever heard, or did it ever enter into the heart of any
sobe^-^inded man, to conceive that Paul intended the seventh v^rse of the
thirteenth Chapter to the Romans to prove the sprinkling of Infants faces with
water to be an Ordinance of Jesus Christ?

W. T. Surely if great words would carry a Cause, this man would never fail to
conquer. But to come to the matter, I answer, That though the Apostle does not
intend in those words to prove Infant Baptism; yet he intends what he says,
and what I cited the words for, to wit, That we must render to every one that
which is due; and more then that I desire not, nor intend to take from that
Scripture; for, that Baptism is an Infants due, I prove otherwise; and if it be
so, then by that general Rule (both of Scripture and Nature) it ought to be
rendered to him. And I did the rather bring this place of Scripture, because the
great Objection against Infant Baptism is, That there is no command for it;
whereas (if Baptism be an Infants due) there lies in this Scripture, though not
a particular, yet a pressing command for it in the general Law of rendering what
is due If any shall say (for I am not only willing to answer him (which is
soon done) but to satisfy others) I say therefore, that if any shall say and
object, That the Apostle applies this general Precept only to things civil,
and therefore it is improperly drawn to Baptism, which is a religious Ordinance.

1. I answer, That the application of a general precept or axiom is one thing,
the restricti is another. The application of a general Rule to one thing, does
not hinder the extent and application of it (according to the general latitude
in it) to other particulars rightly ranked under that general. So that general
sentence (like to this we have here in hand) Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do even so to them, Matt^. 7.12. is very justly, not only
applied as Jo^ does (cap. 16.4, 5, 6.) to show that every man should put
himself into a miserable man's case, and speak and do as himself would expect in
the like case; but also is justly extended to any particulars in the Law and
Prophets, relating to the second Table. In like manner that general truth, It
is required in Stewards (...) a man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. is rightly
applied not only to any ordinary Steward in the house of the Lord, but to
every Minister and spiritual Steward in the Work of his Lord. In sum, Had the
Apostle restrained that general Sentence to things civil, there had been no
room left for enlargement* but being that he recites it as a known Maxim, and
applies it only to the matter in hand, there is both a Liberty and a Pattern
to make the like application in other the like cases.

2. I answer, That if it be true that every one is to have his due in things
civil, and belonging to the second Table, then by proportion in things
religious also, and belonging to the first Table* for the general Rule of
rendering to every one his right, runs thus; not only, Render to Caesar the
things which are Cesar^, that is, which are due to Caesar, and which are here
spoken of to the Romans; but also to God the things which are G^ds; that is
which are due to God, Matt. 22.21.

3. It Is plain. That the Apostle in Romans 13. does not only apply this to the
rendering of what is due to Magistrates; Debita sunt reddenda omnibus; charitas
est debitum perpetuum and universale; per petuo igitur omnibus reddendum.
Parae. in Romans 13.8.
but carries it further to all that love and duty which is required and owing
in regard of the second Table, v. 8.19. and therefore it has a binding force
to impose upon all men the rendering of that which is due to private persons as
well as to Magistrates and consequently to tie Parents to every due and duty
owing to their children. If therefore it be Parents duty and childrens due to
bring their children to baptism (as in my Letter I have proved) then that
general Precept of rendering to every one their due, is justly extended to the
urging of their baptizing.

Now its true, that baptizing Infants as it is a duty of Religion, belongs to
the first Table; but as it is a duty of rel^tion, to the second Table. As to
bring up children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, belongs to the
first Table, as it is a duty of Piety, promoting the honor and service of God;
but it belongs to the second Table as it is a duty of P^rents, and as it is a
debt of love in them to teach their children, as David and Ba^hsheba did their
dear Solomon, Prove. 43, 4. and 31.2.

Now to wind up all; since the Apostle applies the general Law of rendering
what is due to all men generally, and that also in all the duties of the second
Table; and since to the first commandment of the second Table, every due from
Parents to children is to be referred; it is therefore manifest, that if
baptizing Infants be a due, then Parents are not only permitted, but commanded
(and that not only by virtue of that general sentence in it self, but also by
the Apostles application of it) to render it to them.

T.S. Your Argument runs thu^, If we ought to render all their dues, then
Infants ought to be baptized; but we ought to rende^ all their dues. Ergo.
Which argument amounts to as much as this, children ought to be baptized,
because they ought to be baptized.

W.T. Suppose those words, [Render to all their dues] be taken only for an
Exhortation; yet because it is such an Exhortation as is also a Precept, and
that general, it serves sufficiently to infer Infant Baptism, because even
Infants are comprehended under those [ all] that must have their due It appears
to those that have well viewed this context, that the Apostle in the 7. ver. of
Romans 13. falls upon this new ground and Argument for subjection to
Magistrates, Argumentum a Regulajuris and equi. Paraeus Ar^tius, P. Mart. Parr.
Wilson.
to wit, The p^ying of all their dues, v. 7. The owing of nothing to any man, v
8. This reason he coucheth under the form of an Exhortation, yet so as that it
has an argumentative force in it, such as we find more expressly in other
parallel Scriptures, as Matthew. 22.21. Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 4.1. And the Argument is
this, If we must render to all their dues, then sub^ection, honor, tribute must
be given to Magistrate^; but we must render to all their dues. Ergo. This man
does not like the Apostles-Logick, but says (in effect) all this amounts to as
much as this, Magistrates ought to have ^ribute paid, because they ought to
have Tribute paid; when any man (of ordinary understanding) cannot but see that
this is not a proving of the same by the same, but an argument drawn from that
which is more general, to that which is more particular, Quod affi^matur de
genere, etiam affirmatur de sp^cie; and a superiori cum signo universali ad
inferius s^mper valet consequentia; ut Deus est ubique Ergo and hic adest.
K^^k. ^ystem. Log. Lib. 3. c. 16.
and which lies directly under that general; and namely, from the general rule
of Justice, to acts of Justice in particular cases; as if one should argue
thus; Its your duty to do right to every man; therefore to do it to me: So here
the argument is not, Children ought to be baptized because they ought, but
because it is their due, and every one ought to have his due: So it is bottomed
on, and proved by a fundamental Law of Nature, as well as a Precept of
Scripture.

VV.T. The Infant of a believing Parent is a holy child.

T.S. Paul says, That he, with others, were by nature c^^^dren of wrath; but
he that is holy is no child of wrath.

W T. A. An Infant may be a child of Wrath naturally, and yet be holy
faederally, as the Infants of believets are, who (by reason of Gods covenant
made with the Parents) are not to be reckoned among heathens, but among Gods
holy people. Its true that he that is inherently holy, that is, that has the
grace and fear of God planted in his heart, is not now a child of wrath; but we
do not say that the Infants of believers are holy in that sense that is, by
regeneration, but only by Covenan^-Rela^ion*

T. S. If the holiness mentioned 1 Cor. 7.14. be the foundation of
Infant Baptism, then may an unbeliever be baptized also; for the same holiness
that the child had, the unb^lieving Parent had; for the same Gre^k word that is
used for sanctifying the unbelieving parent, is used for the holiness of the
child. And will you say the unbelieving parent had a right to Baptism? (...).
etc.

W. T. A. Here Is some color of an argument, but the color will quickly fade
if it be found that the same Greek word has in several places several
significations and applications. And so it is ordinarily; As in the word
[(...)] that is commonly translated a Church; sometimes that Greek word
signifies a civil (or an uncivil) assembly, as Act. 19.32. but otherwhere (and
often) a sacred and Church-assembly, So (...): signifies lowly, Mat. 11.29. and
base, 2 Cor. 10.1.
1 Cor. 11.18, 22. so another Greek word [(...) and (...)] sometimes signifies
that which is redundant and supe^fluous, 2 Cor. 9 1. sometimes that which is
laudably abundant and eminent, Mat. 5.47. Rom 3.1. Nor is the Greek word here
used always taken in the same sense; for sometimes it signifies only an
outward separation, and coming from the world to the Church, Heb. 10 29
sometimes an inward renovation, and a passing from nature to grace, 1 Cor. 6
11. 2 These. 2.13. yea, in the same verse, John 17.19 its taken in diverse
senses, Christ sanctifying himself for us otherwise then he sanctify thus; he
sanctifies himself by the filling of his humane nature with perfect holiness
for our use and the consecrating of himself to suffer for us in that nature; He
sanctifies us by regenerating us (and that more and more) to newness of life
by the truth of the Gospel.

2. I answer (further) that the Greek word here applied to the parent and the
child, is not altogether the same, that is, it is not the same for the part of
speech, though it be the same as to the T^eme or root. It is said, the children
are holy [(...)] but it is not said the unbelieving parent is holy, that is,
holy personally, as the children are where one Parent is a Believer, but only
that he is sanctified [(...)] that is, is holy relatively, in relation (for so
it is as I conceive rightly interpreted) unto marriage-communion, about which
the question there was raised, and as concerning which the Apostle wholly
there, by way of resolution, declares that there is a lawful use of matrimony,
though one party be an Heathen, and one only a Believer, which also extends
so far as that the children of such a couple shall not be accounted unholy,
because one Parent is an Heathen, but ho^y, that is, persons that are
Church-children, and to whom the Covenant of God belongs, because one Parent is
a Believer.

T. S. Many that are drunkards, swearers, whore-masters, and professed enemies
of the Lord, have received the mark of Baptism; and call you these Gods people?
Does this distingu-them from a profane Indian?

W. T. A. 1. The notorious baptized persons whereof he speaks, have very much
to answer for; yet if God say M^ people, Mic. 6.3.5.10.16.
to them that had the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure which is abominable, yea, that walked after the idolatrous
counsels and statutes of Omri and Ahab; why may we not give even such wretched
men that title? were not they of the Church of Corinth Gods people, and
reckoned among called Saints 1 Cor. 1.2.
, against whom the Apostle draws up so sad a charge? 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. yea, was
not the incestuous person (who exceeded the Heathen in wickedness) one of them
till he was excommunicated? If not, what had they to do to excommunicate him?
since the Church has nothing to do to judge them that are without? 1 Cor.
5.12. And is it not plain in the same chapter, that a man that is called a
Brother, may be a fornicator, covetous, idolater, railer, extortione^,
drunkard, etc. 1 Cor. 5.11. I do not mean that such are to be countenanced in
the Church, or to be tolerated; but yet till discipline have passed upon them
unto Excommunication, they are called Brethren. But when I say such are Gods
people, I mean only that they are his cal^e^ people, and a corrupt part of the
body of the Church; they do not yet show themselves his chosen people; for many
are called, few chose^, Mat 22.14. and therefore I grant what he says, viz.
that [continuing such] they shall be shut out of the kingdom of God hereafter,
and are to be shut out of the Church here.

2. I add, that though it be far from my purpose to speak any thing in favor
of profane people (whom our Ministry does still testify against) yet it
behooves him and his company to consider whether such men as are opposers of the
truth of God, and run themselves out of all right religion, be not as guilty by
the sentence of Scripture Act. 13.10. Gal. 5.20. Heresies.
, as they that order not their conversation according to the Rules of
Scripture; and yet we dare not say they are none of Gods people, but wish their
conformity to that holy calling and truth of God, whereof they are made
partakers.

But let the Reader mark that he that pretends to be a replier to what I set
before him, does not so much as mention the entire proof which I brought, that
Baptism is an Infants due. Its the most compendious way to brand that with
folly which a man cannot answer with reason. I shall therefore my self, for the
Readers sake, transcribe in the close, the whole argument as it was in my
letter.

Christ by the Apostle P^ul commands, saying, Render to all th^i^ d^e. But
Baptism is an Infants due.

Which I prove thus,

If the Infant of a believing Parent be as soon as it is born, a holy child,
and has a right to the Covenant, then the initiating seal of the Covenant is
due to him also.

This sequel I prove because he that is an holy child (to wit by federal
holiness) ought to be declared so to be, by putting that mark upon him, by
which Gods holy people are outwardly distinguished from Heathens. And he that
has a right to the Covenant, should be possessed of his right, that is, be
taken in Gods way into the number of Gods Vovenant People.

I assume,

But the Infant of a believing Parent is as soon as it is born, an holy child,
1 Cor. 7.14. And has a right to the Covenant; for this is the tenor of it, To
be a God to thee and thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. therefore the initiating
seal of the Covenant (which declares him to be one of Gods, and solemnly puts
him into the number of Gods people) is due to him also.

Upon this ground of the everlasting Covenant (besides diverse other reasons) we
administer Baptism to Infants as their due, and as our duty by virtue of this
general command, Render to all their dues.

It comes now to be examined whether the Scriptures be the ground of faith.
T.S. EIther it is written that the Scriptures are the ground of faith, or it
is not; if it be written, why had you not quoted the particular Scripture in
which it is w^itten?

W. T. A. I told him it was necessarily deduced from Scripture, and for that
cited diverse Texts. I therefore demand of him, The Scriptures brought by me to
prove themselves the ground of faith, either do prove it, or do not: If they do
not, why does not he show wherein they fail; but only make outcries? If they
do, why does he not acknowledge the truth?

T. S. How wretchedly do you abuse that place, 1 John 5.10. saying, That the
record there spoken of is the Scripture, when as the very Scripture it self
gives you the lie, saying, That the record and witness there spoken of is
within the Saints, which record the very next v^rse there expresses to be
eternal life which God has given to the Saints; and is paper and ink within
the Saints, or are they eternal life?

W. T. A. Its wonder he should talk of lying to another (who whilst he is doing
it) tells three untruths himself. For, 1. I did not say, The record there spoken
of is the Scripture, but in the Scripture is said up the record which God has
given ^f his Son. And that the Scripture I put in the margin, John 5.39.
plainly proves; for Christ says there, the Scriptures testify of him. 2. It
is a worse falsehood, and of an higher nature, to say the Scripture gives any
man the lie, when there is no such matter (that is to abuse him and Scripture
too) and so it is here; for what if this Scripture say that a Be^iever hat^
this witness within himself? does that give him the lie who says it is
without? may not the same thing be both without and within us in diverse
respects, and in different ways? Explicat testimonium quod and Deus a coelo,
and fidelibus sua conscientia a ^piritu edocta dictat. Beza in 1 John 5.11.
Psalm. 119.11. Col. 3.16.
Is not Christ now without us, that is ascended far above all heaven^, Ephesians.
4.10, Acts 3.21. and yet within us, (i) dwelling in our hearts by fait^? Ephesians.
3.17. so is the witness of Jesus Christ laid up and held forth in Scripture,
^saiah 53.1. John 5.39. but yet it is within the Believer also, that is,
received into his heart by faith, Luke 8.15. and is firmly imprinted upon his
renewed soul and conscience by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.3. 3. He says, that
this very Text expresses this record to be eternal life, and that is false too;
for the Apostle does not say, This record is eternal l^fe, but This is the
record that God has given to us eternal life. Now, to be eternal life, and to
be the record of it (declaring and witnessing that it is given of God, and
where it is to be had) are distinct things.


But his last words may not be lightly passed over, wherein he says, Is paper
and ink within the Saints, or a^e they ete^nal life? This is the right, but the
sad language of the blaspheming quakers; for has it not reference to those
first words to wit, that the reco^d spoken of 1 John 5.10. is the Scripture?
This he refutes (after his fashion) because it is within, and because it is
eternal life; And then adds, Is paper and ink, (i) Is the Scripture within the
Saints? or, Is that eternal life? In the page before this, he is highly
displeased, because some of his Informers told him that I suggested he denied
Scripture (to which I have spoken before in answer to his Epistle.) But,

But here the Reader may see he does not deny Scripture, for he acknowledges
it to be ink and paper. Now I grant that heavenly truths are written with ink,
in paper, (as John 3. v. 13.) but (for all that) there is a Spiritual and saving
sense and meaning in them. Acts 7.38.
A Malefactors pardon is written with pen, ink, and paper, but his life is laid
up in it, which yet ink and paper could never help him to. Have we not all
cause to tremble that there is a generation of men risen up amongst us, (...)
(i) (...). Beza.
who do so vilify that word of God, which is quick and powerful, and sharper
then any two edged sword? Heb. 4.12. which David hid within his heart (and yet
he did not hide ink and paper there) that he might not sin against God, Psalm.
119:11: Are the great things of the word and Gospel of God, which are said to
be the power of God Romans ^.16.
, to convert the son, rejoice the heart, enlighten the eyes Psalm. 19.7, 8.
, which are able to make wise to salvation 2 Timothy 3.15.
, come to be nothing else but paper and ink? was ink and paper sweeter to David
then the ho^y and the honey comb? Ps. 19:10: and 119.103. Does not Christ say
that the Scriptures testify of him? John 5.39. But if all the ink and paper in
the world were brought into America, would that (without any thing else)
testify of Christ to the poor Heathens there? let quakers quake to think that
by this word Christ will judge the world, John 12.48. and ink and paper (if
there were no more) never drew any ^a^ to execution in a way of justice. Does
this Writer and Railer on the Ministry of this Nation, and that offers such
indignity to Scripture, think he has nothing to answer for, but the wasting of
so much ink and paper? I wish, he may think of more.

Yet, it may be granted that the Law works not without Gospel Grace; nor the
Gospel [to salvation] without the sanctifying spirit. But it is
(notwithstanding) without that grace and spirit, an informing word Mic. 6.8.
Ephesians. 6.4.
, a convinc^ng word Tit. 1.9.
, and the savor of death to death 2 Cor. 2.16.
, none of which can be reasonably ascribed to a poor thing, called ink and
paper.

T. S. Was there not faith, and was not Jesus Christ before the written word?
and yet must that be first believed or, and be the ground of our faith?

W. T. A. To leave out his empty exclamations; he may know that the question is
not what men were to do before the word of God was written (then they were to
ground their faith upon it as it was delivered then, though not written) but
what we are to do unto whom it is written. The Word of God being now written, I
must first believe it before I believe in Christ; for how can any rest his
faith on the person testified of, if he do not believe the testimony?

T. S. Is not the foundation spoken of Ephesians. 2.20 that Jesus which was both
preached and believed on by the Prophets and Apostles?

W. T. A. The foundation spoken of in the latter part of the ^. and expressed
by the chief corner stone, is Christ alone. The foundation spoken of in the
former part of the v. is (if we speak of the essential foundation, or the
personal foundation) Christ also, whom the Prophets and Apostles preached, and
held forth as the sole foundation for believers to build up; but if we speak of
the doctrinal foundation, it is the word of God delivered by the Prophets and
Apostles The word of the Prophets and Apostles was the foundation teaching;
Christ himself, the foundation taught; so that to say we are founded on the
Apostles and Prophets, that is, on their doctrine, and that we are founded on
Christ, is upon the matter all one; Vide T^. Aquinatem in commentariis ad locum
hac de re plene, and (ut plurimum) probe disserentem.
for their doctrine was in sum, Christ; only, there is this difference, the
doctrine is the immediate foundation, Christ the ^l^ima^e, on that we build our
faith; on this our selves.

But the business in hand will be more plainly made out (to those Christians
whom I would assist) by answering two questions.

1. qu. How can the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles be called a
foundation?

A. Because we are to build our faith upon that doctrine; when Christ says,
Upon this rock will I build my Church; I conceive, it is rightly understood
thus; upon this truth (preached and manifested to the world) to wit, Thou art
the Christ the true Messiah and Son of the living God; Will I (as upon a Main
ground-stone) found the faith of all Believers, Vid. Musculum in Mat. ^6.28.
or I will cause the doctrine of this self same faith to be the foundation of
my Church Diodat. in loc.
. This is agreeable to our ordinary manner of speaking, which is, Build upon my
word, this shall be done for you; If a King shall speak such words to a
subject, he falls to building presently on that foundation; such a foundation,
and infinitely above that, in firmness and stability is the Word of God, which
faithful men therefore build upon, as the people sometimes leaned and rested on
the words of H^zekias, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. with Judge. 16.29. (where the same
original word is used.)

2. Qu. How does it appear that this doctrinal foundation is spoken of or is to
be taken notice of in this Scripture?

A. Because Apostles and Prophets are named; and why should they be named but
to point at their Ministry, and the main part thereof, namely, the
manifestation of Jesus Christ (both to come, and already come) upon which
manifestations Believers have ever built, and so settled themselves on the Rock
Christ. Ca^v. in Ephesians. 2.20. and Diod^^.
This is it that Calvin marks; He does not (says he) name Pa^riarchs or Godly
Kings, but only those that had the office of teaching, and that were set over
the Church for the building thereof; (...) therefore he concludes, that the
faith of the Church ought to be founded on this doctrine.

To conclude this, I shall not deny that in these words, The foundation of the
Apostl^s and Prophets, Christ is principally intended; All that I contend for,
is, that the doctrine and Ministry of the Apostles and Prophets is here also
included, and contained under the name of Foundation, as that which is no way
opposite, but subservient unto the great foundation Jesus Christ; for first our
faith is built upon the word of God revealed to and by the Apostles and
Prophets, and then, and in that way, our persons are built upon the Son of God.
And thus were the Ephesians built on the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, to wit, by receiving their doctrine by faith Ephesians. 2.17, 18 19.20.
, and by being thereby put in as living stones into that spiritual Temple,
whereof Jesus Christ is the Foundation, in regard of superstruction, and the
cornerstone in regard of coagmentation, union, and coalition of Jews and
Gentiles.

T. S. Could you so confiden^ly give Paul the lie, who says expressly, Other
foundation then Jesus Christ can no man lay?

W. T. Christ alone is the foundation revealed, whereon to build my person; The
Scripture is but the foundation revealing, whereon I build my faith; I shall
ever say that the only person the Church is built on, is the Son of God; but
that I may build on that person, I must have such an infallible revelation of
him, as I may firmly build upon.

T. S. Does not Calvin conclude you to be a liar, who says in terminis that
the Apostle does in that Scripture intend Jesus Christ to whom the Prophets and
Apostles did bear witness? Intelligit Iesum Christum cui testimonium tulere
Apostoli and Prophetae. Calv. in locum.


W. T. A. He cannot speak like a Christian, that is, quaker, of whose Religion,
rudeness is one part; but still he is unhappy whilst he speaks of lying; for
how can Calvin conclude me to be a liar with those words which he never spoke?
And what he cites out of Calvin is not to be found in him; but in Calvin upon
that place, I mean on Ephesians. 2.20. these words are to be found [ Qu^^ fundamentum
hic pro doctrina sumatur minime dubium est] that the word [foundation] in this
place is to be taken for doctrine (that is, for the doctrine of the Apostles
and Prophets) is not at all to be doubted of; for which he gives his reason
before mentioned, and then concludes, Itaque docet Paulus fidem ecclesiae in
hac doctrina debere esse fundatam: therefore Paul teaches that the faith of
the Church ought to be founded in this doctrine. But suppose some other
interpreter speak the words that he puts upon Calvin, the matter is soon
answered; for Christ is the foundation witnessed, the word of the Prophets and
Apostles is the foundation witnessing* or the fundamental doctrine giving
testimony of Jesus Christ.

W.T. There Is a double foundation, 1 personal or real; that is Christ. 2.
doctrinal or declarative, that is the Scripture.

T. S. If the Scripture be no real foundation, it is then imaginary; for that
which is not real, is imaginary.

W. T. A. His silence had been better then his sophistry. Is the story of a
thing (the whole story of Scripture) nothing but an imagination, because it is
not the thing acted. Had he had as much mind to understand as he had to cavil,
he might have seen that I did not oppose real to imaginary, but to declarative,
and that my plain meaning was, that Christ is the person or the thing whereupon
we build our selves, but the word whereupon we build our faith, that we may
build our selves upon that thing or person, is the doctrine and declaration of
Scripture.

T. S. You go on to distinguish between Gods testimony and Gods truth, Is not
his testimony his truth?

W. T. A. Its true, I make a distinction, but he falsely cries out that I creat
an opposition, and then runs on to pour out his pulpit-hatred he cares not
how; I only ask him this question, When he receives letters from France or
Spain, is there no difference between the things themselves whereof the letters
speak, and the letters and lines that testify of those things?

T. S. But the ground of faith you say may be corrupted; nay, you say further,
that faith may be lost; Is faith bottomed on a corruptible foundation?

W. T. I did not say, the ground of faith may be corrupted, but only that if
the Scriptures be corrupted, they must be purged. And yet, if any man say that
the Scriptures (which are the ground of faith) may be corrupted, it does not
follow thence that the faith of the Elect is bottomed on a corruptible
foundation; for their faith is not bottomed on Scripture as corrupted, but as
pure and clear, and as it is that word of God that endure^ for ever having no
dross in it, though men seek to mix their dross with it, which the Elect of God
that build upon it, do both detect and detest.

Its worse then this, that he reports me to say, that faith may b^ lost, when
the words of my letter were, that if the Scriptures could be (...), ^here would
quick^y be found a loss in faith; And has not he wit to distinguish between a
loss [in] it and a loss [of] it, between less and nothing?

T. S. You confess that the Scriptures were not the ground of Abe^^, Enock^,
and Noah's faith; See the sober answer to an Epistle of T. S. page 73.
and if they were not the ground of their faith, then neither were they the
ground of any of the Saints faith since them; for that they and all the Saints
since have the same foundation, and are built on the same Rock, which can never
be removed nor corrupted, as you do most absurdly assert.

VV. T. A. The name Scripture denotes and contains two things in it; 1. The
revealed will of God. 2. The written will of God. The revealed will of God is
the foundation of Saints faith from the beginning to the end of the world, but
in a different manner, viz. as delivered by God without writing in the first
times, but in writing since; and being now delivered in writing, that written
word is now the ground of Saints faith.

2. Unto this argument This is just like the old Popish argument for
trad^tions, B^llarm. tom. 4. lib. De ve^bo Dei non scripto, c. 4. answered by
VVhi^tak. controvers. de Scripturae perf^ctione c. 7. quaest. 6 and the
fallacies in it discovered.
I answer, That all Saints (former and later) have the same foundation in
regard of the substance, but not in regard of the manner of communication. The
ground of the faith of the first Saints, was the revealed will of God
unwritten, since the same will of God revealed and setting forth the object of
our faith, in and by writing, that is, the doctrine contained in the old and
new Testament, about which two things are considerable, 1. something inward,
and that is the immutable truth of God. 2. Something outward, and that is in
the writing, by which it is exactly presented unto the Churches view; when we
say the Scripture is the ground of faith, we put both together, and say it is
the word of^ God as writter, and communicating unto us in that way, the
doctrine of our salvation.

3. I never asserted, nor ever thought to say that the Rock (whereon our
persons are built) can be removed; yet it may be granted that the Scripture (on
which our faith is founded) may be corrupted, though our faith be not grounded
on corrupted Scripture.

T. S. Did ever any of those called Quakers say that the Word of God was not
the ground of Abraham's faith, and still is of the faith of all Saints?

VV. T. In that book (which was the occasion of writing my first letter)
called, The fiery darts of the d^vil quenched Written by Fran. Hougil.
, there are these words Page 19.
, This again I affirm, as before I did, that the Scriptures is not the Saints
Rule, but the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; we walk as Abel, Noah,
etc. by the immediate Spirit of God, which was before those Scriptures were
w^itten. Here I observe two things, 1. That this Quaker says the Scripture is
not the Saints Rule, which is all one as to say the Word of God is not the
Saints Rule, for the Scriptures are the Word of God; Christ calls the written
Law of Moses the Word of God, which the Pharisees made of none effect by their
traditions. Ma^k 7.10, 13. The Scripture speaks Romans 4.3. and whose words does
it speak but the words of God? Romans 10.17. 2. I observe here, that though he do
not say, The word of God is not the Saints Rule, but only that the Scripture
is not, yet the same reason why he holds the Scripture not to be the Saints
Rule, to wit, because we must walk by the immediate spirit of God, excludes the
word of God also; for the Word and Spirit are different things, Isa. 59.21.

T. S. Because Christ says to the Jews that they thought they had eternal life
in the Scriptures, did he therefore direct to look for life in them? Christ
tells his Disciples that the time should come, that whosoever killed them
should think he did God service; and will you thence gather this doctrine
(which is as true as the former) that Christ in that Scripture directs men to
kill his Disciples?

W. T. A. Is there the same reason between these two? were not their thoughts
right in the one, but altogether unrighteous in the other? Does not Christ
approve the one, and condemn the other? Are not the thoughts which Christ
approves right, because the same men have other thoughts which Christ condemns?
They thought rightly that eternal life is laid up in Scripture Deuteronomy. 30.19. and
32.47.
, for it is said, Hear and your soul shall live, Isaiah 55.3. and of that song,
and of those words of the Law which Moses wrote, Deuteronomie 31.22, 24 it is
said, it is your life, ^euteronomy 32.46.47. Therefore from their own right
concession Christ presses them to search the Scripture; and shows further, how
that eternal life (which they truly thought was to be had there) was to be had
and enjoyed of them, to wit, by their testify n^ of him.

Unto this my Letter spoke further, which he lightly passes over; for a man's
easiest way is, to slight that wherein he cannot satisfy.

T.S. Cant at eternal life which alone is to be had in Christ, b^ yet had in
Scripture, and in that which is not Christ? where had you this rare piece of
Logic, That that which is to be had in one thing, is yet to be had in another?

W.T. A. Here are great words; but he must know, and men of understanding do
know, that it is not against Logic nor any right reason, to say, that what is
alone to be had in one thing, in one sense, may yet be had in another* to wit,
in another sense, and in another war, as Deuteronomy. 30.20. it is said of God, He is
thy life; and we may truly add, He only: Psalm. 36*9. Ioh. 8.32.
And yet it is said, Deu^. 32.47. It is thy life; that is, the Word of God: So
Prove. 3.18. and 4.22. in like manner, The Son makes fre^, Jo^. 8.36. that is he
only, for who else is the Redeemer? and yet that Redeemer says, The Truth
shall make you free: So God is a Savior, and there is none beside him, Isa.
45.21. and yet men are ordinarily called Saviors, Judge. 3.9. 1 Samuel 14.45.
Obad. v 21. Thus the life of a condemned Malefactor lies only in the mercy of
the supreme Magistrate; and yet it lies also in the pardon sealed, as the
Instrument reaching forth the Magistrates mercy for the Malefactors safety

T.S. The Scriptures testify of Christ; but is life therefore to be had in
them? Is the d^c^aration touching any thing the thing it self?

W.T. A. Whether it be the thing it self or no, its the means of obtaining it;
as the declaration of plenty in Egypt showed life was to be had there, and
directed a famished creatures to repair thither for it: So the Scripture
declaring the way of life (with a purpose also in God, in that way to bring men
to it) it is said truly to help us to life, the rather because the Scripture
not only declares the person in whom life is to be had, but shows also what
manner of persons we should be; yea and puts us also (through the Grace of God)
into a capacity, that we may receive it from him, John 20.31. yea such a
neerness there is between the word of life and life it self, that he who is our
life says, I kn^w that his commandment (that is, that doctrine of the Father
which himself was to deliver) is everlasting life, John 12.50

W. T. I would ask you this one question, whereupon must I believe that Christ
is the true light that lightens every man that comes into the world?

T. S. I ask you again whether that all the holy men of God from Abe to (...),
John himself, who spoke the words, believe the truth of them?

W. T. A. Here are shuffling things; instead of answering one question of mine,
he puts me to answer two or three of his. I shall not slide out of his
questions as he does out of mine, but answer him, that the holy men of God to
whom that truth was revealed extraordinarily (as to John and the penmen of
Scripture such truths were) believed them because of that extraordinary
Revelation; they to whom any such was revealed before the word of God was
written, believed it because of the certainty of those ways of Revelation
which God was pleased to use then; but since the Church of God has had the
Scriptures, holy men have believed the truth of God, and this in particular
(after it pleased God to record it) because of Scripture-revelation. But after
this answering of his questions, I must call him again to mine, and ask him
once more, w^e^eupon he believes that Christ is the true light that enlightens
every man that comes into the world; If he says, he believes it be
extraordinary revelation, let him show and prove such a revelation, which is
now as needless as to do that in an extraordinary way which is already done in
an ordinary way; if he say he believes it because the Scripture Joh. 1.9. says
so, then I say still he must believe and build on that Scripture first (and so
grant the Scripture to be the ground of faith) otherwise the house and edifice
of Quakers will fall for want of a foundation. And so it will howsoever,
because howsoever that be an excellent and established truth, yet they build ^
wood, hey and stubble upon it.

After he has spoken his pleasure of what he calls my dro^sie interpretations
(which whatsoever they be, were occasioned by his juggling expressions) he comes
further to lay open himself thus.

T. S. I own no Relig^on but that which teaches a man to fear the Lord, and
work righteousness, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted of the world; Christ is the light of the world, which
I own as the founda^ion of my Religion, who is within me unless I be a
Reprobate.

W. T. A. Here Is the account of his Religion; may not a man make as fair a
profession as this is, and yet come short of salvation? But I shall explicate
my self.

1. I grant that they who truly fear God, are the persons that shall be saved;
but no man fears God truly that does not so reverence the Lord Jesus and his
righteousness, as therein alone to look for his salvation, Phil. 3.9.

2. I say that the fear of God and the working of righteousness are evidences
to a man of his good estate, and Gods way wherein to come to salvation, but
they do procure our happiness, neither will any wise man rest upon them for the
obtaining of salvation, Gal. 5.2. Isa. 64.6.

3. It Is wonder he should own such a Religion as says nothing of faith, when
that is a chief lesson that the Gospel teaches for a sinners salvation, Mark
16.16. 1 Timothy 1.16. This is an old Popish trick, to make much of the doctrine
of St. James (in a mistaken interpretation) and to lay aside the doctrine of
St. Paul in its true sense, Romans 3.28. when they should join both together, and
ascribe to ^aith the justification of men as sinners and to works, their
justification as believers, Jam. 2.22.

4. Whereas he says, Christ is the ^ight of the world, which I own as the
foundation of my Religion, who is within me. The question is, whether he build
his Religion and salvation on that Christ [who] is within, or on Christ [as] he
is within, that is, on that of Christ which is within; I grant that Christ is
in us, except we be Reprobates, but its true also that Christ does not save us
[as] within us, nor by any thing he has put within us, as if that were the
cause of our salvation or Christ by that; for, how can that save us which is
imperfect, and which needs a Savior? It is therefore Christ without us, that
saves us, and that by what he wrought without us that is, by dying for our
sins, and rising again for our justification; nor does grace reign to eternal
life, any other way then through Christ's righteousness made ours by faith, Romans
5.21. which clearly appears in converted Paul, within whom Christ was
abundantly; he feared God and wrought righteousness, and yet he desires to be
found not having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the f^i^h of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil.
3.9.

T. S. That you may know my Religion will bear the trial, I do hereby declare
my self free and willing, upon seasonable notice to appear in the midst of your
Congregation, or in the presence of the whole County to have my principles
tried by the Scriptures of truth.

VV. T. A. 1. It seems he thinks now the Scripture is the touchstone, or Rule
to try things by, whether they be of God or no.

2. He has been in my Congregation once already, which (considering his sad
Apostasy since) I am sorry for; and shall not have to do with him there again,
nor by way of dispute any where else I have not been used to tumultuous things,
nor is it like his conference will be better then his writing; and then let
others judge whether it be fit a Congregation (especially a whole County)
should be called together to hear it. I began with him in writing, and shall
walk with him no other way, nor long in that, but shall leave him as a man whom
no conference or writing is like to do good upon, unless the Lord be pleased to
change his heart, which I should be most glad to see.

T. S. Can any man be said to own the Spirit that breathed f^rth the Scripture,
and living the life of Christ, and yet disown the Scripture which is the
testimony of that Spirit and that Christ? In my Letter there were diverse things
to detect his deceit, which hef^irly leaves and only catche^h at this close:
that which he undertook was, to give his Testimony concerning Scripture; why
did he not do it, but talk of owning the Spirit, and liv^ng the life of Christ,
which are things beside the point in hand?


W. T. A. I grant that they that truly own the spirit breathed forth the
Scripture, and live the life of Christ, will also own the Scripture, yet are
these two distinct things though they meet together, and agree in the same
person. But I answer further, that a man may own the Sgirit in profession that
breathed forth the Scripture, and yet not own the Scripture as we see in
Z^dekia, that owned and arrogated the Spirit of the Lord, and yet disowned and
detested what Michaias spoke by that Spirit, 1 King. 22.24, 28. 2 These. 2.2. so
quakers talk much of the Spirit, and yet instead of owning the Scripture, their
design is found to be to depend upon an unwritten word immediately dictated to
them within themselves, proceeding from him who is (as they say) the word from
the beginning, and is the life, and is manifested (as they give out) within
them, as to the Apostles. ^am. Eaton^ answer to the quakers 19. queries, page
20. Yea, they do little less then deride the Text of Scripture, calling
Ministers in contempt, preachers of the letter. when as they preach those
spiritual truths that be contained in it; yea, one of them makes this out-crie.
All people cease from their outside lights, and return to the light of Christ
in you; and this light is not a chapter without you in a book, etc. Perfect
Pharisee p. 20. out of James Nayler, in a book called The glory of the Lord
shining out of the north.

Of the word Sacrament.
T S. [SAcrament] principally signifies the Oath by which Soldiers of old
bound themselves to be faithful to their Captains; and is there such affinity
between this word, and the word sign, seal, Antitype and example?

W. T. A. Its true that the word [Sacrament] among profane Authors signifies a
military oath, which because it was accounted of all things the most sacred,
yea, and went under the name also of a most holy mystery Servato etiam militari
jura mento, quod est unum principatus Romani ^^sterium sanct^ssimum. (...).
Lib. 8.
; hence use was made of the same word in the Churches of God, to set forth the
holy things instituted therein of God wherein there was a secret and mysterious
signification; and in special, the two New Testament Seals of the Covenant of
grace. I deny not therefore that notion and acception of the word Sacrament
which he and many others mention, it being very fit to set forth these Seals as
they represent the covenant of grace; in which regard, as on the (...) side
they assure us of the benefit of the Covenant on Gods part; so on the other
side we are therein consecrated unto God, and bound (as Soldiers were that
took that military Oath) to perform the Covenant on our part: But this being
granted, it no way crosses the ordinary description of a Sacrament, ^e verbis
non (...) litigandum, (...) con^ti^.
which is, that it is an outward and visible sign of a spiri^ual and invisib^e
Grace. Now to set two things one against another, which being rightly taken, do
very well stand together, is a poor quarrel. And so is the whole contestation
about the word Sacrament, it being not made any matter or necessary
appurtenance of our faith; but used only as a convenient and received
expression of that thing which is found in Scripture

Whereas he questioneth further, what affinity there is between the words sig^e
and sea^, and the word Sacrament, as it relates to the aforesaid Military Oath:
I answer, the words sign and seal express what we have from God, to wit, the
benefits of the Covenant of Grace, represented and sealed in that Ordinance:
The word Sacramen (in that sense wherein he takes it) shows what God is to have
from us.

As for his cavilling about my forbearing to answer his qu^r^es, I shall only
say this, querie^ to pick quarrels; and in that respect, better some silence
then more strife. If therefore I had answered none of his queries, he had no
reason to be querulous; yet some I answered briefly, because that was sooner
done; and by that all men may see how willing the wayward questionist is to be
informed.

T.S. Did no^ Paul and other Saints witness Jesus Christ to come, whenas he
lived in them, and was in them their hope of glory, strength, life, peace?

W.T. A. Christ is come already in the flesh to us, in the Spirit into us; but
is not come yet, nor till the last day is to come in his power and glory, Matt.
24.30.

Of the Ministry, and calling of Ministers.
T.S. I Judge those Ministers of Christ, who run not before they are sent of
him, and do abide in the Doctrine of Christ, who have received that gift (not
by expense of money in a University, but) freely from the Lord, by which they
are made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but the
Spirit, who preach him in words, and own him by their works.

W. T. A. Thanks be to God, that there are so many public Teachers in this
Nation, to which this description may be justly applied, they having received a
gift to be able Ministers of the New Testament freely from the Lord, though
there were money expended in the University, that they might receive it freely
^n God wa^, that is, in the obedient serving of free grace, and doing their own
endeavor, in reading, meditating, studying to show th^mse^v^s (...), as Timothy
was charged to do, who had that gift freely from God, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16.
2 Timothy 2.15. But how true his profession is that such men are precious in his
eyes, let his precious Epistle ^o [^ll] ^he public Teachers in this Nation,
show.

As for the contrary sort, whom he describes and judges not to be Ministers,
if his meaning were only to show a dislike of men vicious in the Ministry,
there be Ministers enough that would join with him in that, who yet cannot
consent with him in saying such are no Ministers; because even among men
unquestionably called (as te Priests and Levites were) there has still been a
corrupt mixture.

But that any tell the people (as he says they do, p. 33.) that a heap of
stones is the Church, is (I think) his tale; yet may the place where the
Congregation meets (which is not an heap of stones; but is, or should be a
decent house) be as properly called, the Church, as that place is called the
Court where Tenants do (at times) meet together to wait upon their Lord; when
it is said, that the Centurion built the Jews a Synagogue. Luke 7.5.
Here this Writer comes and complains, That the Elders of the Jews call an heap
of Stones a Congregation (for that the word Synagogue (...) proprie
congregatione (...) significat. Hic. (...) locum ubi ^ongregatio fiebat pis. in
locum. Page 33.
signifies) But he that complains without reason, must go home again without
relief.

T.S. Where is it written that one was made a Minister by ordinary call, mother
by extraordinary?

W. T. A. The thing is written, Gal. 1.1. Act. 14.23.

T.S. Is there so much as mention made i^ either of those Scriptures of a Call
ordinary or extraordinary? and have you yet the confidence positively to assert
that it is so written in these Scriptures? Must your dreams and dr^wsie
meanings pass for Scripture?

W. T. A. Its wonder that this quick-sighted youth (that speaks so much here
and otherwhere of dreaming and drowsinesse) should be so dull, and obtuse
himself, as not to see that I said, The thing is written, and not the words are
written: Why does he not awake himself, and prove that those two Scriptures do
not in their true sense and meaning lay before us a Calling of two sorts, one
from Christ immediately, and so Paul was called himself (which we call
extraordinary, because it was but of certain persons, and but for a certain
time, and accompanied with extraordinary miraculous gifts) this the first
Scripture shows, Gal. 1.1. The other from Christ mediately by the Ministry of
men; and so Elders were ordained by Paul and Barnabas, as the other Scripture
shows, ^ct 14.23. this we call ordinary, as being common to all Ministers, and
to continue in all ages of the Church. Nor does this make two doors into the
Sheepfold (as this caviller would collect) but two ways of entering in by the
same door.

T.S You say, This distinction has ever ^een used in the Churches of God, when
it was never used among any of the Churches mentioned in the Scriptur^^.

W.T. A. I said so in an usual way of speaking, yet not meaning to extend it to
all that time wherein God has had a Church (which has been from the beginning
of the world) but to declare only, that it has been of long and continual use
in the Churches of God; and so the word ver is ordinarily used, viz. to
signify a long, and yet limited term of time, as 1 Samuel 27.12. Exodus 12.24.
and 21.6.

Besides that in the Scripture-Churches there was (as has been showed) this
distinction in the ground and thing it self, though not in the form of words.

W.T. Our gifts, abilities, and fitness for the Ministry (which are Gods
inward call) were first tried,

T.S. Does the Scripture any where say, That gifts, abilities and fitness for
the Ministry are Gods inward call? or that any of the Saints sought
Testimonials in order to their being made Ministers? or did Pau^ and Peter keep
any Chaplains to try men?

W. T. A. 1. Is it any where said in Scripture, that faith, love, and holy
desires are inward Graces? Is there not enough (therefore) in Scripture to
gather that they are so, when as we find there that such virtues are placed in
the i^ner and hidden man of the heart, and that in opposition to outward and
bodily things, To. 7.22. and 10.10. 1 Pe^. 3.3, 4.2 Co^. 4.16. So it is in this
case; Paul describes the qualities of those that are to be made Ministers,
which are inward, and whereunto are opposed other qualifications which are
outward. These qualities (namely, abilities for, and strong desires to the Work
of the Ministry) are a Call, because God plants them in the heart, as pointing
to; putting them into a capacity for, and as it were, leading unto that
Calling; and they are an inward Call, because they are seated in the inner man.

2. Whatever Paul and Peter did in their own persons, we are sure that Paul
requires of T^mothy to see that the Deacons be proved (and for the same reason,
the Bishops and Presbyters also) before they could use that Office, 1 T^m.
3.10. why are the things required in Ministers so fully and distinctly
prescribed? Why is such a precise commandment given, to lay hands sudd^nly upon
no man; but that diligent search was to be made into those that were to be made
Ministers? 1 Timothy 5.22.
for which (no doubt) there were able and faithful Instruments and Agents
employed. As for his Expression of keeping Chaplains, that is but to make
himself and his company merry, who had more need to be made wise.

T.S. But who are those that tried you? were they not such as are like unto
your self? could they try your gifts, who had not the gift themselves? Could
those that were enemies to the cross of Christ, try who were fit to be made
Ministers of Christ? etc.

W. T. A. 1. If they were (as he says) like my self, I leave it to others to
speak and judge whether they were such as he describes afterward; nor would he
speak so of former-Ordainers (without any exception or discretion) if he were
as careful to speak the Truth, as he is vvilling to speak the vvorst.

2. Though Tryars be very blamable in regard of their personal carriage, yet
having abilities in themselves, 2.
and rules to walk by in their examination; they might make a true discovery in
the capacity of Tryars. An Artificer may be a dissolute man in his life, and
yet being skillful in his calling, may be fitter than a man of better carriage
to try those that pretend to that Calling: And as for grace and goodness
(besides that many that were Examiners and Ordainers formerly were godly men)
even he that we cannot say, is possessed with true grace himself; yet may be so
far acquianted wi^h it, as to be able to enquire into the probable evidences
of it: Whereof (on the other side) the holiest man that is, is not able to give
an infalible character in another man.

W.T. And that there might be an outward calling, we were Ordained by Bishops
that were Presbyters, and other Presbyters that were not Bishops, who were to
be and were joined with them in our Ordination.

T. S. You have well derived your Succession, and very learnedly acknowledge
your self and your Brethren to be Romes Emissaries, brats of Babylon, p. 36.
etc.

W.T. A. 1. He must have leave to say any thing, and it must deceitful tongue.
But were those Bishops and Presbyters Antichristian, that, for the testimony of
Jesus, were buried in Antichristian flames? Or diverse others that have employed
themselves from time to time since that time, in the opposing of Antichrist and
his antichristian doctrines; renouncing also in their practice, his ways of
worship?

2. If he say they were Antichristian, because their Ordination

First as ordinary Ministers, that is Pastors and Teachers are from Christ,
Ephesians. 4.11. and the ordinary way of their ordination also is from Christ, Tit.
1.5. so the ordaining of public Teachers in that way, was not from, but long
before Antichrist; See the Divine right of the Ministry of England. p. 2. chap.
3.
for we find it in Scripture, Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. If the Ministry be said
to have been under Antichrist, it is not denied; but that amounts to no more,
but that it passed through Antichrist* as the Scriptures also did and the
ordinance of Baptism, which it is confessed are not therefore to be rejected
Now though it be granted that our Ministry came through Antichrist; yet that
does not prove that it came from him, but that it came not from him; for how
could that come from him that was before him, and only passed through him, as
an Army through an enemies country.

Nor is it denied, that this and other Ordinances were defiled in the passage;
but its one thing to be made ^oul, another thing to be made null and to loose
their nature and substance. It is See Mr. Perkins Treatise of Callings.
observed that Priests and School doctors ordained in popish Churches and
Schools, were by Oath solemnly bound to confute error, and to maintain the
ancient Apostolic Faith. I am (says Luther) a baptized Christian, and
withal, a sworn Doctor of the holy Scripture, and a daily preacher, whom it
concerns in regard of my name, condition, oath and office, to ab^lish perverse,
false, seducing, impious doctrines; or at least, to hinder them. And this
reason he gives of his burning of popish and poisoning Sum baptisatus
Christiaus atque adio juratus Sacrae Scripturae Doctor, Sed ^t quotidianus
concionator cui pro nomine, condition juramento atque officio suo conveniat,
perversas, falsas seductorias ac impias doctrinas abolere vel saltem impedire,
Luther. opera Tom. 2. fol. 316.

Vid. Calv. in Ezekiel. 13.9. Cogimur faceri penes Papistas esse ordinarium
Ministerium.


Books

As this (on the one side) adds little to the reputation of the Church of Rome
(who though they had the things of God; yet have managed them for the devils
use) no more than it added to Belshashers honor and happiness, that he had in
his custody, the Golden vessels that were taken out of the Temple of the house
of God, to drink and quaff in, Dan. 5.3. So (on the other side) it cannot be
justly reckoned a disparagement to our Ministry received from Christ and his
Apostles, and the Primitive Churches, that it has passed through and been
polluted by the Romish Channel, no more than it was a dishonor to those holy
Vessels, or them that bare them and ministered with them, Isa 52.11. that they
were abused to the praise of Idol gods in Babylon, Dan. 5.4. when after they
came to be used according to the mind and to the honor of the true God in
Sion.

Secondly I answer, That if there had been no lawful

Obj. But you say Ministers are to be Ordained by Ministers and to be set apart
by the Presbytery Vid. Lutheri Opera Tom. 2. fol. 554. de Instituendis
Ministris. Reliquum est aut permittere Ecclesiam Dei perire si^e verbo aut
opportere ecclesiam conventu facto communibus suffragiis ex suo gremio id (...)
eligere, and orationibus ac manuum imposicionibus universitati commendare ac
confirmare atque eos tum pro legitimis Episcopis and Ministris verbi agnoscere,
and colere.

Ita ac camero in Myrochee, in cap. 10. v. 15. Epist. ad Roman. Non officii^
Majoribus nostris quorum saecuto and aetate caepta est reformatio, etiamsi
missione and vocatione illa externa quae ab hominibus est certis formulis and
ritibus veluti definita, instructi non fuiss^nt. Neque enim rat^o tempo^um
illorum ferebat, au^ patiebatur ac constitutu^ (...) commmode (...) servari
possit, etc.




Answ. True; regularly and in settled times and when it may be had, for Paul
does not send to the Christians of Cre^e to Ordain Elders themselv^s, but he
leaves Titus to do it; But many things may be done lawfully in a confused time,
and when Churches are in constituting and reforming, that are not to be allowed
when they are once formed and settled. When a town is on fire every one that
has a Bucket, that has strength and means to do it, is called to quench it.
The world was all on a flame (as it were) by the popish fire; This fire was to
be quenched that it might not devour all. The first Reformers had Buckets;
that is, gifts and abilities to draw water out of the wells of salvation, to
prevent the consumption of all right Religion: And God put a spirit into them
more than ordinary, to be invincibly stout and vigorous in that work. When the
Papists therefore burned Luthers Books, to the hinderance of the truth, and the
alienating of the minds of the multitude from it; Ego vicis^ssim. instinctu ut
spero spiritus libros Adversariorum combussi. Lu^^* oper. Tom. 2 p. 307.
I in like manner (says he) I hope by the instinct of the Spirit, to confirm
the hearts of the common people, and preserve the Christian truth, burned the
Books of the Adversaries, whom there was no hope to reform. Unto these
abilities so animated and heightened by the Spirit of God; if we add the
consent and call of all Protestant people that they lived amongst in those
times, we may upon good reason judge that (as things stood then) they had a
sufficient call to the Ministry themselves; and from and by them, other
succeeding Protestant Ministers might, and did receive a more complete Call,
carried in every point in scripture order

Thirdly, it is answered and declared by others, that England, as in other
places; but (the Gospel being planted here by the Apostles, Vid. Jus divin.
Regim. Eccles. in Append. and Jus divini Ministerii Anglicani. p. 46.47.
or Apostolical men, who in all probability that they might preserve and
propagate a Church, ordained a Ministry according to the Apostles Rules) there
were still here some reserved even in the reign of Antichrist, who bowed not
the knee to Baal, but contended for the truth of God. And (to speak more
particularly) the corruptions that the Church of Rome would have introduced
about the ordination of Ministers; and other Ecclesiastical affairs, were
withstood by the Kings of England. Speed Hist. of great Brit. Book 9. chap. 3.
p. 446.

Antichrist and Popery have been ejected; Ordination as well as other things,
purged and ever since exercised in the way of Christ, for it was managed by
Ministers (upon precedent trial) in the face of the Congregation, and that
with notice given to the people present, See the form and manner of ordering
Deacons, etc.
that if they knew any impediment or notable crime in any presented to
Ordination, they should discover it; which if they did, the ordering of that
person was to be stayed till he cleared himself: There was also adjoined an
earnest admonition to those that were admitted into holy Orders to do their
office faithfully: I do not say (notwithstanding all this) that there was
nothing defective in the ordination, but nothing destructive to it, nor giving
any just reason to renounce it, or question the validity of it.

These things will be considerable, and I doubt not, prevalent with those that
are willing to be satisfied as concerning our ministerial Calling. But for the
establishing of weak Christians that are not able to search into matters more
removed from their capacity, they may comfortably content themselves and
preserve in their hearts and consciences, the reverence of our Ministry, by the
Apostles popular and powerful argument drawn from the success of it upon their
own souls, Who are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by
us, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables
of stone, but in the fleshy tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. When a proof was
sought of Paul's preaching from Christ, or Christ's preaching in him, 2 Cor.
13.3. there is this proof given, ver. 5, 6. If you be not reprobate Christians,
we are not reprobate Ministers; Examine your selves (says the Apostle) ver. 5.
Prove your own selves; know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? And then he adds, ver. 6. But I trust (however I
bid you search and put it to the question, yet that) you shall know (to wit, by
finding true goodness in your selves) that we are not reprobates, but the
approved Ministers or Apostles of Jesus Christ: So that the ^^eration and
approbation of the Ministry go together, we justly offer to those many
Christians that have been converted by the Ministry of England, the same proof
though not in the same height? nor has it ever been known, that God has given
such an ordinary and eminent efficacy to any unapproved Ministry, as he has
done to the Ministry of this Nation.

T. S. p. 36.
As for that blessing from heaven which attended the labors of the Apostles,
consisting in turning men from darkness to light, from Satan to God; how few
are there among you that can boast of this blessing? for who is turned by your
Ministry, from the evil of his ways? etc.

W.T. Here I shall not answer, but call all that fear God to answer for me,
thousands of whom have witnessed and can witness, that God has wrought that
blessed work of conversion upon their souls, by the public Teachers and
Ministry of this Nation, which nothing but impudency and a feared conscience
can deliberately deny; yea even here also so much of convincement is left as to
say (whether with a good will or an ill will, let him see that says it) How
few of you?

T. S. You charge me for closing with them which wander about the Nation; Is it
wandering, for any to go too and fro to declare that which they have heard and
seen of the words of eternal life? p. 37.
If so, what were Paul and Peter but wanderers?

W. T. A. My charge was and is the leaving of their callings) wherein every one
ought to abide with God) to wan^der about and testify that which they never
heard from God nor saw in Scripture. See what one said of them, who was nearly
acquainted with them: Some of them have said to me when I enquired what our
Families should do, if all our callings and labors should be neglected; that
truly they must shift for themselves: They are a people for as many as I know
of them, wholly possessed with a principle of idleness, and going about from
place to place, pretending they are moved of the Lord, etc. Worlds wonder p
30.31.

As for his comparing of Apostles and Apostates together, I shall only say
this, that it does not follow because Ambassadors travel lawfully and
honorably with Comm^^sion from their Princes and Letters of credence; that
therefore Vagrants may walk which way they please, with a Pass that themselves
have made under an Hedge: So it does not follow, that because Apostles by a
known Call from heaven, preached the Gospel; therefore Quakers are licensed to
compass the Nation (according to their own fancy) to cry down every where that
preaching.

T. S. Why do you not come where these false witness bearers are, and manifest
them to others that they may beware of them; p. 38.
you have a rare faculty of conquering men in the Pulpit -- who never had
liberty or opportunity to give you an answer.

W. T. A. 1. Have they not been talked withal by diverse, but to what purpose,
when they have lost those principles by the owning whereof good should be done
upon them?

2. Mr. Baxter in his Epistle to the Reader, lets all men know that he offered
to come among them and confer with

Mr. Skip out of his own experience (conversing familiarly with them) speaks
thus of them. Sometimes when I have desired to have had some fair reasonings
with them about some things, and found they would not; I have told them they
were possessed of a dumb Devil as well as a railing Devil, for Satan is all
upon extremes. Worlds wonder p 24.

3. That others may beware of them, many Books have Who has warned you to flee
from the wrath to come, Luke. 37. yet we believe they will effectually warn
other Christians to beware of their way.

Of Imposition of hands.
T. S. YOu say that imposition of hands is a sign of consecration, and the
blessing of God settling on them so consecrated. p. 40.
Has not imposition of hands been used on them that are enemies to God and
goodness, and does the blessing of God settle on such?

W.T. A. It is a sign of consecration, because used to that end, Exodus 29.10.
Acts 13.3. And a sign of the blessing of God settling on them so consecrated,
because we find in Scripture blessing adjoined to the laying on of hands, Genesis
48.14, 15. Mark 10.16. it is expressly said, that Joshua was full of the Spirit
of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him, Deuteronomy. 34.29. And the gift
(whereby we may understand both the calling of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.11. and
qualifications for that calling) was given Timothy, with the laying on of
hands, Tim. 4.14.

Yet Ministers that impose hands are far from assuming to themselves the giving
of grace (which belongs to God only) nor do they make it an operative
ceremony, but whilst they use that Rite and declarative Sign, which the
Scripture holds forth in the a^tion of Ordination, they humbly hope that
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by the solemn prayer of the Churches, that
blessing shall be obtained of God, which he has formerly been pleased to give
in that way. Nor is it of any moment that diverse so Ordained have proved bad
afterward; for, are not the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, signs
of inward spiritual grace, and of a blessed condition to those that do as they
ought partake in them, though to many they be condemning Ordinances, because
they reject and rebel against the Lords conditions required on their part.

T. S You prove the laying on of hands is not the foundation of your Call, To
which I say; p. 41.
You esteem it so much the foundation, that you judge him no Minister that has
not received it.

W. T. A. If any do judge so (which I believe he cannot show) that does not
prove that imposition of hands is the foundation of our Call; but only a
necessary ingredient to a regular Call.

T. S. Whereas you say, that they that do assume unto themselves the name of
Saints, do persecute the general company of ordinary Ministers in their
scolding Books. I answer, p. 41.
They who were Saints of Old did call an Idol Shepherd by his name, and a
greedy dumb Dog by his name.

W. T. A. But they did not write to all the public Teachers of the Nation,
wherein they lived and call them so.

T.S. If any charge those with that of which they are not guilty, I am no
Patron of them; but do judge them Revilers. p. 41.


W.T. A. I wish he may judge himself according to his own rule, that he may not
be judged of the Lord; for has he not written, To all the public Teachers of
this Nation* And does he not charge those so to whom he writes? If he charge
some only, this Book has no reason, for some (yea many) in all Ages were bad
that were lawfully called: If he me^n all, or say that there are not a very
considerable company that cannot be charged with being Idol Shepherds or
greedy Dogs, then his Book has no Patron; for he will be no Patron of such as
revile.

Of Calling to the civil Magistrate, for the punishing of the open enemies of
Religion.
T. S. I challenge you to produce me one example (through all the Scriptures)
of any Saint that persecuted any for conscience sake, p. 42.
or that called to the civil Power to punish Heretics?

W.T. You find the Prophet Elijah calling to King Ahab for a trial, that
brought many false Prophets to execution, 1 King. 18.19.40.

T.S. How do you prove the Prophets of Baal to be Heretics any more, than the
poor Indians in America, that worship the Creatures?

W.T. I did not say, the Prophets of Baal were Heretics (nor was it needful,
for his question was extended to the punishing of men for conscience sake) but
yet why may not such be called Haereticum hominem tria faciunt; Error,
convictio, contumacia.
Heretics, who were habitual and most obstinate opposers of the truth; yea, of
the nature of God in their most abominable Idolatry. And must the poor Indians
therefore be Heretics who never heard of God, nor were ever convinced of the
evil of their Idolatrous worship, because they were so that were bred up in
the knowledge of God, and had the true Prophets of God among them, by whom they
might and should have been, but never would be reclaimed?

T.S. Does the Scripture say, that Elijah called to Ahab to punish Baals
Prophets, p 42.
who was himself a worshipper of Baal? or does it only say, that he bad him
send and gather them together; and do you read that Ahab did more than Elijah
desired of him?

W.T. A. The afore-cited Scripture shows, that Elijah called to Ahab when the
Kingdom was pestered and pined with Idolatry; and why made he his address to
him, but to have the assistance of his kingly power, for a course and
concertation tending to (and ending in) the false Prophets execution, which he,
being a Prophet, did (in all likelihood) foresee should come to such an issue;
yea, this Objector says after. It cannot be imagined but that if Elijahs God
had not been known to be the God that answered by fire, the portion of Baals
Prophets had fallen to Elijahs Lot* Therefore on the other side, it may be
reasonably said, that if God did answer Elijah by fire, then Baals Prophets
should undoubtedly have the portion which in conclusion befell them, else the
business had been unjustly carried, and would have become an useless trial.
Should Ministers make such address to Authority as Elijah did, what outcries
should we hear, when there be so many cries against us, though we be in many
respects on the suffering side? Nor does it follow that because Ahab himself
was a worshipper of Baal, therefore he would not give way to Elijahs design;
for all the people gave way to it, among whom were diverse wo^shippers of Baal,
1 Kings 19.18. And we know the power that extraordinary and Miracle-working
Prophets had in those days, and that there was an authority of God upon them,
by which they were t^rrible even to Kings themselves; otherwise it is not
probable that Ahab would ever have born the prophets eminently controuling
language, 1 Kings 18 18. Unto this another reason may be added; to wit, the
miserable condition they were in by the present famine, which came by Elijahs
word, 1 Kings 17.1. and was most like to be removed in Elijahs way; for there
must not be dew or rain, but according to his word, and on that it came, 1
King. 18 41. Jam. 52.8 even the worst of Kings in public calamities were
willing to take Prophets counsel and to obtain some comfort from them, though
they were sharply reproved by them (as here Ahab was) before they had it; see
2 Kings 3 13. No marvel therefore, if Ahab in his necessity closed with Elijah
that was so considerable a person, so hopeful a Prophet, and one so like to
contrive a deliverance in Gods way.

T.S. Besides that, the prophets of Baal were not executed by any Order or
command of Ahab, p. 42.
but it was the fruit of the compact made between Elijah and the prophets of
Baal, with the consent of the people, etc.

W.T. A. suppose it were the event of that compact, whereof he speaks; Yet, 1.
was it not Ahab that sent to all Israel to convene them for such a purpose? And
the compact (for the main) was with, and was concluded with the people of
Israel before the prophets of Baal were spoken to, 1 Kings 18.24. which is to
be marked, that we may know whence the destruction of those idolatrous prophets
arose, to wit, from the peoples agreement summoned by the King upon Elijahs
motion and design. 2. Was not Ahab himself at the compact? Was not his consent
in it? Yea, was not he present at the slaughter? verse 40, 41. At least durst
the people have done that execution, but that they knew the King was engaged to
a consent by the compact made in his presence, and made good by his sending for
the people and prophets of Baal, that it might be acted according to agreement?

Now where as he says, that if God had not answered by fire, the portion of
Baals prophets had fallen on Elijah, that is like enough; but that does not
prove that Ahab was unwilling that the prophets of Baal should be slain, when
the Lord did answer by fire; nay, its far more probable, (as we may partly
collect from the peoples killing of them who yet themselves were worshippers of
1 King. 18.21.
Baal) I say, it is far more probable that he (as well as the people) was so
convinced with Gods determination from heaven (unto which we may add the hope
of plenty usually succeeding reformation) that he willingly gave way to it: And
we find he stood upon good terms with Elijah that ran before him when it was
done.

The sum is; That gracious God that keeps not anger for ever, intended to
remove the present drought and scarcity: This was to be done by the word and
Prayer of Elijah: and it was to be done by a Reformation; in that Reformation
the Kings Hand and Power was to be employed: Upon that Reformation, and the
execution of the false Prophets, a sound of much rain immediately followed: To
show that that act of Justice (by the help of Supreme Authority, called to by
the Prophet) was the thing intended, that way might be made to the Lords mercy.

W.T. But I wonder what calls to punishment you can specify suitable to your
complaint?

T.S. Nay I can specify calls both from Presses and Pulpits, p. 43.
more then suitable: -- Let almost every prison this day in England speak; where
is there almost one in which some innocent heart or other does not lie in bonds
for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and that at the instigation and procurement
of some or other of your persecuting generation?

W.T. He Is full of words in the beginning of this page, and I leave it to any
indifferent Person that will read his Book, to judge whether he does not
slander abundantly in the latter end; but there is not one proof or evidence
(neither do I think he can bring any) to show that any one soul, is in any one
prison for the Testimony of Jesus Christ: Nay, it is so far from this, that
they that are very well acquainted with the Quakers and their opinions,
declare, That they do not witness a Jesus, according to the word of God; but a
Christ within them according to their own fancy; withdrawing men from eyeing
the death and righteousness of Christ without us, and making that but a
shadow of that done within us. Faithful discovery of a treacherous design,
p. 7.

Let him inquire again whether they do not bring trouble upon their own heads,
either by a tumultuous carriage, or by disturbing the Messengers of God whilst
they are doing their Office: the sum and height whereof is to give a true
Testimony of and for Jesus Christ. And so all the clamor and calumnies that
follow being built upon the sand fall. In the conclusion whereof, he who does
so abominate Ministers, would seem to have some good thoughts of the civil
Magistrates, concerning which I shall transcribe their words, who show
themselves willing to have the best thoughts they can of them, Their words are
these; Its not any person nor circumstance so much that is aimed at, as the
Ministry it self or all outward Teachers: In which argument they discover more
envy, pride, passion, than in any other: But be assured if the Magistrates had
not a material sword, as the Ministers have not, their language would light as
hard on their heads, and more than so A fathful discovery of a treacherous
design, p. 47.
.

Of Christian Liberty.
W. T. ANd let me tell you also, that Christians will one day rue the Liberty
of these days.

T. S. Would you have Liberty of Conscience, and would you not give it? p. 44.


W.T. A. Ministers have sufficiently declared themselves to be far from being
against Liberty of Conscience truly so called; And their hearty desire is,
that tenderness of conscience (if it appear to be so) may be much favored. But
must Saul therefore be permitted to do what he pleases against the Name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, because he thinks verily in his conscience that he
ought to do it? Acts 26.19,
Mr. Buroughs in his Lect. in Cornhill An. 1645. (that was no friend to the
troublers of tender Consciences), yet was so wise and sincere as to teach, that
a man may be required to give an account of his Conscience to any in an orderly
way, especially to the Magistrate. And again, that when conscience is pleaded,
a man may be put to so much trouble as may take away wantonness of spirit, that
information may be received. And further, that men may be enforced (though they
plead Conscience) not to work for the hinderance of others Salvation. If any
will seduce my wife or any near me (says he) and it be immediately against
Salvation, I would divert it by violence my self, if there were no Magistrate,
or go to him if there were any. Thus far Mr. Buroughs. But it is to be
believed that they have such tender Consciences that shake off Gods public
Ordinances, rail upon his Officers, profane his Sabbaths, and sweep out of
their Families all religious Exercises.

T.S. Are not you of the number of those, who (not many years since) preached
and printed Parliament and people into Arms and into blood, p. 44.
for the rescuing you from under the tyranny and oppression of the Bishops?

W.T. A. 1. Here he puts me to answer for my self; I shall therefore make known
that I was so far from preaching the Parliament and people into Arms to be
rescued from the Bishops, that (if I know mine own heart) I should have chosen
to have suffered not only much more than I did or was like to do, but then I
could have done under Bishops, or any other way, rather than that there should
have been a Civil War; for besides that the sufferings of particular persons
are inconsiderable in regard of the common calamity of intestine Broils; I know
by sufficient experience, that such troubles as were arisen and were like to
fall more and more upon Ministers by popish innovations, would have been
accompanied with inward comfort, and followed with an happy issue. They fight
the good fight, that quietly suffer for God and a good Conscience. But
providence wrought and pressed so far by occasion of public grievances, as
that a Parliament was called and confirmed that found and declared (as by the
Preamble to the Protestation ordered to be printed and recommended to the
Nation, May 5. 1641. may further appear) that through the designs of Romish
and wretched instruments, the true Protestant Religion was endangered;
subversion of the fundamental Laws of the State endeavored; and innovations
and superstitions brought into the Church. Things standing thus, it belonged to
the Parliament in right and duty (being convened to consult the public Weal
and safety) to find out a Remedy for these Maladies. There were many
Declarations signifying their faithful intentions and real purposes for the
reformation and defense of Religion; the preservation of the Rights of the
Supreme Powers; and the lawful Rights and Liberties of the subjects. In
contemplation of these great ends, my self (with other Ministers) submitted to
that present entire Parliament; not as if the business were to be summed up in
procuring a Liberty from Bishops (that was a very inferior thing) but that
which we aimed at was, the glory of God in the pursuance of all the former
ends, and (which was most proper to Ministers) the advancement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ in the Reformation of Religion according to the Word of God.
Little did we think of the strange things that have arisen since; For that God
that orders all things according to the counsel of his own will, left the
consultations of supreme powers unto such differences and distastes, that they
fell into a sad War, followed with the effusion of much Christian blood, which
any man that has the heart of a Christian was so far from taking pleasure in,
as to make it (when things were come to that pass, that there was no help for
it) the matter of deepest lamention; and so it was ever professed to be by both
parties that were engaged in the war: for my own part I was so far from
preaching Parliament and people into a War, that I endeavored what I could to
pray them out of it.

2. It may be observed here that he is earnest to extract himself a Liberty of
Conscience from that fighting which he speaks against, and wherein (being a
Preacher in the Army) he had more to do than other men; yet I say again, they
whom he so highly reviles, deny not just Liberties, nor do any thing like that
which he speaks against in his quaking language. But sure no godly man fought
to procure a liberty to do what he list, and to force an open way to run
himself out of all Religion. Of old, he that dug a pit was to cover it,
Exodus 21.23. He that made an house was to make battlements, Deuteronomy. 22.8.
Pest-houses have ever been thought neccessary in infectious times; And shall
there be no stopping up of passages leading to the bottomless Pit? No restraint
of soul-infecting-persons? Shall no battlements be made to keep people from
falling down headlong into Quod autem vobis videtur in vitos ad veritatem non
esse cogendos erratisnescientes Scripturas, neque virtutem Deiqui eos volentes
faci^ du^ coguntur in viti Aug. cont Gaudent. Epist. 2. l* 2* c. 17.
Hell? How happy a thing were it on the other side, if people were brought to
ordinances unwillingly that they might be brought to God and goodness
willingly? Whereof King Josiah is an immitable pattern, 2 Chronicles. 34.33.

I do not speak these things as desiring the straitning or affliction of those
that are so bitter enemies unto us, but as eying the extreme danger they are in
of soul-destruction. In which regard, I cannot but think and say; that it had
been far better for them to have been compelled and haled to Gods holy
Ordinances, then (by enjoying and abusing a liberty to them miserable) to have
broken loose as they have done from all the bonds of Religion: and to have made
those sad approaches to Atheism that they have most unhappily made. And we see
a little the benefit of restraint, and what reason there is that Authority
should therein duly exert it self, by late experience: For, a course being
taken by the higher Powers, that no Minister should be interrupted in the
acting of his Office, the Quakers that so usually molested the public
Meetings, have forborne their former disturbances; so God is not provoked by
those affronts; our Congregations are free from those distractions; and the
Quakers themselves from that sin, though they come still as near it as they
dare: But hereby it appears that the interposing of the Civil Powers is o^
special effic^cy for the repressing of public provocations, and so it would
be* also (were it vigorously put forth) for the attending of holy Ordinances
administered in the way of God, which the Lord give unto Governors rightly to
consider of, that God may not suffer in his glory; themselves in their last
account, and poor souls (apt to be deceived) in their spiritual and
everlasting condition, for want of the help of a compassionate compulsion.

W.T. Though Liberty be a good thing; yet it is not good for children. Its
weaklings tentation and seducers advantage.

T. S. Would you have judged it a reasonable answer for Bishops to have said,
p. 45.
Liberty is good for us Bishops, but not for you that are our children of the
Presbytery; for some of you are weaklings, and liberty is your tentation,
others Heretics and Seducers, and it will be your advantage.

W. T. A. As for the business between Bishops and Ministers, its true, that we
desired Liberty of conscience; that is, to serve God without intanglement of
conscience by those things that were apparently and in true judgment, Snares
and oppressive burdens to the consciences of those that were neither children
nor seducers: But its one thing to desire a liberty to serve God without
unnecessary and apparent intanglements, and another thing for men to seek a
liberty to choose, whether they will serve God according to his Word or no. Its
one thing to desire freedom from a book of sports, another thing to desire
freedom from the Book of God, as not willing to be led and ruled by it, but by
a light within, or as desiring a liberty from that, which that word commands,
or to that which it forbids.

T. S. But why is not liberty good for the children? Is any thing too good for
the Children of the Lord? p. 45.
Whether do you and the rest of the Teachers of the Nation, judge your selves
to be of the number of children? If you are, then neither is liberty good for
you.

W.T. A. Its wonder this man should please himself with so childish a thing,
that is, with a poor playing upon the word [ Children;] I cannot think that he
understands so little, Fallacia homonymiae.
but that it is against his conscience to conceive, that I unde^stood the word
Children in that sense wherein he (...) it: For the help of those whom such a
toy may a little trouble: I shall let every weak Reader know, that by
[Children] I meant such Christians as (although they be the Children of God,
yet) being weak in knowledge and in grace (as all Gods Children are not) are
apt to abuse and take hurt by a larger liberty, as children do, because they be
children; for when they be grown up, they have more wit, and so will do
otherwise. Now the Teachers of this Nation and riper Christians are in the
number of Gods Children, as ch^l^ren come to maturity are the Parents children
still, but they are not such children as children in in their minority ^re,
unto whom, because they have not understanding well to use more liberty, they
grant less; yet diverse such children there be, unto whom if you say, you may
observe the Lords day religiously* hear on that day sound Teachers and no
other; fast and pray on solemn days, ^o preserve the Land from per^shing:
These things you may do (if you w^ll) and if you will not, you may choose: I
say, if you speak thus to diverse ^n these days, its all one as if the father
and mother should say to the little child that is at play among his
play-fellowes, you may go to school if you will; or you may come in to read a
Chapter and be catechis'd if you will; but if you will not, you may choose: Its
easy to know what he will choose. And parents that give that liberty to a child
(that would do better as we say, if he should) are to answer for it, if he make
an undoing choice.

As for that liberty of Paul which he mention, Try al things, and hold fast
that which is good, we are far from denying it Christians, so the trial be made
by the right Rule; that is, the Word of God (an^ not the warping rule of an
inward light, and that be held fast which is found to be good and right in the
judgment of the Spirit of God in the Word, and not that which is good in their
own eyes. And we blame Christians exceedingly, that they have run from one
thing to another, without this Trial.

W.T. If prejudice have not blinded your eyes, you may see that there are a
very considerable company of Ministers that (through the grace of God) are such
as Paul speaking to Timothy 1 Timothy 3. requires they should be; I mean, as
far as humane infirmity will bear.

A Defense of the Ministry.
T. S. I answer, that has no weight at all; for admit that for a plea, and the
filthiest Idol Shepherd in the Nation, may be judged so qualified as* Paul
required. He that is full of spots, will say he is harmless as humane infirmity
will bear, etc.

W.T. Here Is good stuff: Because a common drunkard cannot say (unless falsely
and wickedly) may not therefore a David, or an Asaph say truly, This ^s mine
infirmity, Psa. 77.10. Does he not know that there are some spots, that are not
the spots of children, Deuteronomy 32 5. and therefore some that are? when I had said,
blameless, as humane infirmity will bear; I added in my letter these words,
unto which if you give no allowance unto others, you know not your self; but he
is willing to leave out that, and shakes off (I doubt) that self-sear^h which
being rightly ordered, would help him to see the need that sincere and weak
Christians (who cannot be Quakers and plead perfection) have of that supporting
truth, that there is no child of God here upon earth but has his Eccles. 7.20.
infirmities. Nor is this any protection to profane men who do in vain shroud
their gross miscarriages, under the name of humane frailties, when as by their
constant and wilful wickedness, they declare themselves to all the world to be
presumptuous sinners.

W.T. It has ever been the devils grand design (wherein he has palpably
played his part in our late changes) to throw down the Ministry. Its not enough
for him that Bishops be taken away branch and root; unless he root out the
Ministry also, for he knows well that his work cannot go forward while their
work continues.

T. S. I never heard before that the Devil took away the Bishops. p. 4.


W.T. A. As he did not hear it before now: So neither does he hear it now. It
is not to be expected that this man should h^ve much Logic; yet one would
think he should not have so little reason as to collect; that because I said,
I^ is not enough for the Devil that Bishops be taken away: therefore I said,
that the Devil took them away. If a man should say, its not enough for the
Devil that Altars, Crosses and Crucifixes be taken away, unless Bibles be
taken away also; does this prove that the Devil took away Crosses and
Crucifixes: Or, If a man should say* it was not enough for the cruel Romish
Catholics, that Fagius and Bucer were not alive to trouble them, unless they
dig up their dead bodies and burn them openly; does it follow therefore that he
says the same Romanists took away their lives?

2. I desire the Reader to know, that I thought not of any such thing (as this
Replyers figment is) when I wr^te that passage; my meaning therein, being only
this; that it is not enough for the Devils purpose, or that the Devil is not
satisfied, unless under the notion of Reforming the Minister^, he can proceed
so far as to destroy it.

3. I ad^e, Had Bishops been taken away, according to this Replyers desires and
Declaration, I mean, had the removal of Bishops been acted, as an
introductory, and in way of ten^ency to the removal of the whole Ministry;
(which all goo^ men that had an h^nd in removing of Bishops abhor) than the
taking away of Bishops had been absolutely the Devils work; For as God is his
Ministers best friend, so is the Devil their greatest Enemy; and other
opposites are but his Ministers, 2 Cor. 11.15. That lying Spirit it was that
opposed Michaiah in the Prophets of Ahab^, 1 King. 22.22 that encountered Paul
in Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.10. That hindered the same Paul, once and again,
in his holy intentions, 1 These. 2.18. Its he that casts as many as he can of
them into prison; and where An^ipas is slain, there Satan dwells, Revel. 2.10 13.

A lamentable thing it is that this Opponent, and that Adversary should be so
unanimous; an^ that this l^te Preacher should be a brazen faced Professor of
his longings, to have the Ministry abolished; For these a^e his words What is
the designs I must fear and tremble to act? Is it to endeavor the rooting out
of your Ministry? p. 49.
And why fear and tremble at it? Is your Ministry so precious a thing that it
may not be plucked up under the same penalty, as was in eating the forbidden
fruit, etc. It may make other men tremble to see that a man living under the
light of the Gospel, should have so little knowledge, grace, and fear of God as
to utter such words, when those persons or Nations, that seek to throw down the
Lords Ministers (which Ministers are in this Nation or in no Nation in the
world) as they do Giant like oppose themselves against heaven, and Gods
express ordinance, Ephesians 4 11, etc. So they take the next and most effectual
course to ruin themselves, 2 Chronicles 36.15.16, 17.

T. S. I shall note two things with which you falsely accuse me: The first is,
p. 50.
that I inveigh against humane learning: If a man say a tilestone is not fit to
make a foundation: must it presently be concluded, he denies the use of
tilestones?

W.T A I say he inveighs against it, because he speaks contemptuously of it,
and of Universities, in reference to Ministerial assistance, as if it were
ridiculous to say that a Minister has any help for his work in that way; when
all that know any thing rightly, know that humane learning (in the hand of
grace) is a great help for the better understanding of heavenly things. I
granted to him (though he runs on as if he had heard nothing of it) that
learning cannot make any a spiritual man; but yet it makes a spiritual man, a
better servant. But Quakers might be glad if there were no learning nor wisdom
in the world: for as long as there is any, their folly will be made to appear
to all men: what he says of tilestones, shows that he never knew what it was
to be a grounded scholar: For though learning be not the groundwork of
Religion; yet it supplies many grounds (which wisemen use to call grounds of
learning, whereof an holy mind makes good use for the justification of the
things of God against the subtilties of ungodly men.

T.S. 2. You accuse me with seeking to justify absurd Tenants. To which I
shall only say, that I seek to justify no Tenants, p. 51.
but such as the scripture does justify.

W.T. These are good words, and show that the scripture is more than Paper and
Ink, because it does justify Tenants. But since he refers himself to that (it
seems as a Rule to judge things by) let him show where the scripture does
justify these Tenants. viz. That the Scripture is not the Rule of Saints; that
it is not the ground of Faith; that the Infants of believing Parents are not to
be baptized, etc.

T.S. Whether does not the Scripture testify that Christ is the true light
that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world; p. 52.
and also that he that follows that light shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life?

W.T. A. This is spoken to at large in my Answer to his Epistle (already
published) and namely to the first Article of his charge against the Ministers
of the Nation. See Railing (...). p. 12.^3*


For present, I answer thus, Christ enlightens men more ways than one: to wit,
1 By natural light, J^h. 1.4. and so only he lights every man, that comes
into the world. Now he that has that light and no more, cannot (in an ordinary
way have life; because he is without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. From whom alone life
is to be had, 1 John 5.11.12. 2. By Gospel Light, Now whosoever does (by the
spirit of grace) follow that light or follow Christ so enlightening him, he
shall have life, Joh. 10.27. But this will do him little pleasure, whose
pleading is fixed, not on a light which comes from the word, but which
enlightens every man that comes into the world.

T.S. Whereas you coat Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? You might have found an answer if you had lookd a little
further, viz. in the 18. v. where it is written; But I say have they not heard?
yes, verily, their sound went into all the earth; and their words unto the ends
of the world.

W.T. A. 1. The Apostle shows in that Chapter, that the time was now come,
wherein both Jews and Gentiles (believing) should be saved, Romans 10, 11, 12.
But for this belief he decl^reth hearing to be necessary, v. 14. whereupon it
might be objected. How can this salvation be extended to all, when this hearing
is not extended to all? This Objection is answered in the v. 18. wherein the
Apostle shows that at the same time wherein God appointed to receive the
Nations of the world (together with the Jews) into a saving state; he ordained
also the means, and that the word of Salvation should be heard and received of
them; so that as the Sun in the Firmament (yea the whole frame of heaven spoken
of Psalm. 19 1.) Shines, and (in a sort) speaks to all; so the Sun of
righteousness, in the New Testament did (by the Apostles) shine and preach to
all the world, that is, as it is expressed, v. 12. to Jews and Greeks; And so
the word [World] is taken in the New Testament, Matthew. 13.38. 1 John 2.2. viz.
as opposed to that confinement, that there was of the ordinances of God to the
Jewish Church in the Old Testament-times; the sound of the Gospel (therefore)
went into all the earth, or all the world (that is all Nations of the world,
Romans 16.26.) generally, yea, it was to be preached to every creature, Mark.
16.15.
indifferently, but that will not prove that it reaches to every place
particularly; much less to every person individually.

2. If this sound went into all the earth: that is, to Gentiles as well as
Jews, by the Apostles preaching, that so men might believe and be saved; then
it follows that either that preaching and sounding forth of the Gospel was
unnecessary, or else, they could not believe, nor be saved any other way; and
if they could not otherwise be saved, then it is apparent that the light that
enlightens every one that comes into the world, could not suffice to save those
Gentiles, who in former times never heard of that Gospel which sounded in all
the Earth, in and after the Apostles times: Dou^tle^s that Sound went not into
all the Earth before the Apostles times, Psalm. 147. last v. And yet the
Gentiles who then lived had that inward light which Q^akers plead for, because
they were men come into the world, therefore that light will not suffice to
save, which is the thing for which I quoted that Scripture; and it is in vain
for this Writer to speak of an answer from verse 18. for that shows only what
was done in Gospel times; we are sure the Gentiles heard not of Christ before,
(at least in any observable generality) and yet they had the inward light,
therefore that light is not sufficient to save, for why then could it not save
without any further hearing?

T. S To which I shall add these following Queries,

1. Q Whether had not the Lord his witness in the hearts of those of whom Paul
speaks in his first Chapter to the Romans, p. 52.
convincing them of, and condemning them for sin, thought it was kept under and
held in unrighteousness?

W.T. A. Yes, they had that in them which was sufficient to make up a
convincing and condemning witness against them.

T. S. 2. Q Whether that which left them without excuse, did not also reveal
unto them the way of life, which if it had not done, whether had they not been
excusable?

W.T. A. Though that light did not reveal unto them the way of life (as I
affirm the light that all the Gentiles had, did not; there being no way to life
but by his Name, whom the Apostle says was not named among those Gentiles to
whom he preached, Romans 15.20.) yet were they not therefore excusable, Acts 4.12.
but by so much light as they had from the works of God, though they had none
from the word of God, were left without excuse, Romans 1.20.

T. S. 3. Q Whether were they condemned because they knew not God, or for
disobedience against the light they had, in that they glorified him not as God,
according to the measure of light they had received?

W.T. A. For both; to wit, because they liked not to retain God in their
knowledge, Romans 1.28. and therefore they had not the knowledge they might have
had and because they glorified not God according to the knowledge they had, v.
21.

T.S. 4. Q. If they had obeyed and glorified God according to that measure of
light and knowledge they had received, whether had they been condemned?

W.T. A. That Is an impossible supposition, for the darkness that was in them
would not suffer them to glorify God according to the light that was in them,
John 1.5. which d^rknesse also they willingly pre^erring above the light they
exposed themselves thereby to just condemnation without excuse; which is enough
for us to know and acknowledge in this point, without puzling our selves with
needless suppositions.

T.S. The thing that I charged you with, was the denial of Jesus Christ to be
within us; p. 53.
which charge I grounded on these words of yours viz the Scripture ^aith that
we are justified freely by the grace of God, through the redemption and
righteousness of Jesus Christ which is not within us, but without us. Now the
thing in controversy between you and my self, is in which of these two orders
these words must be read; either thus, which redemption and righteousness is
no^ within us, or which Jesus Christ is not with in us, you would have them (to
save your self out of the mire) to be read in the former sense.

W. T. A. 1. That if I had meant what I spoke of Christ, I should in congruitie
of speech rather have said who is within us, then which is within us, the
latter being a more proper expression of a thing, the former of a person.

2. If he had meant to take my words plainly and honestly Christ within, but
about Righteousness within, and namely whether that righteousness within does
lead to justification? Whereupon I proved to him out of Scripture that the
ri^hteousnesse w^thin is not that which does justify us, but that we are
freely justified and saved through the redemption and righteousness; that is,
through [ that] redemption and righteousness which is not within us, but
without us. Now, to dream of a thing that was never in controversy, and to
forget the matter that is in present dispute, shows that a man is willing
where he cannot find a fault, to make it.

T.S. Which being supposed, I demand of you two things? p. 53.


1. What number is the word [ which] the singular or the plural? The singular
you cannot say, unless you will destroy your Grammar, which says, that many
Antecedents singular having a conjunction copulative coming between them, will
have a Relative plural: This being granted that the word [ which] is the plural
number. I demand,

2. What Is the Nominative case to the verb [ is]? for which you can find no
other but the word [ which] and that being the plural number and the verb [ is]
the singular number; pray produce me some rule in your Grammar, that allows
any concord betwixt a verb of the singular number and a nominative case of the
plural.

W.T. A. Now* here is a piteous accusation that I that have lived in the world
64 years have forgot, and have need to be catechized in the Childrens
Accidence; but this Grammar Scholar carries it so high, that something must be
said to so frivilous a thing.

In his Childrens Catechism the^e be two questions: I shall need to speak
only to the first of them (whereupon the other will fall:) I answer
(therefore) and can say well enough, that the word [ which] is the singul^r
number, not the plural; and yet the Grammar will escape well enough: only, he
that fears the destruction of Grammar may comfort himself with this, that there
be more Grammers then one; and should remember also, that the Composers of our
ordinary Grammar acknowledge that they framed it [ Crassa Minerva] for
Childrens use: It is no marvel therefore if they wrote those things that were
plainest and most common, and do for other things not so fit to be
communicated to young beginners, refer them to other Gramarians as Linacer and
Despaucerius) and to their own after experience in the reading of those
Authors out of whom Grammers are composed.

This being premised, I shall come to a more close and Antecedent; that is, to
the word [r^ghteousness] which righteousness (though I added the word
[Redemption] exabundanti) was that which I intended principally to speak of,
and about which the contest arose between him and me. Now that when there be
two Antecedents coupled together, the Relative, may be of the singular number,
and refer to the latter, is plain from those words of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which (that is without which
(...).
holiness) no man shall see the Lord Alvarus de constructione intransitiva;
interdum redditur Relativum vici-mori (Scil. Antecedenti) e. g. Cic. in Pis.
Mihi non venerat in mentem, furorem and insaniam optare vobis, in quam
incidistis.
.

Or the Relative may refer to either of the Antecedents as in that of Tully in
the Margin Cicir de Offic l. 1. Deinceps de Beneficentia and deliberalitate
dicatur, qua quidem nihil est naturae homnis accommodatius. Where the Relative
may agree with the latter Antecedent or the former also, as here both with
Redemption and Righteousness, it being truly verified of either, that it is
without us.
.

But 2. I shall follow him in his own way, and let him know that Grammar must
needs be destroyed if such a Syntax as he exagitates will destroy it, for Tully
himself destroies it. De Offic l. 1. Humanae societatis vinculum est ratio and
oration, quae docendo, disceno, etc. conciliat inter se homines, etc. Here are
two Antecedents singular, having a Conjunction copulative coming between them,
and yet Tully will not let them have a Relative plural, but the Relative is of
the singular number, and joined with a verb of the singular number.

3. I add, that this man who is so tender of his Grammar, destro^es it
himself, page 46. of this Pamphlet, where he what I writ proceeded from that
deep sense I had of all that deceit, hypocrisy and abomination that reigns
in the mided^t of them. He^e are Antecedents more than a good many, and yet he
will not do his Grammar right by following them with a Relative plural, But
only a Relative and a Verb singular.

And now I shall leave it to the sober minded (to whom he appeals, and whom it
is a shame to trouble with so trifling a thing) to judge and determine between
us, whether I had any cause to fear that sticking in the mire, which this
maundy man loves to mention, or do need any such Apology as he would fain have
for a fained mistake.

W.T. The Redemption and Righteousness of Christ, p. 53.
by which we are Justified, is not within us, but without us; against that you*
say (you can say) nothing.

We are not justified by a righteousness within.
T. S. SInce you are so confident I can say nothing against what you did so
peremptorily ass^rt, p 56.
I shall further offer to you by way of enquiry, as follows.

W.T. A. I may be confident still he can say nothing; for to enquire is not to
say, but to hear what another man can say; I did not say, that he could not ask
questions about it, but that he could say nothing against it.

Yet his Q^eries showing part wh^t he would say, if he knew how to stand to it,
I shall briefly answer them.

1. Quest. Whether Christ be separable from his righteousness? If not, whether
(he being within the Saints) his righteousness be not there also? And
cons^quently whether he that denies the righteousness of Christ to be within
the Saints, does not blasphemously deny Christ to be there also.

W.S. A. 1. Christ is not separable from his humane nature, therefore by his
good reasoning, the humane body of Christ must be within Saints.

2. I answer positively; where Christ is in Person, there is his righteousness
also: But that righteousness which justifies us, is not there inherently where
Christ is by his Spirit: And it is by his Spirit that he is in Saints not in
his person, Ephesians. 3.17. Acts 3.21.

2. Quest. Whether Christ be not made of God to the Saints,

W.T. This is a Falacia plurium interrogationum.
falacious and captious question, for the the things mentioned are of diverse
kinds, whereof some are within us, and some are without us; take them
altogether and no man can say, they are either within or without, for they are
both within and without; But as for that righteousness whereof the Apostle
speaks (which is the thing now in question) that I say is without us, not
within us; Christ is made unto us righteousness by that perfect obedience of
his which is not within us but imputed to us.

Whether Redemption and Righteousness must not be there witnessed where the
Seat of Sin and uncleanness is; And whether is that Seat of sin and uncleanness
within or without.

W.T. A. It is enough that the sanctification of Christ be there where the seat
of sin and uncleanness is. The justifying righteousness of Christ is not there
inherently, but it is there efficaciously, inasmuch as it is imputed to us to
take off that guilt of sin and uncleanness that is in us, and inasmuch as
Christ's obedience to the death of the Cross has not only a meritorious but
an efficacious work in it for the killing of that sin that is within.

Whether does not the Scripture witness that Christ gave himself for his that
he might redeem them from all iniquity, and purify them unto himself? And
whether is that redemption and purifying from their iniquity and pollution
within them, or without them?

W. T. A. This fourth Querie is answered in the third. The Redemption of Christ
in regard of the ju^^ifying and pacifying work is without them; Colos. 1.14.
in regard of the end, effect, and purifying work it is within them.

T.S. As for that Spirit that teaches men to revile I do abominate it, etc.
p. 57.


W.T. A. Its a great matter for a man to know of what Spirit he is, How he
abominates that Spirit that teaches men to revile, let the Reader judge by
this reviling Book; yea by this reviling Page, wherein he makes the Ministers
of this Nation, the successors of the Scribes and Pharsees in their bloody and
Christ-killing way; wherein there is the quintessence of reviling, the
aspersion and expressions being extremely high, and the charge abominably both
false and foolish, as not having (in regard of the generality of the public
Teachers of the Nation) any color of truth (...) reason in it.

T. S. I know no Seducers in the Nation but such as draw men from the light,
love and fear of the Lord, p 59.
to listen to their own fond dreams.

W.T. A. This is a right description of Quakers, who have forsaken the
ordinances of God and the Scripture rule, to follow and to draw followers to
their own fancies.

T.S. Stiling him who is the only sure Teachers of the Saints, p. 59.
a pretended inward light.

W.T. A. Stiling him] I wonder who that is; sure it must be either Christ or
the Spirit: But if this inward light enlightens every one that comes into the
world, how can it be Christ (...) any having lived in the world without Christ,
Ephesians. 2.12. Romans 15.20.) Nor can it be meant of the Spirit, for that was not
poured on all flesh, when they came into the world, but when Christ came into
the world, Joel 2.28. and there are some still that are sensual having not the
Spirit, Jude v. 19. Its true, the Spirit is the sure Teacher of the Saints, but
no man calls the inward light of the Spirit a pretended light, but the inward
light of the Quakers.

T. S. I wish eternal good t^ your precious Soul and rest. etc.

W.T. That Is a good wish: only I must mind him, p 60.
that he wish it really, he must wish it in such a way as is like to attain
that end, which is not (as he says it is) by abiding faithful in the measure
of light received, for no man shall come to heaven by his own faithfulness,
(though that be necessarily required) but by faith in Jesus Christ, Mark 16.10.
Ephesians. 2.8.

To conclude (together with him) I thank God I can truly say that I most
heartily desire that to him which he wishes to me, whereof there being no
hope but only this, that To God all things are possible. I do therefore humbly
pray that omnipotent God, to enlighten his understanding (with a better light
then every man has that comes into the world) to sanctify his heart, to awaken
his conscience, and by one happy means or other to lead him out of those
dangerous delusions wherein he is detained, and which are so preparitory to
everlasting misery; and to set him in the right Scripture path, and way of
life, that so his precious soul may be saved in the day of Jesus Christ.

A Postscript: A little to acquaint the Reader with some passages published by
Thomas Speed in a late Pamphlet, Entitled (I know not with how good sense, I
am sure with little truth) The Guilty covered Clergy man unvailed.
WHen Thomas Speeds first Reply was Printed, I left it to all that had any
sense of Religion to consider whether ever they knew so strange and ugly a
thing brought to Bristol-fair. I did not blame him As he would have the Reader
think, p. 9.
for bringing a Book thither at the Fair, for to every thing there is a season,
but for bringing a Monster thither, that is, such an horrid spectacle as was
never (I think) seen before, either in Bristol, or in England, or in the
Christian World; I mean, an Epistle written to all the public Teachers of the
Nation (and that by one that was himself a late public teacher) wherein all
reproaches are cast upon them; and (upon the same account) on the Ministry all
over the world since the Apostles time, as because they are not infallible;
because they do not take upon them to Preach (as the Apostles did) by immediate
inspiration; because they sprinkle Infants; because they take that maintenance
that the nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers of the Church have provided for
them, and allotted to them; and because many in that calling are not such as
they ought to be. At which enmity of Apostates, none should marvel, because
Ministers stand so much in their way, and the very end of the the Ministry is
to keep Christians from being carried about by flatulent Seducers in this windy
world, Ephesians. 4.11, 14.

But as one evil begets another, so now very lately, this mishapen-birth, is
followed with another like it self, that is, very deformed as the former, but
much more audacious, as being prefaced and presented to the world with an
address, To the Parliament of England now assembled at Westminster.

And is a Parliament of England become so low a thing; or is a Quaker so high a
thing; or the Ministry of England (and all Protestant Churches) so base a
thing; or is the whole frame of sound and saving Religion, grown so despicable,
and so friendless a thing in this English Nation, that such an empty and
impious invective should be ushered and introduced with the prefixing of so
great a Name, and an application to so high and religious a Court and
Convention? and that also to so sad a purpose? for the sum of that which their
plain-dealing friend would pre^^^ them to, is, to suffer him and his accomplices,
and those whose faith they have overthrown, or can overthrow, to run themselves
(quietly and without any compassionate restraint) into the hands of Satan, and
out of the Kingdom of Christ; for to that issue Error and Heresy comes, as
well as Drunkeness and Adultery, 1 Timothy 1.20. with 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2,
10, 11, 12. Gal* 5.19, 20, 21.

In this his last Reply, there is very little wherein the Religious and rational
Reader (that shall be pleased to take a view of what I have written formerly in
Answer to his Epistle) will require an account; but yet he may expect some
satisfaction in regard of a personal defamation wrapped up in this Quere.

T. S. I would demand of William Thomas whether he did not some years since
receive of his Parishioners the Sixth part of all their increase for one year;
p. 54.
and whether he did not urge them to continue the same for one year more -- If
this be true (for which I can produce testimony out of his own N^ighbourhood)
then I demand, What shadow of a rule in Scripture he had for this; and whether
(supposing the tenth to be his due) it be not extortion to receive the Sixth?

W. T. Ans. 1. The urging that he speaks of for a second year, is to my self
(and any other that I know) absolutely unknown. As for the taking of the Sixth
part of their increase, suppose it were true (which he shall never make good)
yet what is there in it? for he dares not say that I demanded it (and it were
foolish to say so, for there is no way to have it) only he charges me with
receiving it. Now I thought he would have granted us voluntary contribution:
what? must we have nothing neither by Law, nor by love? And is it extortion to
receive? Where did he learn that the meaning and the English of Extorting [of
Extorquere] is to take that which is freely given?

2 Both for the pretended receiving of this Sixth part, and the Urging to have
it another year, my Parishioners and the Neighborhood shall answer for me, who
(hearing of this report) were willing to meet together and consider what truth
there was in it, and thereupon have written and subscribed this Testimony.
Ubley December. 15. 1656.
WHereas a scandalous report is printed by Mr. Thomas Speed Merchant of Bristol
against our Pastor, We the Inhabitants of his Parish, whose names are here
subscribed, do certify and testify that our Minister never received from us
the Sixth part of our Estates. It Is true, that for one year, when he had been
some time absent from us in Prison, and at London, we concluded to give
something more then ordinary The whole sum that year was but 53 l. 10 s. 6 d.
; but it was voluntarily by our selves without his seeking or motion. And
having met together and viewed the note of what every one gave, we judge that
as for those from whom Tithes were due, they were so far from giving the Sixth
part, that they gave no more, or very little more then the Tenth, though diverse
young people from whom Tithes were not due, gave what they pleased. Further,
none of us can say or do know that he urged the having of that which was given
this year for another year; only he desired to have the value of the Tithes in
money.




This is subscribed by 18 hands of the Parishioners and Neighborhood. He may
produce the Neighborhood (if he have a mind to it) that will witness the
contrary.

I am sorry I have detained the Reader with a matter of so small moment,
whereunto notwithstanding, in these days wherein every tale will serve the
turn (with many) to make a Minister odious, there is some need to speak. I
shall pass from this, remembering only this Replyer how disingenuous he is,
that cannot be content to live in prosperity himself in the calling of a
Merchant (into which he is lapsed) but he must also grudge Ministers that
maintenance (whether by right or by gift) without which, unless they should
entangle themselves in the affairs of this life (which the Apostle forbids, 2 Timothy 2.4.) they are not able to subsist; Was it not enough for him to make sure
he would be no Minister himself, but he must be so cruel to that calling? which
yet shall certainly stand firm with God, when all his wood, and hay, and
stubble that he opposes against it, shall be burned up.

As for those small and weak things which in the before named Reply he objects
against me, I shall make a brief return to some of them, that thereby the
Reader may judge of the rest.

T. S. If fasting and prayer cast out all evils and Devils (which were the
words that upon occasion I had spoken before) then there is perfection in this
life; p. 14.
for where there is no evil uncast out, there is absolute perfection.

W. T. Ans. 1. Men of understanding know, and ingenuous men will acknowledge,
that such general expressions are to be taken Rhetorically, rather then
Logically; that is, according to their general intent, rather then the words
precisely taken; as Mat. 5.39, 40. Jam. 3.2. and so the meaning is, that
Fasting and Prayer is a special medicine for special maladies; in so much that
any thing that will be done, will be done effectually in that way.

2. (To walk with him in his own way) I answer further, That all evils are said
to be truly cast out, when they are cast out in regard of their gross acts,
their reigning power, their wonted prevalency over us, and our greater and
greater degrees of victory over them. In these respects it is true that Fasting
and Prayer casts out all evil, but I deny what he infers, viz. That where all
evil is cast out thus, there is absolute perfection Briefly, I did not mean,
that Fasting and Prayer casts out all evil absolutely (from whence only that
which he infers will follow) but according to our capacity here on earth; which
is such, as that though all evils be cast out in regard of their dominion, yet
In many things we offend all; and this writer must rule his tongue a little
better (a great deal better) before he be a perfect man, Jam. 3.2.

T. S. William Thomas in the close of the 13th page is made to confess as much
of the Light as ever I heard, p. 38.
viz. Christ lights every man that comes into the world, though not by
saving illumination, yet by saving revelation, that is, by Gospel revelation
that is fit to save them, though diverse receiving the revelation, do (through
their own fault) lose the salvation.

W. T. Ans. I shall need to say nothing to this, but only let the Reader know
how dishonest and false he is, in making me say what I never said, by leaving
out that explication and limitation of it that was before his eyes, for my
words are these, (and they are but a relation neither) Christ lights every
man that comes into the world -- and then it follows, that is, into the
Church, or into the world collected into a Church, as world is taken, Mat.
13.38. -- though not by saving illumination, etc. So that I did not speak of
every one coming into the world absolutely (as the Quakers do) but of such only
as are gathered into a Church.

T. S. Unto those words of mine, Our duty is to be always perfecting, but it
belongs to our wisdom to know that we can never be fully perfected till our
souls be among the souls of just men made perfect, p. 41. Heb. 12.23.
-- I say unto these words he replies; -- Does that Author say in the future
tense, they [should] come (at the last day) or to those that [shall] be
perfect? Does he not say they are [already] come to those [already] perfect?

W. T. Ans. And what of all this? May it not be as well said that we are come
already, (viz. by our heavenly calling and spiritual consociation) to the
Saints that are now in heaven, as to an innumerable company of Angels, that are
in heaven? Heb. 12.22. Besides, that he says not they are come to the [
persons] of just men made perfect, but to the [ spirits]; now where does he
find that Saints on earth are called Spirits, Luke 24.39. So that the spirits
of just men are (in true and plain meaning) their souls separated from their
bodies, and put into a perfect state and condition in heaven.

But when he has abused this Scripture, he must abuse another, viz. Isa.
44.25. and the Diviners must needs be mad, because he has no skill in
Scripture and in Divinity.

To speak only of one thing more, When I had said that Paul and Peter were
instructed by immediate revelation, which we are not so presumptuous as to
expect; He replies:

T. S. -- Poor blind man! my heart is moved with pity to him -- I could even
weep over him; p. 63.
Has he been preaching 39 years, and yet never expected instruction by
immediate Revelation?

W. T. Ans. Here Is a pang of effeminate zeal. But must a man needs either
preach the history only of what others did, and spoke (which he objects) or
else be immediately inspired? Cannot he distinguish between the revelation of
the Spirit, and the immediate revelation? If he knows not, yet others do, that
the influences of the Spirit are abundantly put forth in the use of means, as
to Timothy in reading, meditating, studying to show himself approved, 1 Timothy
4.13, 15. 2 Timothy 2.15 of all which there had been no need, if Timothy had done
all his work by immediate inspiration Yea Paul also ^esired Saints ^a^ers as a
^eans of his ^ssistance in ^reaching, ^phes. 6.19.
. Now by the assistance of this Spirit of God in the use of means, and the
continual study of Scripture, with Prayer, I have (I thank God) not without
some fruit exercised the Calling of a Minister this 39. years.

Whereas he says, he could even weep over the poor blind man drowned in
ignorance (a taking passage with quaking people) I am very well assured, that I
have much more reason to weep over him, (but he especially over himself) for
another matter which his Book mentions p. 23.
, I mean his desperate resolution in choosing rather the portion of an Heathen
Seneca A (sometimes) Blaspeming Seneca, that says, F^rte fortiter: hoc ^st quo
cum antecedatis; Ille extra patientiam ^alorum est, vos supra patientiam; ^hus
that proud Stoic; De divina pro^identia. Cap. 6. Yet no man denies ^im an
eminency in natural abi^^ties.
(when yet we may say, and must say of such honest Heathens, that they were
honest worshippers of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20.) then of the Christians and
Ministers that he names Christopher Fowler, and Simon lord.
, who declare themselves to be men fearing God. It seems he is of their mind,
who think men may be saved in any Religion, if they be honest in their carriage;
when it was wont to be said in England; They are to be had accursed that
presume to say, that every man shall be saved by the law and Sect which he
professes, so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law and
the light of nature, for holy Scripture does set out unto us only the Name of
Jesus Christ whereby men must be saved. Articl. of Relig. art. 18 They
therefore are against holy Scripture that are of that opinion.

Other trifling catches and C^vils, I shall leave, and in conclusion advertise
the Reader of two things.

1. Whereas this Replyer, p. 70. complains (though causelessly) of the proofs
that are produced from several writers to discover what the Quakers are; the
Reader may observe that the most I have cited is out of two Books; the one
called, A faithful discovery of a treacherous design, etc. The other, The
Worlds wonder, etc. which Books, whosoever shall unpartially read (as I wish
all to do that would be fully acquainted with the Quakers light and life) will
easily see that they write so Heartily and Charitably of them, that there is no
cause to suspect their testimony.

2. I cannot but here admonish all Christians with fear and trembling to take
into consideration, and to take warning by the late story of the Entrance See
the Na^^rative, entitled, Satan enthroned in his chair of Pestilence. By Mr.
Farmer.
of James Nayler (that famous infamous Quaker) into the City of Bristol,
October 24. 1656. With one man going bare-headed before him; and two women, one
on one side, the other on the other side of his Horse, holding the reins, and
leading him, singing H^sanna; and, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Israel. I doubt
not but many of those that are turned out of the right way, are (in respect of
this horrid height of Blasphemy) of Hazaels mind, 2 King. 8.13. Am I a dog that
I should do this great and hideous thing? but this Narrative of Nayler may let
them know that they cannot now conceive how far they will range and rise when
once they have begun to wander and to take head. Particularly, three things
come in here to be considered.

1. What it is to follow an inward light separated from, and unagreeable to,
Scripture light. That Is so wild and wicked a thing that it suggests at last,
to sing Holy, Holy, Holy, to a most sinful man; for the Apology for that
singing is this, They that did sing were called to it by the Lord p. 18.
; and one of them says, The power of the Lord carried me to sing and lead his
Horse p. 15.
Dorcas Erbury calls that wretch, over and over again, The only begotten Son of
God; and then, Lord and Master whom she is to serve, for the Spirit within her
does command her to call him so p. 19.
. It Is true that Quakers say, they disown this abomination; but do they not own
the principle that leads to it, to wit, a being led and instigated by that
which is within them? Unto which what limits do they put?

2. What it is to have low thoughts of Gods word, and of the Preaching thereof,
which God has appointed to be the means of feeding his people with knowledge
and understanding, Jer. 3.15. Such men quickly come to set up a Religion, and
in the end a Jesus, of their own making; with this hellish Blasphemy, Thy name
shall be no more James, but Jesus p. 19.
: Let every one whom it concerns weigh it well. Why may not he that now speaks
scornfully of bowing down and crying Hosanna to the mutable directions of the
Pulpit (as this Replyer does, p. 2.) come at length to have others fall down
upon the ground at his feet (as it is informed upon Oath, some did at Nailers
feet p. 23, 25.
) -- yea, and to have Hosanna also sung to himself. He that cries out wickedly
against Ministers for persecuting Jesus, may come himself to be so wicked as to
be named Jesus, and to have Hosanna sung before him; yea, he may come to such
an height of pride and madness, as to take such honors, and defend the taking
of them, saying as Nayler said, I may not refuse any thing that is moved of the
Lord, and that their Father commanded them to do p. 15.
. I wish, and pray, that James Naylers just punishment may be [ foelix
flagellum] an happy Scourge to drive, yea (by grace) to draw him and his
company not only from the highest risings, but from the lowest root and rise of
ever-increasing error. He spoke truly and wisely that said, Greg. Moral. (...)
Job lib. 5.12.
Blanda sunt quae Haeretici proponunt, sed aspera quae subinferunt, sicut
radices spinarum mol^es sunt, sed tamen ex ipsa sua mollitie proferunt unde
pungunt. Heretical things are like the roots of thorns, that are in themselves
soft, but from that softness they bring forth pricking and piercing things. See
Eccl. 10.12, 13.

3. What it is to be ever learning and never settled in a sound Religion, such
are easily drawn to the utmost height in soul-ruining ways. For which reason I
shall (I hope without offense) seriously advise younger Students in Divinity,
by reading Scripture, Orthodox Divines, and much Prayer to season themselves
(at first) with a right Religion, lest the conclusion b^ to have no Religion;
particularly to arm themselves against that man-exalting, and God-depressing
Arminianism, which is the forerunner of Popery; and that much-spreading
Socinianism, which is the entrance to Atheism.

I have now done with the Quakers, and intend not to make any further return to
this Replyer. The old proverb is, It will weary an old man to follow a child.
I am sure it is very tedious to walk in and out after an unprincipled man, not
well acquainted with Religion at first, and led by fancy at last. If there be
yet any thing that he can reasonably object, some or other (it is likely) will
answer it (perhaps some honest Merchant or Tradesman that loves the Ministry
as much as he hates it) If he contend only in a way of railing and vaunting,
therein he must be suffered to get the better, and he shall [for me] have the
last word; only, if he make any further Reply upon me, I desire the Readers to
do me so much right as to reflect on what I have already done, and to view my
writings before they believe his. I told him formerly that I would not have
further to do with him; that is, that I would not direct my speech to him
(though I meant to make Answer to his Reply) but to the Reader for whose sake I
wrote; hereafter I mean not to say any thing to him or of him. Let him first
answer the Books that have been printed against his phansies already, and know
that those Books (how mean soever he makes them) will not be answered by
Bravadoes, or by counting the sheets and making the sum total wrath and
confusion As he does in the Title page of his last Book.
; nor will the arguments in them be taken off with animosities, admirations,
and outcries, which are his ways of answer.

To conclude, I am very sorry (that when my intentions were better, and I am
sure I gave this impetuous man no cause by any thing I wrote or spoke, to rave
against the whole Ministry, yet) that I should be any occasion to him of his
abominable abuses and misapplications of the Holy Scriptures, and of pouring
forth so much corruption and virulency as he has done, and (by a dreadful
hardness of heart) is resolved still to do against Gods Officers, and Gods
Ordinances, whereof the Ministry is one, Ephesians. 2.^^. Tit. 1.5. and their
Maintenance another, 1 Cor. 9.14.

The Lord open his eyes that he may find out his sin, before his sin find out
him -- Number. 32.23. Amen.

FINIS.

