GOOD WORKS, If they be well handled. OR, Certain Projects about Maintenance
for Parochial Ministers. Provision for and Election of Lecturers. Erection and
indowment of new Churches in the great out Parishes about London.

2. Sam. 24.24. And the King said unto Aranah, nay but I will surely buy it of
thee at a price, neither will I offer burnt Offerings, unto the Lord my God, of
that which does cost me nothing.

1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and Doctrine, for the Scripture says,
thou shall not muzzle the Ox, that treads out the corn, and the Labourer is
worthy of his reward.

1 King. 6.7. The house when it was in building, was built of stone, made ready
before it was brought thither, so that there was neither hammer nor Axe, nor
one tool of Iron, heard in the house while it was in building.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for I. S. 1641.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THere is much talk among many men, of advancing the Preaching of the Gospel;
but few do cast, in their thoughts, how to effect it, unless by ways that
may be no cost at all unto themselves, nothing being so base, in their eyes, as
the preaching, and Preachers of the Gospel; whereof for bie and sinister ends,
their tongues speak Magnifically: they would have Preachers every hour in
their Pulpits, but, as they have Beggars at their doors, clothed in Rags, and
bowing down to them for morsels of bread, and their Sermons like so many
suites for a farthing, their preachers must be all of the mendicant order, and
above all other orders and ranks of men, live upon their Alms and Benevolence,
that bear no farther goodwill to preaching then as it may be a Shooing-horne
to their esteem and gain; this being their godliness, and that their God;
more Churches and Preachers they would have, but upon the charge of these they
have already by di^iding the mainten^^ce, that is hardly paid to halves, as if
H^nun when he ha^ cut o^f David's servants Garments to the Buttocks, should
after have cut them off to the shou^ders, as being long enough to serve, each
of them, a man and his fellow: they would serve God abundantly; but be charged
to it very sparingly, esteeming David weak in judgment, for that Speech. God
forbid I should serve the Lord with sacrifice of that which costs (...) naught.
True love is liberal. Benevolentia and Beneficentia are never severed;
therefore you may know these sheep in a feigned show, to be in truth, Lions by
their Claw. I know the thing they desire to be good, and wish the advancement
thereof, but abhor Robbery for burnt Offering. I wish the Gospel, and the
preaching of it set forward, as much as any man, accounting it a work of
Piety; but would it should be done in ways of Justice and Righteousness. The
price of a Whore God a^^orres in his house, and so does he likewise the
promoving of his honor by injustice, Unrighteousness cannot advantage
holiness: yet I have seen some evils of that nature under the Sun, masked
under pretense of love to more preaching, while there is little care to
maintain that in honor, or to live answerably to that we have already. Yet am
not I of their mind, that would keep both milk and meat from children,
because they eat much and thri^e little, but would they should be fed to the
full; knowing, if they abuse their Food, they shall account for it, to their
grief; but those that fed and provided for them, with joy, their labor and
care, for the welfare of the people, being their Liberavi.

To further therefore this purpose, I have drawn a rough Breviate of some
things, which may promove that, that many talk much of, but do little to
help forward, If my Seed fall into good ground, it may bear desired Fruit, if
my Projects come to be managed by good Heads and hearts, they may be very
honorable to God, and profitable to men; for, they be good Works, if they be
well handled. God send my Wood to fall into the hands of that worke-man that
has skill to make Mercury of it.

GOOD WORKS, If they be well handled.
THat the glory of God may be advanced, by the preaching of the Gospel, and
the Salvation of men's souls promoved, and love and peace preserved among
Ministers and their people, these things may be desired, as tending that way;
especially in the City of London, to which Meridian my thoughts are calculated
only, leaving the provision for other places, to men better experienced in
them.

First, because in many places where Ministers be willing to preach in the
Afternoon, as well as in the morning, on the Lords day, if they might be
encouraged by sufficient maintenance. And because, where either the Minister is
not able, or not willing, the peoples Benevolence being uncertain to the
Lecturer they make choice of, they are forced to humor the people, often,
unworthily, and to make sides and Factions against the Minister, to his great
discontent and discouragement, it were to be wished.

First, that in every Parish in London, within the walls especially, where the
Benefices are, most of them, incompetent, that a sufficient and independent
maintenance may be provided for the incumbent.

1. Because, if he be faithful in his Ministry, or otherwise become
displeasing to some part of his people, a dependent and benevolent allowance
will be restrained, in whole, or in part. 2. Be he what he will be, it will
decay of it self in time, by the change of Parishioners, succeeding men being
not always of like affections to preceding. 3. When Ministers grow old, and
have most need of comfort, they are commonly despised, although their former
constant labors of youth and strength, have merited never so much respect from
the Church: for the new generation, that comes up in their age, proves unto
them like the new King, that knew not Joseph. 4. And because there is great
inequality of paying Tithe in London, the rich men, for the most part paying
very little; some that are worth many thousands, and dwell in houses of 40.50,
60.100 l. per annum, and some more, which pay for Tithe 20. s. 16. s. 10. s.
yea 11. s. 9. d. per annum, which is a shameful thing, so that the Ministers
maintenance arises, for the most part, from the meane^^ and poorest pepole, in
which respect, that little maintenance he has falls short many years in a
great part; especially in hard, or sickly times; in which, Residence deserves
greatest reward. 5. And, for that it is conceived by the Ministers in London
(among whom, diverse are men of approved Learning, Piety, and Fidelity in their
Ministry) that the City-sacriledge is great and monstrous, and maintained by
deceitful double Leases, and other wicked devices (not practiced in any other
part of the Kingdom, except London) to avoid the Decree, whereby the Benefices
within the Walls, are mean and poor, and London, a place where all things
are dear, and nothing to be had, but by the penny. 6. And, forasmuch as the
Citizens do live in all affluence, and abundance of wealth and riches; which
comes in by far less pains then the Country man does take; whose gains are,
notwithstanding, far inferior, and his Tithe and maintenance paid to his
Minister, far superior, the richest Citizen in London hardly paying so much,
as a Country man, that has but twenty, or ten pound Land per annum, in his
occupation. 7. And, that the snare may be taken from off their consciences,
which will lie upon them, while the Decree is in force, and so vilely
perverted, is it is at the present. 8. And, that Ministers may have a
comfortable m^intenance, fit to support them, in the City they live in, while
they live; and to afford them something, to leave to their wives and children,
when they shall dye; that they may not go on begging, when their Husbands and
Fathers are departed from them; and also, that they may be able to relieve
poor strangers, and other poor, that they are frequented by for succor,
far beyond any Ministers in the Kingdom.
Jn these respects, it might be wished, there were a new Decree made for their
maintenance: wherein these things may seem convenient to the desired purpose.

1. That all houses within the walls, may pay 2.s. in the pound Rent, abating
the odd 9.d. 2. That the houses be not valued according to the old Rents, but
as they be let by the prime Leasor, or any other that letts them. 3. That the
Tithe be paid, according to the value the house shall be of, as the same value
shall rise, or fall, and notstanding still at one stay. 4 That Fines may be
cast cast up into the account of the Rent, that the Rich by paying great Fines
and small Rents, do not deceive the Minister, as it has been hitherto. 5. Jn
case the Rent, or Fine be not certainly known, that the Tenant may be put to
his Oath, or the house be valued by six Parishioners, of honest note, three
chosen by the Minister, and three by the Tenant, who shall estimate the house
according to the ordinary rate of other houses, compared with it. 6. If any
Rent be concealed, and less paid then is truly due, whenever it shall come
to light, the arreares may be recoverable on the Landlord, or Tenant, or either
of them.
Their rate may be demonstrate, all things considered, to produce a
maintenance, that shall not exceed, but comes short of the Ministers
maintenance, paid them, at the making of the Decree.

And the City themselves have advanced their own Parsonage of Christ-Church,
in the increase of Tithe, above that was anciently paid far above that other
Ministers have done in the City.

And it will be so easy a way, to any Citizen, as may be; if he pay any thing
considerable to his Minister, which very few of the richer sort do pay; who
pay not so much for the Ministry, as for many idle vanities.

And it will be far below the Tything in the Country, where a Farmer pays
four times the value of any Citizen in London, if not many times four times.

And it is supposed, if in the Country they might have their Tithe for 2. s. in
the pound Rent, one thing with another, they would think it very reasonable;
where a man of 100 pound Rent a year, shall scarce get 100. l. in a Lease of
21. years, with great labor, and hard fare: whereas here there is less
labor, and far more riches gotten, and many a needless vanity, that might
be spared, enjoyed, at a far greater rate, without any grudging at it.

2. That because there be in London some Alleys and Houses, that have been
given to several Parishes, for their poor; that such houses may pay no more
Tithe, then has heretofore been accustomed, when they were let for Rent to
Tenants.

3 That one certain Table of Duties, for Marriages, Burials, etc. may be made
all over the City, and hung up in every Church Vestery in London, and the
certain days, and times of the days appointed, for the performance of all
those Offices, that so the Ministers may not be compelled to attend at all
times, when every particular person shall think fit, or as their particular
occasions shall call for him, without his good will, and the farther
enlargement of his recompense: it being a great hinderance to his study, and
other employments, and a druggery very unworthy to be imposed on a Minister.

4. The Minister thus provided for: If the Parish shall, in any place, over and
above the pains he is able to take; or desiring, for their contentment to
have a Lecturer, that they suppose, may be more profitable in his preaching,
then their Pastors. The next care must be, that God may be glorified, and men
built up to Heaven hereby, and not misled by unsound Teachers, which many
people much doat after, neither that the man that is chosen, on pretense, to
further the peace of our consciences, be an occasion of disquiet and
discontent, by Divisions and Factions, occasioned by him, amongst us. To this
end three things would be provided for. The first concerns the Maintenance.
The second concerns the Man. The third the Election of the Lecturer.

1. First, the maintenance of a Lecturer would be made certain, and laid upon
every house to be paid constantly to the Lecturer, whosoever he be that is
chosen; and not be paid at pleasure, or called back, when people will. This
provision is requisite.

1. Because when any Lecturer is brought into a Parish, usually two, or three,
or five, or more stand for the Lecture, and every one has some interest in the
Parish, more, or less: now, when the choice is made, these, whose friends
fail of the expected Lecture, will pay nothing to the man that is chosen,
although chosen by the major part of the Parish: This is evident in daily
experience, this year, in London. 2. It is fit, that so the Minister, that is
the Lecturer, may preach the word faithfully, and without flattery: which a
dependent maintenance is seldom so happy, as to be accompanied withal. 3.
Thus shall peace and brotherly Love be maintained, betwixt the Pastor and the
Lecturer, and both of them go hand in hand, and heart in heart, about the
work of their Ministry, and both of them live in peace with the people, and
free from those carnal Divisions and Sidings, which usually accompany an
arbitrary and benevolent maintenance.
II.
For the man. That the people may not bring in a man, between whom and the
Minister there is no sutablenesse in opinion or affection, which is now a
disease of many people, who can be pleased with no man, but inclining to
Brownisme, or otherwise factious, and given to Innovation. And therefore it
might be wished; That no particular man be brought in, against whom the
Minister has good exception: and for that purpose, if he and his people agree
not together, about the choice (for it is not fit they bring any man into
another charge, against his good liking) that the matter may be referred to
the Bishop, or to six of the next Ministers to the place where the Lecturer is
to be, in case there be no Bishop, that they may order the Election, so, that
it be no apparent inconvenience to the Minister, to whom the Church belongs.

III.
Concerning the Election, That the Lecturer be chosen only by the Votes of
Housekeepers, and of such Houskeepers, as pay Scot and Lot; and not by them
that either receive Alms of the Parish, or pay not to the poor, by reason of
poverty, or be unable to pay to the Lecturers maintenance.

Providing before hand, that the maintenance of no Church, that is in present
being, be divided and lessened, by erecting of any Chappells d^ nov^, seeing
the present maintenance is annexed to every Church by Law, and is the Rights
and Privileges of such Ministers, as be in present possession, that we have
protested to maintain. Yet, for the advancing of Gods glory, and the peoples
Salvation, it may be desired.

That course may be taken for erecting Chapels, in the great out-Parishes in
London, and for the endowment of them, by raising the Tithe in them to 2. s. in
the pound Rent, to the worth of every house, not abating the Fines: the
surplussage of which Tithe, above that that is now paid to the Parson, would be
levied, and kept in the Chamber of London, till it come to a fit sum to build
a Chapel; and then a competent number of houses allotted to that Chapel,
and that their Tithe, so much as it is, above the Incumbents due, go to the
maintenance of the Minister of the Chapel, and the rest reserved in the
Chamber to go on with the building of more Chapels, one after another: and as
they be increased, to be m^intained, after the manner formerly mentioned.

This work is very necessary, because those Churches are not capable of the
greater part of the Parishioners, some of them, not of the tenth part of them,
and some, not of the tenth part of the Communicants; so that generally the
youth are altogether neglected: and those Parishes be harbors for all kind of
vicious and lewd People, that pretend they have no room in the Church, which
is incapable to receive those that would willingly repair to it.

And if this work were appointed to be done, many well disposed persons would
contribute willingly toward it: in which respect, if any shall give toward
Erecting any Chapel, it should be ordered, that the Minister of the Parish
shall not hinder that work, so long as the Tithes, now paid unto him, the
duties of Marriage, Burials and all other (except the indowment of the new
erected Chapel, raised by the inhabitants, by a surplussage above what they
now pay go to the Mother Church, which must be there continued, or composition
made for them, that we rob not Peter to pay Paul.

That if the Parishioners, that are allotted to such new Erected Chapel,
shall over and above the Tithes and duties to the Mother Church, raise a
sufficient maintenance for a Minister, by the surplussage of Tithe augmented;
then it may be lawful for them to choose their Minister, so often as the
place shall be void: and not to have one forced on them by the Parson, that
shall be of small benefit unto them. Neither shall the Minister of the new
Chapel be turned out, at the pleasure of the Parson, carrying himself as he
ought by law, nor have any dependence on the Parson, but the People of the new
Chapel, to be the Patron thereof.

FINIS.

