UPON HIS MAJESTY'S Going for IRELAND
GO on, Great Prince, the mighty Work pursue,
And reap the Laurels to your Virtue due.
Go on, and let the sad Ierne share
Your Glorious Triumphs, as it does your Care.
There Victory will on your Arms attend,
(For Heaven must sure the Justest Cause befriend:)
There urge the Fortune of your growing Fate,
And kindly prop Ierne's sinking State.
Well, now he is Shipped! -- See how the obsequious Main
And trembling Billows fear to entertain
So Great a Pledge of Fortune, One to whom
Fate owes so many Victories to come.
Cease, cease, ye Winds, you need not send your Gales,
His Subjects Loyal Vows will fill the Sails.
The wondering Sea-gods on their Master gaze,
And Reverend Triton on his Trumpet plays:
No foamy Waves alarm the peaceful Deep,
The Winds are hushed, the very Tempests sleep;
Till safely landing on the distant Shore,
He views a Place he never saw before.
Behold the Monarch walking on the Strand,
Whilst mighty Crowds do blacken all the Sand:
Guns, Trumpets, Drums, his Welcome all proclaim;
There Is Soul, there is Life, nay, Magic in his Name.
New Vigor from his Sight the Soldier draws,
And through all Dangers boldly courts Applause;
A nobler Warmth does all the Men inspire,
Their Breasts are heated, and they feel the Fire;
While Peals of artful Thunder rend the Air,
And their loud Joy through the large Region bear.
What Place will first our Caesar's Arms employ,
To give Prefage of future Victory?
The unequal Force no meaner Town withstands,
But beg their Peace with low submissive Hands.
Cavan in vain relies upon its Strength,
And views those Turrets which must fall at length.
Where Valor's wanting, what do Walls avail?
Those may be stormed, but this can never fail.
The English Youth, like a bold Torrent, run,
And scorn the weak Attacks of Sword and Gun.
Forthwith the dastard Irish quit the Place,
And scarce dare look our Party in the Face.
So when Great Josuah, by God's Command,
With his unconquered Host o're-ran the Land,
The trembling Canaanite, possessed with Fear,
Fled to the Hills, yet scarce found Safety there:
In vain they fought to shun approaching Death,
Begged to protract a poor and shameful Breath;
The fiery Jews destroy the timorous Race,
And show the hardened Canaanite no Grace.
Tredagh does next the English Arms oppose,
Following the Counsel of her Gallick Foes:
At last, when no Relief, no Hope is near,
And Death does in a thousand Shapes appear,
Taught by Experience of former Time,
When haughty Cromwell punished her great Crime,
To Article she wisely does begin,
And opes her Gates, and lets the Monarch in.
Now Naked Dublin do our Troops survey,
A cheap, unguarded, and defenseless Prey,
Unless the French have labored to destroy
The Place they could not any more enjoy.
And who can tell? For Fear, with Malice joined,
No Bounds, no Limits to their Fury find:
But if those Bloodhounds thus do serve the Isle,
All France next Year shall be its Funeral Pile.
It Is far above the Meanness of my Verse,
Such great Heroic Actions to rehearse:
For, ah! what Tribe of all the Muse below
Can our Great Prince in equal Numbers show?
But if the Great Apollo does inspire
My vigorous Mind with no fantastic Fire,
Ireland will in a Years revolving Space
Our Mighty Caesar's Glorious Triumphs grace.
Jove did the Isle from Toads and Spiders free,
A puny Task, below a Deity:
But you far greater Miracles renew,
A larger Laurel to your Worth is due;
For by the Influence of your careful Toil
You free the Men, Jove only freed the Soil.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant; containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the Beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richlieu. To which is added, A Particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the Advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop, about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original.

The Cabinet Opened: or, The Secret History of the Amors of Madam de Maintenon
with the French King Translated from the French Copy.

Both Printed for Richard Balwin in the Old Baily.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in the Old Baily. 1690.


