HELMONT Disguised: OR, The vulgar Errors of Impericall and unskilful
Practisers of Physic confuted. More especially. As they concern the cures of
The Fevers, Stone, Plague, And other Diseases. In a Dialogue between
Philiatrus, and Pyrosophilus. In which the chief Rarities of Physic is
admirably discoursed of.

By J. T. Esquire. Student in Physic.

London printed, by E. Alsop, for N. Brook, and W. Leybourn, and are to be sold
at the sign of the Angel in Cornhil. 1657.

To the Ingenious Reader.
TO be in print, it has not at all been my Ambition, though I appear so, by
persuasions of some, who having perused (unexpectedly) this Posthumus as it lay
in his solitude within the narrow confines of a Studdy, have thought it more
fit for public view then my self, so conscious was I of its calumny; Their
power prevalent, and their judgments not contemptible they have called out this
Idiot to take the air and walk a few turns in the wide World, but how it may
return is uncertain, since Contempt and Pride lies in ambush every where; But
these are as active to betray others, as well as this; It must therefore fear
the less: Now as I said this publication being so wholly theirs, it had been
but proper they should have been this Usher also; Perhaps they were so
charitable to think Good Wine needs no Bush, and since they are silent, I will
say but little, but that shall be positive truth.

The discourse here is but brief, succinct and plain, yet are its extents
copious, misterious, and honest, and freely lays down those solid principles
both of Philosophy and Physic, as may give the best consideration and reason
scope enough to swim as well as wade, in the due poising their validities; Such
heads being chosen as reasonably includes the primary Institutions both of
Physic and disease, where otherwise that great Jewel of Nature [HEALTH] would
be but crasie in its supports, unless the cordial remedies be improved from
these fundamentals, being such Indications as lays the Axe to the Root, if duly
and seriously weighed.

Now one of these improvers (worthy Reader) I could desire thou might be, if
the offer be not received, it will not be the first labor has been lost in
good attempts; However let not prejudicate opinion, nor the impertinent
presidents of others, startle the advantages may certainly be accrued by these;
Again, let not the most dangerous enemy of Mankind [SATHAN] prevail in his
snares, betraying us to Sickness as well as Death, by pretending Novelties,
impossibilities, or aerie toys; Nor let our Author be vilified, who, once in
this Nation has been styled renowned Helmont, and was by the same hand
afterward recanted: Being thus fortified (dear Reader) this little Dialogue may
prove a Legend of health and happiness, not yet fallen upon by any but our worthy
Author, whose ends doubtless were sincerity, and true zeal to serve, and
preserve (as much as may be, and with the least disturbance) all humane
decays: As for my self, I desire thy improved capacity, may supply my defects,
who have here but hinted at what a better genious may happily be renowned for,
which is all the design and ends of

Civil Reader -- Thy faithful Friend, JA. THOMPSON.
Sept. 10. 1657.
ERRATA.
P. signifies Page. L. signifies Line. F. signifies For. R. signifies Read.
Page 2. l. 6. f. these banquets, r. those banquets. p. 3. l. 10. f. neither
cured, r. never cured. p. 3. l. 11. f. any malady r. his malady. p. 8. l. 14.
f. in time, r. in times. p. 8. l. 18. f. to propose, r. not to propose. p. 22.
l. 22. f. either, r. pride. p. 33. l. 12. f. why, r. what. p. 48. l. 8. f. t.
r. it. the first line of p. 56. is misplaced, and not to be read till you come
to the last line of p. 57. and then read Nature is overthrown, etc. p. 57. l.
19. f. life keep, r. veins keep. p. 58. l. 3. after Schools, add judge blood to
be, etc. p. 68. l. 14. f. wanding, r. wandering. p. 72. l. 20. f. revelled, r.
repelled. p. 103. l. 26. after abundantly r. find. p. 112. l. 6. un the arm, r.
unto the arm. p. 128. l. 8. f. your arbitrament, r. their arbitrament.

PHILIATRUS, AND PYROSOPHILVS; OR, HELMONT Disguised. Discourses about Fevers,
the Stone, the Plague, the four Humors, etc.
Ph. DId you not lately [Sir] put forth a new Doctrine of Fevers?


Py. Yes, I did.


Ph. What showed you therein?


Py. That a Fever is unknown to the Physic Schools as well in its essence,
root, and properties, as in the remedy thereof.


Ph. Surely this could not choose but many ways offend Physicians, and
especially anger such, as scorn to learn of any man.


Py. It did so; for such as persuaded themselves they knew enough, said, what?
Shall the Academies endure these calumnies without recenting them? Have so many
renowned wits, and we our selves been stocks hitherto,? Is he only feasted at
Apollo's table, that he should dare out of these banquets, ^o arrogate unto
himself the adept understanding or knowledge of curing.


Ph. And did not these high speches move you?


Py. Alas, I knew mine own intention; and though it were accompanied with the
poverty of my confessed ignorance; (and though my confession of that ignorance,
takes not away the stain thereof) yet the integrity and sincerity, of that
intention, may deserve pardon, because the truth of every thing in curing, is
to be esteemed according to the work which it leaves after it. Now to detect
the errors of such as went before us, not nominating any man, is not to be
thought a calumny. For I treat of things that are Humane, public, and for
Charities sake. If therefore I shall say, that no man was hitherto heard of,
who seeking his grounds of curing from Ethnicks, knew the roots of Fevers, or
of any other diseases, and their lawful remedies: And further, if I shall
demonstrate thus much to be true, I think I may be deemed faultless, and not
injurious?


Ph. But what if they will not take it so?


Py. Then let me entreat them to compassionate my ignorance, and instruct me.
For I assure them, that my commiseration of humane kind, is my only motive
hereunto: Lest any man hereafter should trust his life in the hands of
trustless helpers; who hitherto neither cured out of certain knowledge any man
of any malady. But if some escaped with life they were recoverd only by the
merciful hand of God, and by the strength and goodness of their proper nature.


Ph. Surely you have had no meaning to be injurious to all that went before
you, and men may be satisfied herein, because you protest as much.


Py. God forbid I should not know, that the demonstration of a thing which is
not known, tending to the good or profit of our Neighbor, is void of calumny.
Especially considering that the Physicians ignorance is as a crime, and that a
man is one day to give skin for skin. Thus an Officer accusing any man of a
crime, is excused from a calumny. It has ever troubled and grieved me above
measure, that in the Religion of curing only, men have subscribed, to such
dull, slow and frivolous principles.


Ph. Have their been more ingenious endeavors in other professions?


Py. Doubless, for what subtilty has not been used about those 5. words of
Porphirius, called Praedicables? What craft have they not employed about vain
matters? I mean about pratlings, which are testimonies of a talkative
industry. Yet Ramund not contented herewith, found out nine other most
universal terms, or voices: Adding to them 28 less universal. And at last, he
adjoined to them yet other 72 Universals; whereby every thing might 17446
times, be described, predicated, and distinguished, and and what is this
unprofitable pr^tling, but the unmeasurable ^usks of sciences, without fruit,
or kernels.


Ph. Indeed we see our humane wits need no spurs in follies, which serve to no
purpose, and are every where prone of their own accord to subtilties, but in
the point of life and health, they snore away their time in a deadly sleepiness.


Py. You say right, for if we look upon the law, it is so employed about
subtilties and explications of their Placita, that the heights, whereunto
humane wit, is with so wonderful admiration wrapped, and with so great delight
beholds it self, are by a singular prerogative termed the subtilties of the
law.


Ph. But they are not so vain as your sermocinal toys, in that they are
collected, to get, and defend the right of every man.


Py. Well, let them pass, and let us now go on to look into the business of
Theology: What mighty things do not the Chaires, and Pulpits hope for, by the
diligent inquisition of questions.


Ph. I understand you in both, and I would to God that man had need of none of
them. For this Meum and Tuum, would with less fraud, and lingering be settled,
and distributed.


Py. Away, away then with these fond subtilties, whereof there will be no heed
taken at the latter day. For so the Apostolic sincerity would return unto us;
Sic accepi sicque tradidi vobis. At least they shall undergo a more mild
judgment, which have been in this life, most alienated from them.


Py. I think so too. But alas, in Physic (where search is most necessary,
profitable and out of charity commended:) almost all things have bin untouched,
through a vawning or gaping laziness, prone to subscribe unto the waiward
follies of such as have been ignorant; and those have been more hurtful, then
the residue, who range through Markets, and run from house to house to sell
health, and banish diseases which they know not.


Ph. Was this never taken notice of by others,?


Py. There have been curso^ie doubts, more then once moved in our Academies
about the trust which may be given to Theorems, left us by the Gentles, which
do indeed by their only facility, veil or draw a curtain over their vanity,
and may upon the first looking on them, breed a suspittion, that they are not
what they should be.


Ph. I must confess what you say in Physic. And it is confirmed also, by the
long lives of such Nations, as use no Physicians: Again it is confessed also,
by our more indifferent Physicians themselves.


Py. Well remembered; for of late, I demanding of a pious, modest, and most
renowned Physician, (who lived in Lovain, and had friends at Court, and had
cured Princes there, and was more fit then any man to make a reader) why he
sought not after some lecture? He ingeniously answered, that it was not lawful,
to deiiver any other kind of doctrine to his auditors then Galens. And so
[saith he] I shall wittingly damn mine own soul, teaching worse while I know
better. Thus therefore you see, that what I know and divulge to all men; the
same others know as well as I, but dare not.


Ph. Good God, how long will this dull feeling be continued on Physicians? And
with so much cruelty be practiced against thy handy Workmanship? Suffer O
infinite goodness, suffer mortal men to know, and acknowledge, that the Devil
Moloch envies no subtilties, but such as are winnowed in the way of charity,
and such as are concerning and conserving of the life of thine own image.


Py. Amen. Thus I pray also with you. For ever since my beginning, so
immeasurable a credulity of principles, and so great slo^h in men about a
matter of so great moment, have much perplexed me: And the compassionating
thereof, has daily increased in me. And hereupon at last, having gotten a
little light, I came, [to my infinite sorrow] to take notice that the errors
of the Schools should be laid open and made appear by me.


Ph. How say you? By you?


Py By me. Though I must tell you, that at my first entrance, it seemed a thing
full of unbridled arrogancy to me, that I the least of all men, should brand
every one that went before me, with ignorance of Phylosophical verity: And
that I should attribute the gift of curing to my self only. I therefore
besought the Lord, that he would take his Talent into his own hand again, and
that he would be pleased to rid me wholly of it, and to dispose of it to some
other, which was more worthy of it, for I knew that he that could be well
retired, knew how to live well; at the least morally; especially in time so
ulcerous. I therefore stayed awhile, and of late I debate this ignorance of the
principles of curing, with a purpose to propose it to this World, that
harbored it; till being now aged, compelled by necessity, and being in the
agony of death, I promised my God, that I would with all sweetness lay open
this his Talent, lest in his strict judgment I might be thought to have come
in vain into the World; and gone from hence again unprofitable. For by a Vision
in my sleep, it was given me to understand, 1. That I feared more the obloquies
of men, then I did the indignation of God himself; 2ly, That nature was crafty
in pretending out of deceiptful humane respects, that the pure obedience to
Gods command herein, was pride; and 3ly, That I did not see mine own
arrogancy, to be placed in a fear, that I should not bring things about, so
nobly, and plausibly, and with such Magnificencie as was required against
judicious men, from so many ages rising up against me; rather then in pure
obedience, to the most glorious giver of this verity; yea and that 4ly, I did
not commiserate my neighbor. 5ly, That I hid my talent in the ground, looking
back upon the uncertain worldly censures made upon me.


Ph. These were great motives to look about you.


Py. Indeed, I knew that the gates of Physic had now for many ages been shut
up, and that the locks and bolts thereof were covered with rust, so that I was
doubtful of them; as if I presumed that the porters office had been mine, and
not given me from elsewhere. Therefore I resolved with my self, to do what
charity, and not what arrogancy should command me; knowing, that he which
looked unto the Public, could not be injustious, though it were a shame to
such, as have rashly subscribed to the toys and trifles of the Gentles; yea,
though mankind were thereby damaged. At last therefore, between shame, and fear
of so great a business, I paused; and often putting up my pen, I again besought
his Divine Majesty, that he would be pleased to make choice of some one, who
might be worthier then I am. Whereupon God being justly angry, suffered this
evil and and unprofitable Servant, to be sifted by the Devil. For an order
whose Zenith is the house of powers; and whose Nadir are all other orders;
began to persecute me causeiess, with unworthy devises. Then presently I knew
the hand of God had touched me. And therefore in the full tempest of my
persecutions, I wrote that Volumn which is entitled, Ortus Medicinae, that is,
Initia Physica inaudita, wherein I discovered the errors of the Schools, which
ordinarily occur in curing. I mean I have given ou^, and demonstrated new
principles of diseases, as also Theorems unheard of hitherto; that Academies
leaving the vanities of the Gentles might accustom themselves to truth
hereafter.


Ph. A fair resolution, had it not been hindered by those persecutions.


Py. Shall I tell you? I from that time found such a sabbath in my soul, as I
never found in the height of my Prosperities, insomuch as I being full of
suspicion, was grieved that so great afflictions, did no whit disturb the
quiet of my mind, or sleep of body; wherein I cannot, O God, my protector,
sufficiently praise the abundance of thy mercies, which suffered my soul no
whit to be dism^^'d, under so great troubles, which surrounded me on every
side; but kept me in a full fruition of peace, and Quietness; fearing only
this one thing, lest I might as an unprofitable Servant, be buried with so
great a Talent.


Ph. But what if any man shall interpret this zeal of yours for a proud
boasting?


Py. I give him all liberty, so he hurt not himself therein: for I shall
rejoice to undergo all confusion for the good of my n^ighbour, and his
prosperity; for so, I shall enjoy mine own desire, whether my bold endeavors,
be, or be not interpreted a rashness in me. And God the G^rdiner will doubtless
water that, which he would have increased. For in my Book de Febribus I have
declared the beginnings of my penitencie, and how I fell away, and differ both
from Galen and Avicen, by reason of the falsities, I found in these two curing
pillars; whence afterward a singular confidence increased in me, though then a
youth, whereby I willingly exposed my self to the injurious censures of all
men, for my neighbors sake: and by little and little as time ran on, God
looked down upon the candor of my zealousness, and being now a man, he let me
see, that whatsoever was taught in the School of Physic, was full of breaches
and of ruin; and that they should hereafter be the scorn of all men.


Ph. Good God, how much then should you fear the greatness of Gods clemency,
which had revealed (as you say) to little ones, that which has for so many
ages, been denied unto men, which have been otherwise, both most religious and
most ingenious.


Py. Nay further, though thence I were assured, that the manifestation, of that
received talent of truth, was laid on me: yet is nature easily drawn to find
excuses, and deceives her self, and her distractions by the helps of reason,
which attend upon her. For presently (O fie how much am I ashamed of mine
inconstancy) I flung the burden from my shoulders which I took upon me;
saying, O Lord, who am I? I want those more solid things, which I should
surrogate, or put in place of those things, which should be depressed. For
whatsoever, I had formerly believed, to have been laid as a command upon me; I
again suspected, through the suggested craft of Satan. Because I wanted hidden
remedies (viz.) the privilege, and testimonies of my mission. Wherefore in my
younger days, I was long since persuaded; that the very Art of Physic was
nothing else but a mere imposture, invented by the idle Graecians, and brought
at first to that perfection it has for the destruction of the conquering
Romans, and afterward confirmed, to bring calamities on all men, whereunto our
humane credulity, had, through a conceived hope so easily subscribed: and so
this Physical religion, bred it is own authority; because for the most part, we
believe too easily that, which we desire most greedily. And ever since that
time, I assured my self that the Physic of the Academies, was a thing of
nothing; and hereunto as well incurable diseases, as the vanity of
experiments, lend me their votes and suffrages; and now at last, other helps
come flowing in on all sides, because Physicians are every where, seen to be
exposed to scorn and ignominy. And to this my wandering fantasy, that
Philosophy it self, which is read to youth, now condescendeth. Viz That the
Logic, Physic, and Metaphysick of the Schools (for which in times past,
Pythagoras chose unto him some few only, and those of the better sort of
Scholars, to be instructed, under the discipline of many years silence,
ratified by an oath, that they would never reveal to any man, any thing of that
which he had read unto them,) were not such as we supposed, but another kind of
Doctrine. For I suspected rather, that some introductions were there delivered,
unto Pyrotechni, than unto that science, that Galen lays open in a Grecian
multiloquacity. Long also before Pythagoras, every man was accustomed, to set
down faithfully in their Temples, whatsoever had been profitable unto his in
Hieroglyphics: for so much necessity, and so inward calamity, had brought
that about, that, by this means, they might without envy be delivered to
posterity. While then this art of Physic grew in my conceit, to be
contemptible; I fell upon a Text of Scripture, often read, but never hitherto
understood.


Ph. What Text could that be?


Py. That the most high had created the Ecclu^. 38 1.
Physician, and given command he should be honored, for the necessity which
was of him.


Ph. Why? How understood you this Text?


Py. I presently apprehended in it; First, That he which had created all
things, does notwithstanding singularly glory, that he created the Physician.
Secondly, that for his glory [and] the emanation of his goodness, toward the
necessities, help, and comfort of sick people; God would be appeased by the
Physician, in restoring that health which he had taken from them. Thirdly, that
he to whom all honor and glory is due, had commanded that only parents, and
those Physicians which he created should be honored; as if the Physician had
something of a father in him. Fourthly, in my virility, I after made no small,
though doubtful inquisition, who that happy man should be, whom the Highest
had from eternity destined, chosen, and created for a Physician, and hence had
also given command he should be honored. Whether peradventure it might be he,
who had read over the institutions, and some clasclassick Authors; and had
meausur'd out a full triennial residence within some Academi^, and at last
through disputations and examinations, by Professors, should be sent out, a
candidate, admitted as well by secular power, as ecclesiastical? Or whether it
were he who in the same title of Physician, was grown old under another
suffering, and in the mean time, full of years, experiments, and moneys? Then I
perceived that the infirm stood in need of a Physi^ian, whom the Highest had
created, and was completely instructed: And that the sound man wanted no
Physician to stand by him, to command the Kitchen, to number his bits, and give
rules for diet. On the other part I considered, Quod unguentarius, conficeret
pigmenta Suavitatis nec consumarentur opera e^us: Nec esset medicamentum
exterminii in terris: Which sounded thus. That the true Physician shall cut
down all diseases, with an equal sith, and that with these are no sicknesses
incurable.


Ph. Certainly this is a memorable difference between that Physician, which the
highest had created, and him, whom the Acadamies have created, after the
doctrine of the Gentiles.


Py. It is so, and hereupon an immeasurable catalogue of incurables, presently
represented themselves unto me: as if God had had no care of them at all; or
that such diseased people were not sick: as who should say, that for their
necessities, he had created neither a Physician, nor Physic in the
Universities. For these men do not only cast such patients into desperation;
but they number also those diseases, which of their own accord are cured, among
such diseases as are desperate; yea they hold the Quartan, and such
infirmities, as for some years together keep their constant roots, and are for
the most part, through an inbred tedious irksomness of Nature finished; (I say
they hold these) as incurable. And unless the remaining diseases, should run
themselves at last unto a period, they would all in conclusion be equally
added to the incurable: for the most part, know not how to take away the
tootheche, but by pulling out the tooth. And so peradventure in an old
headache, they would for healths sake, give command that the head be taken from
the shoulders, could the life be safe without it.


Ph. I see then that after many toilsome years, it troubled you, that you had
known and learned nothing more then nothing.


Py. You say right, for though I believed that God created the Physician, and
simple Medicines also, yet I stuck at the knowledge of this Physician, and the
things he used, and that made me often sigh, and wish, O that I could come at
length to be but scholar to such a Physician.


Ph. But in the mean season you knew assuredly, that the art of Physic which
the Grecians, and the Arabians had labored in; and that also, which the Jews
feign they have received, by tradition from the R^bins, under their Kabala, was
far different and distant from that, whereof the holy Text makes mention, did
you not?


Py. I did so; and therefore at last, it came into my mind, that the science
of Physic, should by the means, intention, and end thereof have a good
beginning. As that it was, Donum bonum, descenden^ a patre Jac. 1. 17.
luminum; And that therefore this never descended first upon the Ethnicks, and
Jews, however our credulity may suppose them inspired: as being such whom God
created not Physicians, nor for our necessities, no nor to be honored; but
such whom God had seriously commanded to be shunned.


Ph. I pray you describe unto me this Physician which you speak of.


Py. The Physician that is created of God is not defective, nor given to gain,
neither is he an enemy of Christians, but full of charity.


Ph. Have you noted the rarity of this good gift in any man?


Py. The first time I took notice of it was in Diascorides. Who in the days of
Plato (wherein he lived) described the histories of herbs; and from that time
hitherto, there is scarce any thing added to him, but much taken from him. And
therefore for these 2300 years, scarce any light has descended from above upon
this doctrine of herbs; though it be a thing of much use, and very necessary;
wherefore I conjectured that in other orders, of obstruser knowledges, this
heavenly light has f^ln but sparingly; but least of all upon the Gentiles,
Atheists and perfidious Jews, who are secluded from truth, and charity; and
therefore by the God of light, are left, and given over.


Ph. The births of things, as they are tied to the fullness of times, whereof we
are ignorant: so doubtless the true gift of healing, descends not, but upon
a maturity of Gods appointment. Nor will a light that is given gratis, shine at
our pleasure; for he that made all things as he would, will also make them when
he will, and perfect them in whom he will.


Py. It Is very right, for I am now grown old, as being above these 40 years of
this society of Physicians; and but now at last, in this old age of mine, it
comes unto my knowledge, that the Theorems of the Schools must be by me
subverted; that presently all things in the next age following, may fall in
pieces, as being destitute of the lime, or mortar of Truth, which should make
them stick together?


Ph. What certainty had you of this guif^ of healing?


Py. So great a certainty, and so venerable an authority, that I was not only
sensible of the giver; but that he was also interpreter of his gift unto me.
So that now all doubt is banished from me.


Ph. What kind of knowledge is this you speak of?


Py. Such a knowledge as is far more certain, then that, that is formed by
demonstration. For there is no ability or power, in, or of words, whereby we
may communicate this certainty.


Ph. Shall those who read your Medenda Initia know it?


Py. I know that all who read them, shall not be equal sharers in the fruit of
them: for God will ever remain, the dispenser of this gift of his.


Ph. What have you said then all this while?


Py. What I have said, is said to let you know, that there is a cloud cast
about this gift, by mine indignity, that he that can, may catch the course of
Nature. For my hope was, that as the number and cruelty of diseases was
increased, so God would inspire the gift of healing, into the abject little
ones of this universe. And as he sent into the last age, before this of ours
Paracelsus, a rich forerunner in the knowledge, of resolving bodies, and of
glorious remedies: so, it might come to pass, that he would now add this
science of Adeption, which Paracelsus wanted.


Ph. If it might without offense be lawful, I could willingly hear of an
enquiry made after the reason of that divine decree, for which that adept gift
of healing descends so little upon Christians?


Py. I profess and affirm, that the Schools withstand it, by their headstrong
insisting on the Gentiles principles; and also that all Physic is exercised
for gain, ever since its first beginning: which is only among Arts to be
endeavored and followed out of pity, and compassion: and not as if we should
grow merry, and live pompously, and wax rich, upon the afflictions, and spoils
of miserable creatures. Wherefore lucre has snatched away from men their
necessary disposition; and the falsity of Pagan doctrine, has turned the adept
gift of curing clean another way.


Ph. Wherein consists the seeking it, or hunting after it?


Py. In compassion toward the sick, in unlearning of false Theorems; and in
putting on a profound humility of spirit.


Ph. How shall we know when we have this humility?


Py. When you are no longer pu^^ up with better, nor depressed by disorder: so
shall the mind in an humble intritive knowing of its nothingness, be emptied
of all sciences introduced by inductions of reason. And then (I say) then the
most high God, sc^rce suffers a mind to be empty, but he presently fills the
same, with the plentiful beam of his light.


Ph. But though you say this gift of curing descends from above, I cannot
think but you have met with many; which would have Physic to be learned after
that way that other Arts are learned.


Py. You think aright, for, say they, the understanding is a natural power, and
every natural power is born, to operate its proper effect; but the proper
effect of the understanding is intellection. Therefore a man naturally
understands all things understandable, as the proper objects of the
understanding. Further, they say the faculty of Physic is intelligible, and
therefore it descends not from above.


Ph. How do you answer them?


Py. Thus the soul and its understanding are not immediate works of Nature, as
rising from the supernatural fountain; and so, according to their beginning,
though the understanding be a natural faculty of the soul, yet is it not at all
to be computed amongst those faculties which are merely natural: Faith tells
us, that Deus creavit Medicum. So that Ars Medendi speaks something, above the
common rule of things created, nor does the adeption thereof come by the way of
other Sciences. For Nabuchadonozar testifies, the taking away and the restoring
of the understanding. So does Nolite fieri sicut Psa. 32. 9.
equus and mulus quibus non est intellectus; which had been spoken to no
purpose, if the understanding should be equally distributed by Nature, Further,
this understanding (which they here speak of) does not exercise its natural, or
intellectual act, but as it draws some kind of Notions, discoursing from the
observations which it received, from the perception of the senses; as being
altogether ignorant of the causes a priori: But to the Science of Physic,
there is a certain clearness of light required, which far exceeds that
knowledge by the senses, yea, and by consequences of causes to the effectus,
after the putations (or I think so's) induced to them by reason; which are for
the most part all deceitful. For we have it from faith, that the
understanding, together with the totallity of humane Nature, and so
consequently how clear soever it be, at first sight, perceives not the
propositions to be true, which surpass the sense, unless it be by the affluence
of a supernal light. For example. I often read attentively some place in a
book, and though I understand the words, yet I gather the sense thereof beyond
all hope; but once only admiring much my former readings: this kind of
knowledge, I call knowledge of grace: And so the understanding how clear
soever, does not always assent to truth, because it naturally perceives it not
(and hence come factions in Scienc^s, and Religion) so likewise in the gift of
curing, there is something more noble, and superior, to that which formed in
the imagination, by a foreexistent knowledge of the senses: which is true,
solid, good, and far above the authority of consequences; yea, such as cannot
be properly taught, nor yet demonstrated.


Ph. Of what kind of th^se infused Sciences is this Adeptum or gift of
curing? For I suppose there are many of them.


Py. I would not have you understand me, that the Adept of curing, is such an
infused Science, as in times past shined to Bezeliel, Exodus 31. 2. and 36. 1.
and Oholiab, much less, such as in a large shower, reigned down upon the
Apostles on the day of Pentecost, whereby they presently spoke in various
languages: Nor yet is this Adept of healing wholly therefore of the
sublunaries: for the eternal wisdom created his Physician singularly above
other creatures; and therefore there is something of more Majesty required for
him, then for such other professions; which he had not commanded to be
honored. For all our understanding otherwise in Nature, arises only by way
of discourse, supposition, consequent, and inquisition, and that wholly a
posteriori. Wherefore all this kind of knowledge, leanes upon uncertainty. And
therefore between the ordinary way of understanding, and infused Sciences of
the first degrees, there are certain large receptacles, or Latitudes in an
understanding, supernaturally arising one above another, which are particularly
every one in its degree distinguished.


Ph. I would you could prove me this.


Py. I prove it thus. Every good gift descends from the Father of Lights:
The Adept of curing is a good gift, therefore it descends from the Father of
Lights. Our faith confirms the Major, and the Minor is apparent, in that, the
Physician as such is created by the Father of Lights?


Ph. How reply they to this?


Py. By a kind of similitude, and nothing to the Syllogism.


Ph. As how I pray?


Py. Thus, the knowledge of God is of greater difficulty, then that of Physic;
but the Gentiles by the operations of the understanding, have naturally found
out the existence of the Deity, therefore have they much more easily attained,
to the natural Science of Physic.


Ph. What answer made you?


Py. I granted all, had they not brought in four Termini. Therefore as no man
can by Nature draw the light of faith: but only by a shadowed kind of
knowledge; so, I grant, that in the gift of curing; by observations of
helpful things, and hurtful, there may a kind of curing knowledge be
achieved: But this knowledge is indeed, so shadowy, and blind, that it is
repugnant altogether unto the Text, which to no purpose, should have said, that
God created the Physician, as such, and that he should be honored, unless some
light should shine in this created Physician, above the vulgar, ordinary, and
natural intellectual power of the soul.


Ph. But now what proofs bring you against those Atheists, Jews, and Gentiles,
which you spoke, that they never received this gift of curing?


Py. No other, or farther fetched, then that it is de facto, that sickness,
remedies and their appropriations, are at this day unknown to all mortals. For
it is an inevitable argument, that, hitherto the Adept of curing has been
unknown: Therefore God gave it not the Paganism in former ages, nor to the
Schools which followed those blind conductors. And the correlative of this is,
that whosoever assenteth not to the doctrine of the Pagan Schools, is secluded
from the true principles of curing. The Assumpt I shall God willing demonstrate
in a large Volumn, viz. That the principles of the knowledge of causes, and
roots in diseases, remedies, and appropriations, have remained unknown. The
consequent is clear of it self, unless they can show that every good gift is
derived from elsewhere, then from God. For to the establishment of the gift of
curing, it should suffice, that though that gift, be so near to the nature of
the understanding, that for the propinquity and alliances of natural objects,
it be customarily attributed to natural Sciences, apprehended by a simple
understanding: yet, at least, in that it includes the gifts of prudence,
council, etc. which are Charismata, or gracious gifts of the Holy Ghost:
doubtless the gift of healing should be derived, brought, and expected from
such a beginning, as is altogether situate above the Orb of Nature. For
oftentimes a man that is drowned in the depth of dreams, upon a sudden
conceives a knowledge, which while he was awake he never ob^aned. For Nox Psalm.
18. 3. 19. (...).
nocti indicat Scientiam. And so a man often reads a place, often read before
without fruit, from whence at length he takes a resolutiton to amend his life.
And do not these things descend from the Father of Lights?


Ph. It should seem they do.


Py. Then are these Sciences (without doubt) infused; though they be not of the
more excellent orders of them; I mean they are Talents, whereon a well formed
understanding afterward builds profitable doctrines. Dan. 12. 3.
For Docti, (as such) fulgebunt (before or above the unlearned) in regno
C^lorum, if for doctrines cause their souls shall have habilitated, or made
themselves fit to, or for the greater Charismata. For Almighty God pleased
himself, in the diversity of mansions, chores, brightness, and understanding of
Angels, likewise of men, as their associates. At least it makes in favor of
the gift of curing, that among the seven Spirits, nearest to the Throne of
God, one is called Medicina Dei. and he is above Principalities, Raphiel.
Tobit. 12. 15.
Thrones, Powers, and Dominations. And yet the inhabitants of Heaven, are not
diseased, nor need they Physic. Neither is this Medicina Dei, to be taken
metaphorically, Tobit. 6. 6 7, 8. 1^. 11. 12. 3.
as knowing the proprieties, even in the gall of fishes. But now let us fall
upon this business in our following Dialogues.


THE FIRST MEETING OF PHILIATRUS, AND PYROSOPHILVS; About the examination of
the definition of a Fever, according to the ancient Physicians.
Ph. A Fever is a familiar disease, and accompanies, goes before, or follows
most infirmities, and the ancients have written much and often of it. Can more
be said thereof then has been hitherto?


Py. I confess the disease is but too familiar, for it above all other keeps
our Churchyard fat, and depopulates our Armies; yet much more may be said of it
then has been.


Ph. It Is easily taken notice of, even from the beginning of it.


Py. Yet our Physicians hitherto, know 1. The roots of a Fever hitherto unknown.
nothing of its causes, the manner how it is made, the seat thereof, or of its
remedies, as in our following discourse I shall plainly make appear, either to
you, or any else that is instructed in Philosophy.


Ph. You shall do me a favor worth acknowledgement, for I long to hear what
you say of it.


Py. To satisfy your longing, let us first 2. The definition of a Fever
according to the Schools.
examine the definition of a Fever; which the Physic Schools define to be, a
preternatural heat, kindled first in the heart, and then dispersed through the
whole body. (I add moreover) by their own consents, that it hutteth many of our
actions.


Ph. And is not this a good definition?


Py. The point of the business is, that they 3. A prime clause omitted also,
about the requisites of the Ancients.
make the Genus of the thing defined, or the essence of a Fever to be heat, and
not every heat, but that which is preter-natural, and is in its degree
hurtful. And by that means seeing this heat is essential to a fever, that a
fever cannot mentally be conceived, but this heat must be its individual
companion.


Ph. Well suppose it be so, is there any false doctrine herein?


Py. I pray judge you, but first, the leaguer fevers have of late objected
themselves against it, which are without thirst or manifest heat. That is, they
act their tragedy from the beginning of the fever to the end of life, without
heat.


Ph. Whay if they say, that these fevers 5. A vain evasion of the Schools.
were unknown unto the Ancients, and that therefore they are not comprehended
under their definition?


Py. Then I at least conclude, that these fevers are no fevers; or the essence
of fevers is 6. Some doubts following thereon.
not necessarily tied to heat, but by accident only. And that therefore the
definition of fevers anciently delivered, and at this day also kept in Schools,
is not adjusted to the nature of a fever. And thirdly, whosoever shall for some
hours, feel an intrinsecable, penetrable cold, in the beginning of fevers, and
should for all that, persuade himself his fever is begun, or that it is present
on him; but some other disease hitherto nameless: and though he chatter with
his teeth, shake with cold, and have his lips blew therewith, and yet persuades
himself, that, notwithstanding these inconveniences, those beginnings, are no
beginnings of fevers: nor that he which dies in such beginnings, (which
commonly falls out, in intermittent fevers) dies of a true [and real] fever:
Believe them who will [for me] for I am not wont, in contingies, known by the
sense of feeling, in that I am so stupid, that in things sensible, I stand unto
no other judgment then that of the senses.


Ph. But some hold, that grouling cold, and 7. Other evasions.
shakings, are not the beginnings of fevers: but the beginnings of the fit.


Py. These are such who sticking closer to the opinion of the ancients, then
others, creep into corners, that they may maintain the sense of Galen: but
Galen himself shakes these men off, saying: We first understand by the name of
Paroxism, the worse part of the whole fit, or acc^ssion. Which is as much as to
say, a fit, and a fever are fynonima's. Well, go to now: If he could tell us
the beginning of a fit, and not of a fever, an accession shall at least tell us
of an approaching fever, and so of necessity, the beginning of the fit, or
accession shall be the beginning of the fever.


Ph. But are there not yet others, who say 8. Others deny things known to the
senses.
it is true, that in the beginning of a fever, the sick are sensible of a real
coldness, but it is a false one, and a fraudulent deceiving of the senses. For
though they are cold outwardly, yet inwardly they are hot, and bnrn with a true
heat: though the patient thinks otherwise.


Py. These are such, as would rather not see, or not be sensible, though their
eyes be open. But these are madnesses, which every country fellow will hush out
of the middle of a village. In that for some hours, the entrails are possessed,
with a most eager, or intense coldness. For in so plain and undoubted an
history of cold (which is of fact and sensible) the argument which they produce
9. A loose argument of these men.
is very feeble: they say there is inwardly a great heat, though the Patients
feel it not; their reason is, because they are oppressed with a continual
thirst; which as it is primarily a figne of siccitie, so this siccity in living
creatures presupposes an heat equal to it. And that from hence thirst deserves
to be of greater authority, then sense is.


Ph. What say you to this assertion?


Py. I say they know, that this thirst proceeds 10. Feverish thirst examined.
not either from heat, or dryness, as does in a thirst that is natural.


Ph. How make you that good?


Py. Thus: If this thirst did proceed from 11. An argument from the remedy of
thirst.
heat, or dryness, it would regularly be quenched with drinking: therefore this
thirst is deceitful and not that coldness.


Ph. From whence then should that thirst, in the beginning of fevers have its
original?


Py. From an excrement which, ill affects, and deludeth this sensitive
faculty, and the Organ, or Instrument thereof, in the same manner, as if a
great siccity or drought, were suddenly come unto it.


Ph. Is this probable?


Py. Probable enough, in that, I am sure our adversaries will not allow, the
curing of dryness, by most dry remedies; but by cold, and moist potions rather.
But this thirst in fevers which we now speak of, is cured by a remedy, that is
in it is self most dry and corrosive.


Ph. Good Sir what remedy may that be?


Py. The Acidite of Sulphur: which quenches this d^ceitful thirst, in the same
manner as fire is extinguished, by water cast upon it.


Ph. But why may we not out of invincible 12. An argument a pari taken from
sleep.
sleep or drowsiness, often seen in the beginning of fevers; by a strong
reason, guess at coldness, in that beginning, then they do of heat, or dryness,
by that thirstiness?


Py. We may doubtless, and so much the rather in that the Schools affirm, that
sleep comes as well from an invincible coldness: as thirst proceeds from a
dryness.


Ph. But makes it not against us, that sleep assaults us not in every fever?


Py. By no means: for it suffices, yea and it brings greater confusion; that
sleep is frequent in some patients.


Ph. But tell me, what time, or station 13. Another from thirst, in the state
or vigor, of a feverish fit.
of a feverish fit is hottest: [whether the beginning, augmentation, state, or
declination?]


Py. Certainly the state, or vigor, when the interior parts are sensibly
perceived to be, most hot and in greatest trouble.


Ph. But are they of that opinion?


Py. No.


Ph. Why so?


Py. Because in the state, they say the thirst is not so great as in the
beginning.


Ph. Now if this thirst bewray heat, and that it be a sign inseparable of, or
from heat; so that such as tremble with cold, may be notwithstanding said to
burn; I should think the greatest thirst should oppress Patients in the hottest
station of the feverish fits.


Py. But this they deny.


Ph. What evasion will they now have? Or which way will they turn themselves,
being caught and entangled in their own net?


Py. Therefore I say whosoever they be, who judge of the native roots of
things, from accidents which follow by accident are in an error.


Ph. Then assuredly if a fever be ill defined, 14. It proceeds from a deadly
ignorance not to define a fever rightly.
and if they cure that fever, after this definition; it may doubtless prove a
deathfull ignorance [in the definers.]


Py. Nay more; by the Cornelian Law of privy murderers, the Magistrate is to
proceed against such, as obstinately cure amiss those patients, which trusted
their lives into their hands; as being such by whose offense, so many thousand
thousands are unfortunately killed.


Ph. Well then if a fever, or a feverish 15. An argument against the Schools
about feverish heat.
heat, should first be kindled in the heart, and yet the matter of fevers,
(which they hold to proceed from one of the four humors putrified) consists
not in the ventricles of the heart, what follows?


Py. It follows that this heat, or fever, is not first kindled in the feverish
matter; and that they in vain seek after putrefaction, who would find and
intimate, and an immediate cause of a preter-natural heat.


Ph. Then is this definition of a fever ruined.


Py. It is so, and moreover it follows 16. Another.
thence, that a fever is not primarily, effectively, and immediately existent
in its matter, whence it is caused (as they would have it) materially, and
originally.


Ph. No? where then I pray?


Py. In the heart. It follows also further from the same Thesis, that to make a
fever, it is not required that the offending and feverish matter be kindled.


Ph. What then I pray?


Py. Another inflamable thing, which has its residence primarily, in the
heart, and is from thence issuable through the whole body.


Ph. What inflamable body should this be?


Py. That which I with Hyppocrates, call Spiritum impetum facientem, the
invading, enterprizing, or way-making spirit.


Ph. Whence I pray you bring you this last doctrine?


Py. Not from the Ancients, but I have 17. A third.
wrested it out, and by force commanded it to be granted to me.


Ph. Shall you have any occasion to speak of this any where else.


Py. I shall when we come to discourse of the efficient cause of fevers. In
the mean time this being violently obtained; it follows at least, that the
peccant, or offending matter of fevers, is not properly kindled; neither is it
in its self primarily, and efficiently hot, nor heats it preternaturally; if
the first inflamable must be kindled in the heart. Nor is the peccant matter
thereof hot above, or beyond the degree of Nature in a fever. But that which is
kindled in the heart, was not inflamed before the fit of the fever; and by that
means, it altogether differs from the peccant, or offending matter in fevers.


Ph. It may fitly then, be hence concluded, 18. A fourth.
that whosoever goes about, to take away a fever by coolers; has no intention
to cure by taking away the causes, or cutting up the roots, or by draining, and
emptying the fountain thereof, or that which does exile it: but they intend
only to take away, and correct the heat, which is a kind of product, which
comes afterward, and lodges not in the feverish matter. For they apply their
remedies adposterius, non adprius, to the effects, and not their causes.


Py. You say right; for the feverish heat is 19. A fifth.
kindled in the in-^ushing, or violent waymaking Archeus: But the root of the
fever is the very matter it self, which is offending?


Ph. They therefore look [onely as I said] to the taking away of the consequent
effect, and that which resulteth out of the position of that root.


Py. It Is so, and hence you may see that the Archeus is not inflamed from the
root, but from a heat drawn from elsewhere.


Ph. How I pray you?


Py. Whilst this spirit inflameth it is self by its struggling, and by its own
heat raised to such a degree [thereby] as is far above that, which it has need
of, or is befitting it, wherein it becomes wholly troublesome; as being delated
further then it should be, and above the necessity that is of it. For we must
not 20. Feverish heat not from the offending matter.
think there is any such heat in that detestable feverish matter (which both
they and I call peccant) that it should feverishly heat thereby the entire
totality. If they will allow: that, for which every thing is such; to be it
self more such. And then again; because every 21. Another argument.
heating agent, by it is species works more forcibly, in that which is near
hand, then in that which is farther distant.


Ph. Hereupon I should think, that if the feverish matter did with its heat,
heat the rest: of necessity the center, or nest wherein this offending feverish
matter is received, should first be burnt into ashes, before any thing that is
distant from it, should thereby be warmed.


Py. Yea, and if the peccant matter should 22. A third.
of its own accord wax warm; and that mee^ preter-natural heat should be a
fever, every fever, as a fever, should be continual, neither should it have any
intermission, till all the peccant matter, were totally consumed into ashes.


Ph. That Is plain, and it stands with reason 23. A fourth.
also, that there should be no repition of fits, nor yet any ^elapse, if the
peccant matter, should out of its native property always heat till it were
consumed.


Py. Nay, that which is more; a dead 24. A fifth.
carcass should be as hot after death, and more ardently be disturbed with a
fever, then when it was living; by reason that the same matter does yet remain
in the carcass, which introduced death into the living body.


Ph. And considering that they suppose the same matter, hot by its proper heat
of putrefaction, and that it is more putrid after death, then before, and that
it affects more parts adjacent, then while it lived. A man would therefore
think also, that it should more actually heat then, then while it lived.


Py. But this error is thus discovered, because a fever which made a live body
hot, presently after death cease, and all heat 25. Feverish heat not of the
peccant matter.
expires with life. And this should instruct us, that feverish heat is not
proper to the peccant matter, or that it does inhabit in it; as also; that the
heat of that matter, does not efficiently, and effectively heat in fevers. And
26. Feverish matter heateth occasionally only.
therefore it is perpetually true, that the offending matter, heateth
occasionally only: But the Archeus is the worker of all alteration, and
therefore under this title, that way-making spirit, is it, which efficiently,
primarily, immediately, always, every where, and only heateth; according to
that Axiom: whatsoever 27. Who, maker of the feverish heat.
brings forth sound actions in such as are sound; the very same is it, which
utters, faulty, or unhealthfull actions in diseases. For this very spirit
heats, a man naturally in health, which in fevers is inflamed.


Ph. But, could not what is said be yet made plainer by some instance?


Py. No doubt it might. And to this end 28. The original of preternatural heat.
take that which follows. An Oken thorn or splinter, which is both actually
and potentially cold, is thrust into a finger, it presently begets a
preternatural heat therein.


Ph. Comes this by reason that hot humors have their affluence, thither, as if
they had been called by that thorn, and had expected the wound thereof, which
otherwise had been temperately quiet in their proper places?


Py. O no, for that blood which is next the wound, hinders the access of that
which follows.


Ph. So then, that blood which is next the wound is that which heats it, is it
not?


Py. By no means, for neither that nor any other blood is hot of it self, but
what heat it has, it has by grace and favor from the vital spirit.


Ph. Then I perceive this heat of the wound comes from that spirit.


Py. Right, for th'inflamation, the swelling, the hardness of the pulse, the
pain, and hear, that are in the wound, come all only from the spirit,
causally: but from the infixed thorn alone, occasionally.


Ph. Verily this is a sufficient example, as 29. To heat, and to be hot how
different.
well for the position, manner, and knowing; as also for the curing of a fever.
Teaching that the peccant cause in a fever, is not hot in its self: and that it
heateth no way but occasionally: and that upon the pulling out of the thorn, or
occasional cause, health follows. So that, the Archeus alone is that, which
does every where, effectively stir up the fever: and when it through death is
gone, the fever cease. Therefore heat is but an after accident, 30. Heat an
after accident to the essence of a fever.
and subsequent to the essence of a fever. For the Archeus (in the striving
desire it has to expel the occasional matter, as a thorn that is thrust into
it) heats it self; now whosoever pulls out this thorn, that is; whosoever takes
away 31. Whence feverish heat.
this matter, he pulls up the infirmity by ye root.


Py. I like your brief and easy repition. But add yet this in curing. That it
is almost indifferent to nature, whether the means be hot, cold, or temperate,
so the disease thereby find remedy. For instantly the struggling cease,
because the Archeus is appeased.


Ph. I perceive then that heat, how much 32. A fever is not heat essentially.
soever it be preternaturally augmented: though it may be a sign of fevers, yet
it is not the very fever, nor in the cure thereof to be much insisted on.


Py. You perceive aright: And from hence Hippocrates has seriously warned us:
that heat, and cold are not diseases, nor the causes of them: But that bitter,
sharp, salt, portick, etc. are causes (viz. occasional) of diseases: and that
the spirit is it, which makes all the inrodes. But then came Galen (about 500
years younger then Hippocrates) who blotted much paper, and by his chat allured
followers, whose posterity admiring this prattling, depended on him, making
always most, of what was least. Since when, the world waxing every where old
in frivolous judgments, esteemed that of greatest weight which most resembled
its inconstancy.


THE SECOND MEETING OF PHILIATRUS, AND PYROSOPHILVS; About putrefaction in
Fevers, introduced by the declining Schools.
Ph. WHat made the Schools to 1. Physic Schools constrained to find out
something else besides heat in Fevers.
bring in Putrefaction into Fevers?


Py. They perceiving that exercise did often produce an heat, not unlike the heat
in fevers, yet finding it not feverish, they bethought themselves, that such an
heat as was necessary in fevers, could not be every heat indifferently; but
such an one as must be raised out of putrefaction. And now they were no longer
troubled about the heat, nor yet about the degree, or distemper thereof: but
rather about the continent cause of it. For this graduated preternatural heat,
did not seem to be sufficient for a fever, unless ^t should proceed from
pu^refaction.


Ph. If this were so, I should think this 2. Another defect in the definition
of a Fever.
particular was but drowsily omitted in the former definition.


Py. You say well; but now this feverish essence is no longer a naked heat, nor
shall it distinguish fevers by the diversity of heat 3. The Schools contradict
their own principles.
(though the species should result from that, from whence the essence does) but
from the varieties of the putrid humors, or at least from the varieties of
those, which are in putrefying.


Ph. A fair beginning certainly; to wander thus from the business, that whereas
before, they respected nothing else but heat, which should exceed th'accustomed
temper of Nature; now they require as well heat, as a subject of putrefaction.
But what should be there subject wherein they would have this heat to be
kindled?


Py. Forsooth, they must no longer have 4. The essence of Fevers not from heat.
it k^ndled first within the heart; but in the offending putrid matter. Now
seeing there is but one species only in degree; though the moments, or
mansions thereof be many: and that the species of fevers be many, and that a
specifical multitude of fevers cannot come forth of one species of
preter-natural heat. Therefore in the esse of heat, there is another thing
looked after, besides the degree of it. And by this means, heat cannot make the
feverish essence: but this other thing by reason whereof the diversity of
fevers is produced. Now if the putrefaction of diverse things, be the efficient
cause, of the diversity of fevers; heat, will be as well a thing caused out of
putrefaction, as the fever it self is: And so, considering the causal action of
that which is putr^fied involves somewhat else besides heat, a fever cannot be
an heat.


Ph. How do the Schools relish this?


Py. They remaining now confused, cast 5. Physicians by little and little
forget their own Theses.
about them many ways, that if one help them not, at least another may; so
that al though they stick closely to their form^r definition, and adore it: yet
by little and little they wind away from the naked distemper of heat to the
putrefaction of humors. Neither s^and they steadfast in these trifles, but they
fly moreover, though forgetful of their Theses, to hot remedies. And this
they do, whether they mean to purge their patients; or whether they turn
themselves, to proper specifical remedies of fevers.


Ph. But what use they in particular I pray you?


Py. What is more common in curing for a fever then to give A pozems made of
Hops, Asparagus, etc. and to make them up with Sugar? Or what is hotter then
that aromatical thing, 6. What is aromatical in Roses, is very hot.
or quality which is in roses, (whether you consider the test thereof, or
application;) without which the rose, is but a mere dead carcass? And what meet
you with more frequent, then in your Juleps for fevers, to mingle corrosives of
Sulpher, and of Vitriol: (many ways adulterated by counsel, and consent of
Lucre?) Or then Rubarb, and Scammoniated medicines which they f^ign, to choose,
or pick out guilty humors? 7. Whether the schools think rightly, that feverish
heat arises from putrefaction.



Ph. What is to be done in this case?


Py. We will first therefore purposely examine, whether the heat of a fever,
come from Putrefaction. For which cause I have already plainly taught; that the
heat of a fever does no way causally depend upon the peccant matter. And then,
I have learned, 8. A mal^gnant fever wherein different from the rest.
that a malign fever only, differs from the rest in this, that the offending
matter thereof has ab^ginning putredness joined with it. Which if it increase,
or go forwards to its height, until that putrefaction be now made, and remain
internally; it, upon necessity, brings present death. But if it be thrust out
of the body, while it is in making (as in small Pox, E^ysipel^'s, etc.) it is
for the most part cured. In that health does commonly, accompany a motion
outward. For from 9. Crisis of fevers, by sweat most wholesome.
hence fevers produce of their own accords swea^s toward their ending. And
that C^isis is most wholesome, which ends by swea^ing; and consequently
sweating remedies are wholesome also.


Ph. But why are they fled away to Putrefaction? 10. Why the Schools fled to
putrefaction.



Py. That they might find a cause, from whence they might first ground a cold,
and then a heat presently after it.


Ph. How seek they this cause?


Py. They take upon them to know, that 11. A fond comparison of heat in
horsedung.
horse dung, which is actually cold, waxes hot of it self, by reason of
Putrefaction. But Lord how foolishly do they cheat the credulous world in every
place! For cow dung made of the same nourishment, is better putrefied and
digested then horse-dung, and yet it waxes not hot. Neither does horse-dung
made by feeding upon grass, or green ta^es, or vetches, wax hot, as it does
when the horse is fed with corn: and yet as well that as this putrefieth.
Therefore they 12. Why horsdung is hot.
knew not that the heat comes from the chewed corn, and not from the nature of
the putrefaction. And for that cause they insipidly traduce, the feverish heat
to putred humors in a fever from the heat of dung not yet putrefying, so that
the Schools knew nor, that by how much, the nearer horse dung is, to a
b^ginning putrefaction, so much the more it is deprived of all heat. And the
same shall never after putrefie, if it be sprinkled; But only while it is
heaped together moist, and in that moistness pressed together, it is kindled
before the Putrefaction thereof, in the same manner that bay, and flowers are.
I say they knew not that dung waxes hot, by the proper spirits of the sal^s
compressed. And in conclusion, though dung wax hot, while the putrefaction is
in making, yet all the heat cease, before the beginning of the putrefaction
made. And by this reason the heat of dung, does not square with the feverish
matter, if it must long before lie putred (as they 13. The degree of heat in a
putresce^t thing is not able sufficiently to heat the whole man in a fever.
say) hid in receptacles, and in a Quartan continually, and very long; neither
is the degree of heat in dung so fitted, that it should be dispersed from the
putred center, to the soals of the feet: but it would burn the center of the
body, whence that putred humor issued.


Ph. It should seem then that example of dung in fevers is utterly impertinent?


Py. It is so, and the rather, because they do teach thereby that cold, comes
before heat. For, in Nature, putrefaction causes heat no where, much less in
vitals. For in the things 14. Putrefaction no where cause of heat.
putrefying, cold is necessary. If it be deprived of life which is the
fountain of our heat.


Ph. In the sound days of intermi^tent fevers, we complain not of heat, neither
does cold trouble us.


Py. Yet they suppose the humors to be at that time putrefied. Therefore if
heat and cold, do causally succeed ^ach other in the putrefied; and there be
cold before heat always successively in fits of fevers; cold is more innate to
putredness, then heat i^. And for that cause we measure the length of the
disease, by the continuance of the cold, and not of heat in fevers. Then at
length I showed that all feverish heat comes wholly from the Archeus, and
therefore cease before death: when cold and putrefaction grow stronger. It
implies a contradiction also, that heat in fevers should proceed from any thing
putred, and should first be enflamed, in the heart it self, from whence all
putredness is banished. And in fine heat is not kindled in dung, out 15. Dung
not hot from putrefaction.
of its own putredness. For if it should be daily sprinkled with new
horse-piss, it will not grow hot, no, not for a year together. Yet it is
certain that urine preserves not from putredness, but does increase it rather.


Ph. If I be not deceived, they might more 16. Why they took not their feverish
heats from hot baths.
properly, and truly, have taken their heats, from hot bathes, and lime, then
from horsedung.


Py. They might; but that the causes of these heats were not so well known unto
them, and therefore they thought it more safe for them to pitch upon, the
putredness of horse-dung only. Neither was it material, whether they had taken
or borrowed the feverish essence, rather from heat then cold, or any other
symptoms; seeing they are equal and fellow-ac^idents of fevers.


Ph. Then is their study always to war 17. Ignorance of roots drew the Schools
to the considerations, and remedies of effects.
against accidents of fevers.


Py. It is so; but there was some reason for it.


Ph. What? I pray you.


Py. Because they did not know the roots thereof.


Ph. But now it being manifest, that material things are the very matter it
self, how will they cure who employ all their curing endeavors, upon or
against heat only? The similitude of horse-dung and of feverish heat,
dedicated to, or rather cast upon putrefaction, is at least disparaged also; is
it not?


Py. Doubtless it is; for dung when it begins 18. Dung loses the heat when it
begins to putrify.
but a little to putrefie, it shakes off heat immediately. For so long as it
can wax warm, Artists draw Saltpeter from it: but when it is hot they leave it
to Peasants, as unprofitable to their purpose. But the Schools accuse the
putredness of humors; and that, of 19. A great blindness of the Schools.
one and the same humor, as well for cold as heat, and both in extremes. And
consequently one and the same, should of it self immediately make two
opposites. Therefore of necessity, one of these must be of it self, the other
by accident. Now if it could be the child of Putrefaction of it self; it
cannot in possibility thrown; or, the whole o^der of curing, hiinclude heat
essentially, but by accident only. Bu^ if heat of it self be the son of
putrefaction, then would not a fever begin with cold. Yet it is plain enough
out of what has been formerly said, that the Schools take or think
putrefaction to be the essence of fevers: and heat, and cold to be accidents,
associa^ing putrefaction. Wherefore Galen says: when 20. Galen co^victed of
error.
Blood is put^efied it becomes Choler. Which text if they admit of; this Choler
was putrefied in its b^ginning, or not. If it were putred it should make a
Tertian: and not a Synochus 21. Blood in veins never putrefied, and therefore
what they fable of Synochus is erroneous.
or putred Causon. Let our School Physicians therefore know; that Blood never
putrifies within the veins, but when the vein also putrefies with it, as, in
Gangrens, and Mortifications. And hence therefore they who let blood, that it
may not putrify within the veins, make use of that former fallacy, called
Petitio Principii. So do they who affirm that a Synochus, comes out of putred
blood of the veins. And they also, who tell us that Blood putrefied is turned
into Choler.


Ph. How is this to be proved?


Py. I prove it thus. The veins retain their 22. Presidents proved.
blood fluid even in dead bodies: and that by consent of all Anatomy. But blood
gone out of the veins, presently thickens into clotts; for the co^agulation of
blood is only the beginning of corruption, and the way to separation of the
whole. If therefore the vein, shall keep the blood from corruption in a
catkass: much more shall it do it in those, that are living: by an a^gument a
Minori ad Majus. Indeed the strange excrements retained in veins do putrefie;
as well such as are of their proper, as those that are of any other digestion,
(as elsewhere touching digestions) but the blood never putrefies within them:
as being by consent of Scripture, the seat and treasure of the life. If
therefore the life it self cannot preserve its own seat, and treasure from
corruption, while it is within the veins; when will it then preserve it? Or
how shall it ever be free from corruption? Again, if the life keep not the
blood, wherein it glideth, from putrefaction, how shall the 23. Gui^^ or dowry
of veins.
bones be preserved? The veins therefore are ordained by the Creator, to keep
the blood from corruption; because the life is confirmentated, or mixed like
leven together with the blood of the veins. 24. Nature or School doctrine
ruined.



Ph. It being thus; it seems to me, that under this question either the glory,
comeliness, and destination of Nature is overhitherto adored by Physicians is
destroyed.


Py. Well go to. By what signs do the Schools to be putrefied? Is it not by
the color, that is whiter, or blacker, then it should be, or by the
yellowness, greenishness, or brownness of it? Or by the matter as being too
clammy, too thick, too waterish, too thin? Or at last by the substance, as
being without fibers, and scarce coherent, etc. But I declare, or protest unto
you, under penalty 25. Example out of the variety of blood.
of a convicted lie, that if any man would, make proof thereof, he shall find
that many of the bloods, of two hundred Country fellows sound, and wanton, as
those were, which in one day were by me examined, he might find as I found,
many of them to view, very unlike the rest in color, matter, and consistents;
of which I distilled many, and in cuting found them to be equally wholesome: for
our Peasants are wont the second day in Whitson week, to let blood, that they
might drink more freely. And though many of them seemed putrefied, rusty like
Iron, or melancholic, yet those from whom these bloods were taken, were all
very sound men, which is a thing worth noting. Therefore these bloods, did by
the cause, confirm themselves, notwithstanding the signs of corruption, to be
no whit alienated from the nature of the Balsam.


Ph. What thought you then?


Py. I thought not so much; as I laughed 26. A ridiculous fable of blood drawn.
at the table of Judgments, upon the sight of blood after Phlebotomy, and this
means I was confirmed, and those bloods were commanded by Physicians to be
kept, that they might score up at least one visit more, upon the recovering of
the Patients. For if corruption 27. An argument from the Plague against use of
the Schools.
of blood have place any where; and should under that title indicate its
letting out, this should be rather in the Plague, then in any other infirmity.
But its a deadly thing to let blood in the Plague; there putrefaction is no
where in the blood, nor is there any fear that putrefaction should grow strong
therein. And consequently the scope of bloodletting is in this case erroneous.


Ph. Could you not illustrate this passage better by some instance?


Py. I could, and will. And therefore I 28. Another from the Pluri^ie.
suppose also, that thirty men were equally sick of a Plure^ie, and ten of them
had by Phlebotomy drawn blood apparently vicious (for the blood in this disease
is like red Wine, wherein are clotts of Milk) I will cure the other twenty
without bloodletting: It is certain in the mean while, that these twenty had
their blood affected in the same manner that those ten had. And again that
those twenty cured, if they should open a vein, the blood would be found
rectified, restored to the former perfection, and far different from
Pluritical, in all or any of them. Therefore the blood of one that is
Pluritical, is not corrupted though it seem so.


Ph. May this be proved?


Py. It may, for from a corrupted, or deprived thing, there is no going back
again to life, health, or former habit. Therefore no blackness, blewishness,
greenishness, or other such like colors of the blood do testify the
corruption of it: but only tell us, the tokens of a boiling, or a fermental
turbulency, or troubledness. For if the more watery or yellow blood, should
especially tell us the faults thereof; the arterial blood should be far worse
then that of the veins is; which were an error, in that the blood is in the
same manner distinguished by the former signs, as Wine when it is troubled,
while the Vine is blooming, which is not therefore corrupted; because the
trouble being gone, the Wine of it self does come cle^r again. In like manner a
fever diversely disturbs the blood, and makes the face thereof of sundry ill
colors. But 29. Heats, and turbulences of blood, no testimonies of its
faultiness.
But the Bug beats, or Scare-crowes ceas^ when the fever's over. Indeed I am
wont to liken these men, that look into the blood; to such as give their
judgment of Spanish Wine, and think they are cas^ing of an Urine.


Ph. But they will say: If putrefaction be 30. The poor deceit of the Schools.
not in the blood, why streams it not out of the vein purely red, the third
time, and not the first, or the first, and not the third time?


Py. This argument at least convinces, that one part of the blood is more, or
sooner disturbed then another, and not the whole and all together. For it is
certain that Nature tends 31. Ridiculous to suppose putred humors in fevers.
to the perfection appointed her, by little, and little, and by a direct, and
lineary way. And that therefore the blood near the heart, is purer, then about
the first shops, or offices thereof. And that is the reason why they say, a
Tertian, as well continual, as intermittent, consists of Choler, a Quarran of
Melancholy, and a Quotidian of Phlegm; but all putred: and they err therein.
For what necessity had they to suppose these humors, (which I have elsewhere
demonstrated to be fictious) putred; seeing they confess a Synochus continual,
and more cruel then the three former, not to be putred? Which if they be
conferred with the proposed definition of fevers, the blood in every Synochus,
and the spirit of life in a Diary, Ephemera, or Day-fever must of necessity in
life be putred; that is, they will have attained, or be arrived to the bound of
putrefaction. Then whereas 32. Some absurdities alleged against the definition
of fevers, in the precedent Dialogue.
the Schools confess that these putred humors do not consist in the ventricle
of the heart, and that therefore they are not primarily kindled in a fever, by
this means putrefaction is consequently, in vain required to the kindling of a
feverish heat in the heart. If therefore the putred humors, shall a far off
inflame the spirit in the heart, this by all law of Nature, should first be
done nearer hand, then at a greater distance, and should rather inflame all the
intermediating blood, by the heat of putrefaction, and so all must give a
necessary putred Synochus. Whereupon the Quartan shall neither stop it is
course, nor make it is recourse, if the same putred matter of it can lie quietly
in exp^ctation in the Spleen for a year together. Gangrens teach me certainly,
that nothing which is putred, (for every thing that is putrefied is dead) can
long persist without further contagion. Neither am I capable how the very
spirit of Life it self, the Archeus, shall become putrefied, 33. A ^rivolous
excuse by an Ephemir^.
to give Galen satisfaction for a Diary. But if they understand a Diaria to be
the daughter of that putrefaction, which at last is inserted or comes into the
spirit of life. So all fevers in the Schools should be Diaties. To conclude, if
a Diaria be the daughter of putrefaction: it is then presupposed to be
fermented with the spirit of life, whence they fall again into the same
straights. But if they 34. The foregoing definition of a fever, again impugned.
understand a beginning putrefaction only, o^ a disposition to putredness, and
that heat be the effect of putredness: then it follows that a Diaria, shall
come to be no true fever. But the Schools require a formal, and an absolute
putrefaction, that they may find out the cause of the feverish heat. Forgetful
that then 35. Schools inco^stant.
heat, and not the fever, will be the effect of putrefaction, and so they must
distinguish heat, from a fever by compulsion. Because a Synochus that is not
putred, being a true fever without putrefaction, should consequently be without
heat. In the mean, by little and little, they lay down the fear of hea^, nor
think it to be cared for in curing, while there is a greater fear to be had of
hurt, which may arise from the contagion of putrefaction in things that
symbolize. And that it were better therefore to turn away the putrefact^on,
then seek in vain to appease the fever by coolers. But whatsoever resists
putrefaction is hot. For Myr^he preserves the Carcasis at Memphis for two
thousand years together, which otherwise with Cichory, and Plantain, and your
other coolers had long since been putrefied.


Ph. So that these putrefactions, of putred humors, and of the blood, as also
of the spirit, seem now so like our old wives tales unto me, that I should
scarce believe, the Schools had spoken in earnest; had nor these Theses
fatally, even till this very day, confirmed in their works of Curative
intentions, and indications. 36. Blood in the veins unputrefied.



Py. Well, for an upshot, I will yet add one thing more. Whatsoever is
corrupted once within the body; does never after turn again into grace, and
favor. But the blood in the veins howsoever it seem corrupted, turns again
into favor, therefore it was never yet corrupted.


Ph. They would peradventure have you prove both your Major and your Minor.


Py. I prove the Major thus. Corruption 37. Whence corruption.
is an effect of the sequestration of vital dispositions in us, and therefore
presup^oseth a privation, and death of the thing corrupted. And the Minor is
proved, by those which are cured of the Plague, Plurifie, and of a Fever
without blood letting. And further, if the blood be at any time to be thought
putred, 38. Blood of the Hemorrhoids not putred.
or corrupt while it is in the veins, it will be that or none, which is in the
Hemorthoidal veins. But this is not corrupted, though it be as it were almost
without the veins: therefore is never to be thought putred in the veins.


Ph. And how prove you this other Major and Minor?


Py. All Surgery proves the Major, in 39. An admirable remedy against
Hemorrhoids and other diseases, by a Ring
the Ulcers, and other diseases which happen to those knots, knobs, or bunches
of the Hemorrhoids. And I prove the Minor by composition of a metal, whereof
if a Ring be made, and worn, it will in a Pater noster while take away the pain
of them; and in twenty four hours, both internal, and external Hemorrhoids, how
big soever they be swelled, vanish. Therefore this Hemorrhoidal blood, is
received into favor again, and the sick grow well again. This Ring is good
also in Suffocations of the Womb, and other motions also of the Mother, and in
very many other diseases. Whose description, and way of making and compounding,
I deliver among the great virtues of other things, where we treat upon those
words: In Verbis, Herbis, and Lapidibus est magna virtus.


THE THIRD MEETING OF PHILIATRUS, AND PYROSOPHILVS; About an examination of the
Doctrine of ancient Physicians concerning Circuits, Periods, or Returns in
Fevers.
Ph. WHat causes are there, according to the Physic 1. Causes of feverish
Circuits in the Schools.
Schools, of the set, or appointed Circuits in fevers?


Py. They say that so much Phlegm, forsooth is made every day, as there is
Choler made every other day, and Melancholy every third day.


Ph. But, I should think, they do not 2. The first Error.
hereby teach us the efficient cause; but the remote cause, which they call,
Sine qua non.


Py. You think as it is, and therefore I am not without reason offended, that
they did not feign or devise, a fifth humor for a Quintain, nor a d^midiated
humor for a Semitertian; nor one and an half for an Hepiala: nor a doubled
Choler for a double Tertian; nor a doubled Melancholy, for a double Quartan,
nor a wanding Erratick and uncertain humor, for an Erratical fever; nor
continual humors incessantly coming in the places of those which went before
them, for continual fevers, every day, other day, or third day, exaspera^ing;
neither have they thought of a lazy humor, for a slow fever. They should at
least have expounded, 3. Galen detected of error.
why a putrefying blood, if it must be changed into Choler, should be turned
all into a purulent matter. And why a mattery and purulent blood in Consumption
should not make a burning fever, and yellow expectorations, should not produce
a Tertian, but an Hectic and that presently after feeding. Wherefore this
Quaternity of humors, 4. Quaternity of humors why suspected.
in respect of so large a catalogue of fevers, and of other diseases hitherto
every day increasing, cannot but be suspected by every man [of judgment.]


Ph. You speak home, and to the point, but what say you to the seat of putred
feverish humors?


Py. I say that Galen was stupid in this, as in the rest, yea and so stupid;
that I should 5. A great perverse blindness of the Schools.
be ashamed to unmask his error to the world; unless the Schools had till
this day, so stubbornly persisted in upholding it to the destruction of
mortals; that they have herein showed themselves to worship more the respect
they bear unto antiquity; then that they owe to truth and verity; as if the
very fountain of wisdom, had been exhausted in Galens Cisterns. Who that he
might find the causes of trembling, by fits in fevers, wrore naught else but
tales, and ^ables: which as often as I call to mind, I admire ingeniously,
that so many wits since the time of Galen hitherto, could subscribe them.
Wherein I am indeed amazed, at the great sloth in men of their judgments, used
in the seekng after things, and of such as assent to false principles, least
the liberty they have of Disputing, against such as deny them, might be taken
from them. I will therefore no longer speak to Galen, but to the Schools.


Ph. What would you say unto them?


Py. I would they would declare unto me 6. Galen exploded about the place of
intermittents and many difficulties rising thence.
by what guide, what means, and what way, the putred humor comes every fit from
the shops of the humors to the extremities of the veins, which end in the
habit of the body, or in the flesh, and skin? For if it were putred before it
came unto the small, and last extremities of the veins, why should one of them
(for example Phlegm or Choler) be separated from its three other fellows, to
putrefie in banishment, so far from its own inhabitation? Or what foolish
separation is that, which should pull away an innocent humor from its compound,
to so absurd, and ^rivolous ends, and purposes? And why therefore does not the
same fever continue during life, seeing the same separator persisteth during
life? What Schoolmaster is he which admonishes this separator, to take up in
time, and to be wiser? At least, if the extremities of the veins do corrupt
that putred humor, the veins themselves shall be more corrupted, and so they
should fall into an inexcusable Gangren.


Ph. But what if there should some cause lie lu^king in the very extremities of
the veins, which calls that guiltless humor to its self, that it might putrefie
it near it self, where it is more subjected to the power thereof?


Py. That might be more compendiously done, in that blood which is near unto
it, over which it has greater dominion, and from whence it would be as free
for it to separate Phlegm, or Choler, as it is for a purging medicine to do it
commonly.


Ph. But what if it should have prepared the putred humor, out of the blood
that is nearest to it?


Py. Then should it in vain expect a fitting quantity of Choler for two days
together.


Ph. What if this humor should putrefie, before it arrive unto the veins
extremities?


Py. Then the Schools should contradict themselves, and the seats of
intermittent fevers, should not be in the habit of the body: but in the first
work houses of the humors.


Ph. But, what if the putred humor should be totally dispersed out of the
veins into the habit of the body, at one fit, till it be consumed?


Py. Then why should that separator, at least, or driver (since nothing is
moved of it self which is not vital) be less generous in the bowels, then he
which is placed in the extremities of the veins?


Ph. Nay further, to what mad end, should this passage of the putred humor, be
made from the mesenterie, by the Liver, and Heart to the extremity of the
veins?


Py. It is a passage full of danger, and it is to be feared least the whole
blood should presently, by the putredness, and deadly venom thereof, be
defiled through its frequent thorow-course. For either Galen tells us a large
lie; or humane Nature, does of her self medicate her own destruction. And by
this means, that necessity of Revulsion, which boast to be done by
bloodletting fails. Insomuch as by the proper power of intermittents, the
putr^d humor revelled, or pulled back, from the nest of its g^neration, at hours
appointed; (yea it of it self) runs, to the extremities of the veins:
unless peradventure, this Revu^sion may be thought dangerous, which must all
be made by the heart, and through the hollow vein, as well in intermittents, as
by bloud-lettings. Again, either all the feverish matter, is by particular
fits, drawn from the nest of its nativity; or not all. If all, there will be no
cause of return: if not all, why should not the new humor, which putrefies
against the coming, of particular future fits, rather move a feverish fit by
its putrefaction, then by its expulsion? In that the trouble and pain is
greater, while parulent matter is in making, then when it is made. In this case
why should not the seats of fevers, be rather in the place of putrefaction,
then in places by which it passes, while it is expelled? Nay why should
Choler, or Phlegm in the Bowels putrefie, when the Appetite returns, and
Thirst, and Watchsulness are absent, (suppose on the quiet days of
intermittent fevers) and the putrefaction thereof does not disturb the order of
affairs, in the workhouses of the humors? Why should Melancholy made upon
Monday putrefie into a tipe putrefaction in two days, and that which was made,
the day following putrefie in one day only, as much as the former did in two
days? If both shall make a joint fit of a Quartan upon Wednesday? Why should
not that which was made upon Monday, move its fit upon Wednesday, and that
which was made upon Tuesday, its fit on Thursday? And consequently, if any
where made upon Wednesday, move its fit upon Friday?


Ph. Here doubtless Physicians will wi^h a Spanish shrug, lift up their
shoulders bend their eyebrows, and accuse occul^ proprieties, when they are
constrained to make answer to things known unto the senses, by their credited,
and supposed madnesses.


Py. Yea and why at last in the shakings of a Tertian, will they have that to
be Gall which is vomited in the beginnings of fits; and say, that Nature moves
this way; if the course of Nature in the same time, does quire contrary
proceed, from the Center to the veins extremities?


Ph. Indeed Nature does not, in one an^ the same instant, move two opposite
mot^ons, inward, and outward, ^specially for the sake of one excrement which is
though: to be Gall.


Py. You say well. But why does not this vomiting, take away so much of the
outragiousness of the fit, as the ex^ulsion of that excrement was copious,
which they hold to be the very matter of the Tertian? But if there be vet any
remainder left of Choler after the fit, in its workhouses, why should it
rather putrefie new Choler, then those humors, which radically annexed to it?
How comes bitter vomiting thirst, and so great signs of hurts, to trouble the
stomach, while the dreggs, and filth of the mischief should have for the most
part, gone unto the ex^emi^^es of the veins to cause the sh^kings? But such as
have issues, perceive that within two days, that they have had their fevers,
there come forth but few, if any excrements: which doubtless should be many, if
so much feverish filth, should every fit pass to the ex^remities of the veins,
and habit of the body.


Ph. The Schoois take great joy in these causes of shakings so pleasantly
seigned, and so fondly credited.


Py. Let them; but why does Galen attend more unto the quantity of the humor,
then unto the dutiful obedience of it? Would no: Choler by reason of its heat
and fluxibility, be more ready to follow, or attend upon that which is
putrefactive, then Phlegm would be? But why does not Choler move a fit every
day, if the less half thereof suffice to make a Tertian? Considering that the
greatest half thereof is cast out by vomit? And to conclude, he should have
told us, how many ounces of putred humor should be requisite for every fit.
Whether six or seven 7. What quantity of Choler requisite to make a fit of a
Tertian after the Schools.
for twice, as much is often cast out by vomiting about the b^ginning of a
Tertian, and yet the fit is nothing less. Therefore if yet seven ounces are
gone unto the mouths or extremities of the veins, and twelve other ounces be
cast ou^ by vomit. There will then be nin^teen ounces requisi^e for the fit of
a Tertian. Whereof if you take about the one half, suppose it eight ounces of
Chole^ 8. It is refelled by Arithmetic.
made daily; and consequently about double as much Phlegm, there will be
seventeen ounces of it: and more four ounces at the least of Mel^ncholy daily,
and daily so much blood at least, as was of Phlegm, that is sevente^n ounces;
these being added will amount unto 46 ounces daily, in a Patien: sick of a
fever, though he be abstenious.


Ph. Fine fables, if a man could credit 9. Concluded out of the former
suppositions, that in a fever there cannot be a fullness two days together.
or believe them. I would gladly hear of that Musician, who out of these Pipes
would make an harmony. But what conclude you from hence?


Py. I conclude at least, that out of these supposed dreams of the Schools,
neither blood letting, nor purgatives, ought in fevers to be used, though such
a quantity of humors were bred in the Febricitants; seeing the same quantity is
consumed in an abstirent patient; because though appetire, dig^stion, and meat
be wanting; yet will this quantity of necessity be supplied out of the whole
mass of blood. Therefore emptying is not to be ordained in a Febricitant who
^ath been abstinent, two days together.


Ph. But for Gods sake: whence knew 10. Petitio Principii in Galinists.
Galen that there is so much Choler made in two days, as there is Phlegm made
in one day, and Melancholy in three days?


Py. You may well ask, especially seeing it concerns him, wh^^ Vesalius Prince
of 11. Galen ignorant of Anatomy, wrote many books of Anatomy out of others.
Anatomists, does in a hundred and six places, prove never to have anatomized,
or look^ into ^n humane body.


Ph. What if Galen wrote this without proof or trial?


Py. Then were not the Schools tied to sub^cribe unto his madness.


Ph. But what if he learned this, as being taught by fevers themselves?


Py. Then could he not assuredly bring, this same thing, to be the effect, and
cause, together of one thing. For it m^st of necessity have contained, an
absurd, and ^ond fallacy (called Petitio princip^i) to produce the same thing
to be cause and effect of it self.


Ph. Good Sir, suffer me to digest this passage a little better: supposing
[first] he saith] that a Te^^ian comes from putrefi^d Chole^ ^very other day:
and a Quartan from Melancholy putrefied, every third day: by reason that th^re
is so much Cho^^^ made in two days, as there is Melancholy made in three days.


Py. I hope you understand him thus far; now go on again, and tell me how he
proves the verity hereof.


Ph. He says that a Tertian every two days, and a Quarta^ every three days:
because so much Choler is made every other day; as there is of Melancholy in
three days.


Py. And are not these very miserable Theorems 12. Unhappy theorems of ^uring,
invented by the devil to the ruin of mankind.
of Cu^ing to be taught unto the flowr of youth; to be upon command obeyed by
patients, and to be till this time by the Schools adored?


Ph. It seems they are, but what ensues of them?


Py. Unfortunate curing of diseases daily 13. An argument against the^ taken
fro the vessels
follow them, to the d^struction of the Christian world, and salvation of
Souls. But at least if Choler should surmount M^lancholy two in six, and the
Spleen exceed six times the bag of Choler, if then that be ratified which the
Schools do teach, as well as Galen; that there is so much Gall or yellow
Chol^^r made every other day, as there is black Choler or Melancholy, made in
three days, and that the Spleen be the receptacle of Melancholy, and the Gall
bag receptacle 14. Yellow and black choler, not lodged in the spleen and
gall-bag.
of the Choler; either the Creator erred in his ends, making of those
receptacles of them, otherwise then Galen has appointed, or the Gall and
Spleen were not Butlers, or keepers, or containers of these tables of the
Schools of Physic.


Ph. Were all Physicians satisfied with these i^ventions of Galen about the
Circuits of servers?


Py. No, and therefore some of them ran for help to Astrology, by reason that a
fever 15. Against Astrologians, attributing the Circuits of fevers to the Stars.
made returns at hours appointed. But these are dashed against other dangers,
while fevers have at all ^ours their beginnings, and sometimes they come
slower, sometimes sooner, yea, and sometimes they sleep out their turns and are
silent. Whence it was not sufficiently ratified that humane nature was
constrained to obey the pleasure of Stars; nor that there was any Syngamie
between the Stars, and feverish matter.


Ph. It should seem then, these were trash, and vain tinglings, which credulous
ears did hearken to. But sought they any other ways to satisfy this qu^stion?


Py. They did; for some at last affirmed 16. Simili^udes taught in Schools
square not.
that they had satisfied it by similitudes, saying, that sev^rs are like other
seeds whereof some come forth soon, as Nasturtium, or Cr^sses; some much more
slowly, as Pa^sley.


Ph. Did this affi^mation please you?


Py. No, because that example is invalid, which resolves a qu^stion by a
question. For seeds which are more slowly resolved in moisture, in respect of
their gummy oyliness, sprout up more slowly: as other get up more readily,
which have a sl^miness, near^r unto the juice of the earth. Whereupon this
s^mili^ude no w^y concern^th levers; whose fits they will not have made, by ^n
easy, or a difficult resolution: but by a sparing, or a copious affluence of
putred humors. Otherwise 17. Some arguments against the doctrine of the Schools.
Phlegm, most alienate from putresaction, would scarce afflict every seventh
day, whereas Melancholy (which is deemed most like unto flesh, or to a carcass)
would in the mean time putrefie much sooner. But at least, during the doctrine
of the Schools, about the shakings and Circuits of severs, a Tertian must of
necessity be cured, by exhaustion of the matter in the fit; and by defect of
new Cholet, requisite for the next Paroxism; if the Patient shall abstain from
meat and drink, for two whole days together. But the consequent is false,
therefore the Galenical Thesis is false also.


Ph. But what if the Schools shall teach, and say, that then new Choler is
liquefied out of the Blood?


Py. This were to feign that Nature were more solicitous to maintain the fever,
then to preserve the life, and blood which is the treasury thereof. And to
conclude, this Chole separated, or brought out from the blood, if it be putred;
why is it not together with the Choler of the precedent fit, banished by the
veins, which was formerly detained, with the blood in the veins? Or whether
did this remaining putred Choler peradventure know, there should be a
contingent abstinence of two days, that it should forsooth reserve it self
against this defect, to continue the sever, which should otherwise perish
through the penury of Chol^r? Or, whether did Nature please her self in the
custody of a putred Choler? But if this Chol^r flowing out of the veins be not
putred, then Nature should be mad and surious, to dissolve the blood, that she
might have something for the continuation of the suture sever. But the
Galenical Schools confess it putred, and that a putred humor, is every fi^
powered out by the veins, and carried into the slender extremities of them: and
that, that is the cause of the trembling, of the fit, and of the exceeding cold
thereof: the putref^ction of which humor, while it is there more increased,
should presently after, be the cause of heat in such extremity.


Ph. How relished you this?


Py. I esteemed these, as dry stubble, unworthy tales, miserable old wives
fictions, and ignorances most pernicious to humane Nature.


Ph. But did not Fernelius first detect this ignorance of the Schools?


Py. He did so, and therefore Rondeletius, 18. The merit of Fer^elius.
and his fellow Galenists, inveighed against Fernelius, as a desertor of the
Schools, and an Apostata. But Fernelius was the first that smelt out the nest
of intermittents, to be about the stomach, and next Gut unto it called
Duodenum, and about the Pancreas also, which we call Sweetbread; as likewise
he established the seat of continual fevers about the heart: But he had not the
boldness to decline from the old way of curing fevers. He began indeed openly
to dispute against the precedent Schools, about the nest of fevers: but he
afterward hid himself amongst [his] abdita, and not able to shake off those
straw-made shackles of putred humors, he suffered both the knowledge, and the
essences of fevers also, to be taken from him.


Ph. But what says Paracelsu^ to this business?


Py. Paracelsus being terrified by the rigor 19. The rash^ness and inconstancy
of Paracelsus.
of fevers, persuading himself he had the knowledge of all fevers, sure
enough, tickled by his own invention of an allegorical Microcosme, defines a
fever to be a disease, made of Sulphur, and Nitre. And in another place that it
is the earth quake of the little world, ^^ if Sulphur and Nitre should be made
much colder then themselves, as b^ing drawn, out of the mud, or slime. (which
he calls Limus, or Limbus) of the Microcosm, which afterward should of their
own accords, be set on fire by the burning Etna. Now, as Galen in the search of
causes stumbled every where, and therein showed himself to be no Physician,
(whose name he says is, Iventor Occasionis:) so Paracelsus with a wondrous
liberty is fallen in [his] Microcosmi Par^emius, unworthy a Physician.


Ph. It would prove an hard law, to precipitate 20. Man no Microcosm, if we
obey the Scripture.
a man nakedly, to have a relation, or a reference to the Microcosm in the
miserable necessities of all diseases.


Py. I therefore rejoice with my self, that I bear the Image of the living God,
and not of the world.


Ph. It should seem then that this good man was deceived?


Py. Nothing more certain: In that he knew not, that fire burns no where,
unless 21. Paracelsus deceived
it be first kindled; neither knew he any flint in us, or steel, or any thing,
to strike them one against the other, in the point, or instant of the beating
of the flint, howsoever he dissemble the business; and indeed there was no
necessity of them, no nor of gunpowder to produce a feverish heat, unless we
were to be burnt up the first stroke, and torn in pieces. Therefore the matter
of actual Sulphur, and Saltpeter, are wanting in us. So is the connection of
them both together, neither is there actual fire within us. And in fine, there
wants a body which could tolerate this burning though it were but for a moment.
Wherefore the causes and originals of fevers in the Schools, are trifling songs,
and very fables.


THE FOURTH MEETING OF PHILIATRUS, AND PYROSOPHILVS; About the Examination of
Bloodletting in Fevers.
Ph. GOod Sir, let me hear your opinion of Bloodletting in fevers.


Py. You shall, but before I go on to further scopes, intentions, or purposes,
I should repeat, what I have elsewhere in a large Treatise demonstrated, viz.
That there are not two Cholers, and a Phlegm in Nature, as parts whereof the
blood consists.


Ph. No? That were worth the hearing.


Py. It were; and the rather, because in this place, where there is no mention
made of any but put^ed humors, those would of themselves be destroyed. In that
a putred 1. One reason against humors, the rest elsewhere.
animal, is no longer animal. But this discourse of fevers, requires a more
succinct brevity of me.


Ph. Use your pleasure.


Py. I will therefore only examine two gener^l helps in curing.


Ph. What are those?


Py. Bloodletting, and Purging.


Ph. These are as it were the two Pillars of Physic; if you should deal^
otherwise then well with them, the whole house would of its own accord fall
upon the heads of Physicians. For if these helps should be taken away,
Physicians must forsake their Patients, as not having other medicines then
such, as does diminish st^eng^h, and body. 2. Galen's universal pr^position for
Phleboto^y.



Py. These therefore I will touch upon in general. For by the consent of Galen,
bloodletting is required in every fever except an hectic.


Ph. What arguments bring you against the Schools, and the destructive custom
of these times, in this occasion?


Py. Such as follow, viz. Blood letting, 3. A Syllogism against him.
where there is no necessary indication thereof, that is, where there is no
proper use of it, is unprofitable. But in fevers there is no necessary
indication thereof: therefore bloodletting in fevers is unprofitable.


Ph. What if they deny your Major?


Py. I prove it thus, because the end is the first director of the causes, and
disposer of the means unto it self; wheresoever therefore the end shows not a
necessity of the means, those means not being requisite to that end, are
impertinently used. Especially where a contrary indication tells us; that we
cannot let blood without dejection of our strength or forces. Therefore these
means are foolishly appointed, which are by the end declared to be used in
vain, unprofitably, and with diminution of those forces.


Ph. How prove you your Minor?


Py. Horatius Augenius proves it by three books written to that purpose,
wherein he teaches by consent of the Academies, that only a Phlethora, or too
great fullness of the veins, that is, too great abundance of the blood, is
that which shows when bloodletting is to be used. No^ that directly for the
curing of fevers, but for the evacuation of that fullness: but there is never any
Phlethora in fevers. Therefore there is never any need of bloodletting in
fevers. And consequently i^ is altogether unprofitable.


Ph. I must confess the conclusion is new and paradoxical, and therefore it
should be proved many ways.


Py. Galen himself proves the Minor. Teaching that in every fit of fevers,
there is more Choler breathed out [or spent] then there is in two days
generated. In the mean time the other members cease not to be nourished by the
blood accustomed, that is; besides the consuming caused by the fever, they
likewise consume their shares of the blood as they were accus^omed, which I
have computed, by the humor avoided by vomit in the foregoing Dialogue.


Ph. But now again, may not the same computation with greater [permission]
connivency, be intimated, and ^e-inforced.


Py. It may, and therefore I say, that i^ 4. A Logistick proof.
in a sound body, there be eight ounces of blood made daily, of necessity there
must other eight ounces be daily spent in aliment; otherwise a man would
quickly grow (as they say) from a horse load to a Cart load. If therefore from
a sound man, there go daily eight ounces of blood; certainly a fever will not
consume less. Therefore where there is little or no appetite, to meat, as
little digestion, and no more sanguification, of necessity also that fullness
(which we spoke of) if there were any in the beginning, it will presently
within two days fail: and the indication will cease; for so much as concerns
the letting blood in that fever.


Ph. But how should we know that in fevers, there is presently no more of that
fullness?


Py. This is manifest to every one that ^. Fullness of good blood impossible.
has an Issue: because they are presently dried in fevers; neither do they
yield their wonted matter. But here is principally to be noted, how the forces
can never offend in their abundance; no not in Mathusalem. Neither does good
blood ever offend in being too much; in that the vital powers, and blood are
correlatives: because according to the Scripture, the soul, or vital strength,
is in the blood; and consequently therefore in good blood there can never be a
fullness. On the other side I have in the precedent Dialogue demonstrated; that
corrupt blood is never contained in the veins. Therefore if 6. Never any
corrupt blood in the veins.
at any time there should be any fullness of the veins possible, it should be
in a middle state of blood, between that is corrupt, and that which is very
sound. Whether we should consider that state, as of Decidency, and 7. No fulness
in a neuter stare of blood.
[Convalescency] for Neutrality comprehends both these states: or as it is
mixed of both those states, let Galenists at least remember that good comes of
an entire cause; but ill out of particular defects: and that therefore this
state is not called, Plethorical, or the state of fullness; but Cacochymical, or
of evil juyces. Neither does it require bloodletting; but Purgation rather,
which may 8. Bloodletting never indicated by the Theses of the Schools.
by election, or choice, bring out the evil, and leave the good behind it. And
therefore our of their Theses it is not hitherto proved, that blood letting, is
any way indicated or to be used.


Ph. How so I pray?


Py. Because according to the truth of the 9. What Cacochimie in the veins is
properly.
thing, I have already showed, that there is no Cacochymy in the veins, as
being only a disturb ^^^ of the blood, to the taking away whereof, there is no
drawing of the blood required; but only a taking away of the disturbing
affect. And so much the rather, because it is the pur^r blood, which passing by
the center of the heart, has obtained its purification: And therefore that
which is drawn out of the arm, and comes 10. Co-indications in place of a
proper indication and oppofite to contraindications, agree but fondly.
out first of all, will be the purer, and that which staves behind will be the
impurer.


Ph. Now seeing it appears there is no fullness in fevers, which may require the
blood letting, what follows?


Py. This follows; that the Schools having smelt so much; they h^ve in place
of an indication, substituted certain co-indications as counterpoising an
adjusted indication in Nature, and weighing down a contrary indic^tion, 11. A
Proposition of the Author against bloodletting in a fever.
which ought otherwise (being taken from the conservation of the forces) wholly
to obtain the prime place; in this respect alone; that every fever, is soon,
safely, and perfectly curable, without bloodletting. For in every
putrefaction, of so many sundry client humors, and in the fevers flowing 12.
The Schools defame their purgatives by their allowance of blood letting.
thence, they presently make use, only of the help of bloodletting: because
(as they say) it presently eases, and is stopped at pleasure.


Ph. But do they not by this distinction, in some sort discredit their
purgatives? For they say, though bloodletting seem to be required, for a
sulness, by its natural, and only indication; yea, and though it do not
prope^ly 13. The ends of Co-indications:
take away such humors as putrefied: yet it cools, and disburdeneth the veins;
it recreates the forces, or spirits; it takes away part of the evil humor, with
the good; and by derivation, and revulsion, it stops, and pacifies the flux of
humors, calling them another way from running to the nest of putrefaction;
whereupon Nature finding her self comforted, does what is else required, much
more happily and easily.


Ph. What said the Sow when she eat up the Penitential Psalms; These are good
words, but they do not satisfy the hung^r. I mean, these are Co-indications
whereby they persuade men to continue their afflictions. But in these I will
particularly give satisfaction.


Ph. And herein you will much oblige posterity.


Py. But before all, I would have you 14. A forewarning by the Author.
know. That though in a more strong, and full body there be no notable hurt
done, yea, and sometimes, such as are sick also, seem presently to be
bettered, and cured. Ye bloodletting, cannot but be dis-allowed,
considering, that such as have fevers, are mo^^ happily recovered without it.


Ph. Do we not see, that at the first, or iterated bloud-lettings; the violence
of fevers, is oftentimes remitted?


Py. It Is confessed. But how comes this to pass think you? Note: no otherwise
then thus. The Archeus, or spirit of Life, finding it self suddenly robbed of
its forces, and surprised by a disagreeing coolness, is stricken with so
manifest an horror, that it neglects the expulsion of the feverish matter, and
to do its duty. But those which seem to be ^^red by Phleboto^^y, they either
certainly relapse, or at least they come more slowly to their health, and when
they have obtained it, is not so firm as it was formerly.


Ph. The Turks and a great part of the world make this assertion good unto you,
which never heard of bloodletting, as being that, which is no where read, to
have been either instituted by God, in Nature; or that, it was approved by
him, or that he ever did so much as mention it. But now what say you further in
those Co-indications.


Py. Touching the first scope of Co-indication: 15. How blood letting cools.
which is called resrigeration, or cooling. I say bloodletting does no
otherwise cool, then as it steals away part of the vital heat. Not that it has
any positive power of cooling; and therefore at the least, in this respect,
this kind of cooling must be hu^^full. I pray you tell me; why do they not let
blood in an Hectic fever, vulgarly called a Consumption? Does not a fever want
cooling? Or does a Hectic cease to be a fever?


Ph. No, for in those who are fick of Hecticks, there is a want of blood.


Py. Therefore I said, that where there is ^ detect, or want of blood, and
strength, the hurts of bloodletting are casi^y taken notice of; which do
otherwise in such as are of stronger forces, lie more concealed. And of this I
could bring you lamentable presidents.


Ph. Good Sir, were it not too tedious or troublesom^, I should entreat you to
recount me one of them.


Py. I will; In the year 1641. on the 16. A lamentable history of the Infant
Cardinal.
^ighth of November, there was a diss^ction made of the body of Prince
Ferdinando, brother to the King of Spain, and Cardinal of Toledo. Who lying
sick of a Tertian fever, the space of 89 days died at the age of 32 years.
This noble Prince having his Heart, Lung^, and Liver taken out, and by that
means his Veins, and Arteries dissected, there hardly came from them one
spoonful of blood into the hollow capacity of his breast: his Liver showed no
blood within it; his heart was limber like an empty purse; yet two days before
his death he would have eaten more, had he been permitted. For though he was so
^xhausted by blood letting, purgations, and by Leeches, as I told you; yet the
Tertian desisted not to keep its fits accustomed.


Ph. What p^ofit found he t^en, by this loss of blood? Or how did these
evacuations 17. A note against Physicians greedy of blood to be most seriously
regarded.
cool him?


Py. Nothing at all they showed this kind of c^ring vain, and fruitless, which
took not away one tittle of the fever.


Ph. Is this then that method of cuuring which makes that Physi^an whom the
most H^gh created, and commanded to be hon^ured 18. A gui^ty mind a thousand
witnesses.
for the nec^ssity which is of him? If it knows not how to cure a Tettian in a
young man, whereto serv^s this kind of method? Is this that Art whereof the
infirm have need, and not the healthy?


Py. I would to God this good Prince had never made use of it, who when he
returned from Cortrick and was saluted by the Senate of Bruxels, at his
recovery from the agony of death, (which fell upon him, by the loss of so much
blood, and forces) walked strongly up and down in his Chamber. Wherefore let
Physicians be wary, how they expose their severish Patients to the occurse of
coolers (I mean such as they should presently, and largely find the virtue of,
by a manifest token;) that they trust not [too] much unto their rules of
heaters, and of coolers. For seeing it is now apparent, that all the heat in a
sever, is of the spirit of life it self: it follows that the coolings by
bloodletting, is a mere exhausting and impoverishing of that Spirit and the
blood together. For if a sever should be cured as a distemper; by
bloodletting, as a cooling remedy; (alas the contrary appears by the
exhausting of all the blood, out of this Prince, Infant of Spain. In whom yet
three days before his 19. An argument taken from thence.
death, the Tertian sever, notwithstanding so much cooling, kept its courses.
Or if they by cold alone intend the curing, others should also in a Quo^idian
(which they pretend, out of a pu^red Phlegm to be enflamed) find that this
cooling would at least, with much more easiness be obtained, by exposing their
Patien^s half naked to the No^th, and Western Winds, or by ha^ging them in
wa^^r, or in some deep W^^l, ^ill they should confess they were suff^cien^ly
cooled, for so, they should presently, and ^bundantly do their cure. i^ a
guilty inward, ignor^nce did not condemn their fev^^^sh essence of h^at.


Ph. It should ^^em ^hen that a sever is not a n^ked d^ftemper of heat?


Py. No, it is not, but there is an occasional 20. The Essential seat of Fevers.
offending matter, for whose expulsion the Archeus does by accident inflame it
self, being as it were displeased with i^. Which so long as it is neglected by
the Schools, the cures of fevers will be pr^posterous, pernicious, and
conjectural; and by that m^ans, no man shall owe any thanksgiving to the
Phys^ian, because of their own accord, through the goodness of Nature they are
cured, and I wish they were not put back 21. An explanation of the precedent
Argument concerning cooling, and the Sch^^^s evasi^^^.
and hindered by Physi^^^ns.


Ph. But to this Argum^nt of curing, by sod^in cooling, I should think the
Schools should make some answer.


Py. They do in saying it is dangerous to pass from one extre^m unto another.
By which excuse of their ignorance, they stop the mouths of the people, as if
they had said, something worthy to be credited; not taking notice that they
contradict themselves therein, while they commend bloodletting, and prefer it
before laxatives for this cause especially, that presently and abundantly, it
yields relief by cooling, and therefore they have entitled it, the speedy, and
universal remedy; tying their impotency, founded upon ignorance, to the
arbitrament of an Axiom ill understood, and wo^se applied. For who doubts but a
man may presently cut the h^lter 22. Not to go from one extreme unto another,
ill drawn fro the Mathematiks and applied in Physic.
of one that is hanged, that he may presently enjoy the air, whereof he is
deprived? Who doubts but we may presently lay a drowned man shelving downwards
upon his belly; that he may cast the water off of his Lungs: it is lawful also
to draw one that is saln into a River, presently to the Banks side thereof, and
presently to fr^e a wound that is indispos^d, and close it with a Cicatrice. For
so many wounds are in one day healed: because the solution of union, wants
nothing more, but its re-unition. So is it lawful to put a broken, or
displaced bone presently into its place again. So may we likewise in a fit of
Falling Sickness, in a fit of Fainting, in the Cramp or Convulsions, recall the
infirm as soon as may be, and presently dissolve and call away detained
excrements. For we must conjecturally think that Nature delights in her own
destruction, or that out of the state of health she presently suffers death to
enter, and will refuse a remedy, which speedily repels diseases. Otherwise she
should not do, that which in things possible, is far the best, neither should
she desire to be, or be conserved. In the Mathematics it is thought
impossible, to pass from one extreme unto another, without a Medium: and this
Medium peremptorily, and utterly denies the coming of any thing between it
and those extremes, which if we shall allow with some Latitude in things
natural, yet we may be thought to have done speedily, sufficiently, and very
well. And therefore we ought not to wrest that of the Mathematics unto
curings. I confess indeed we should not by a Paracenthisis, draw out all the
water, of an hyd^opical body, at once together: nor should we take away all the
pu^ulent matter, of a great Aposthume, not bring one that is congealed with
cold, into a warm Stove presently: nor yet nourish one that is almost starved
too too speedily. But yet, a slow, and necessary pace, as such, or a progress
by degrees, from one extreme unto another, does not hinder, or restrain this
Mediocrity, or Medium, as if Nature were averse from speedy curing; for this,
to her is an ordinary, allied, innate, and intimately proper indication. But
these are forbidden, because the loss of strength, or spirit thereupon
depending, would not endure these so speedy motions. Therefore the Schools do
23. A falacie in curing.
by a fallacy tie up their Patients from a sudden remedy, which they have not:
that they may hide their ignorance from the vulgar, by some Axiom ^ll directed.


Ph. I should think that so often as a cure may be had without loss of strength
(for the strength must ever have the primacy in indications) the sooner it is
done, the greater is the Jubilee which Nature gains.


Py. You think aright, and I have observed as much in fevers, to my great
content and admiration. To our purpose therefore, if it be so, that a fever be
merely a preternatural 24. The Argument out of the Thesis of the Schools is
opposed.
heat, and that every cure is to be accomplished, by striving contraries;
therefore it requires a preternatural cooling; that contraries may be placed
under one, and the same kind or Genus. That is every fever should be
necessarily cured, by a more then ordinary coldness of the Ambient, and the
rather, because the Ambient coldness, gathers forces, and does not dissipate
them. But the consequent is false, and therefore the an^ecedent also.


Ph. It should seem then, that the Schools intend not the cooling of the heat
by bloodletting: but primarily, the taking away of blood, and mitigation of
accidents, which wait upon the dejected forces: or, they primarily intend, a
diminution both of blood and forces.

This is that which they term a more free 25. Deceit of the Schools out of a
perverse ignorance
respiration of the Arteries, though with much deceitfulness. But I always
make greatest esteem of that indication, which concerns the conservation of
those forces, and is quite opposite to all emptying of veins, how and
whatsoever; because the forces being diminished, 26. Strength has chiefest
place in indications.
and cast upon their backs, the disease cannot be chased away; neither is there
any thing further to be done by the Physician. Therefore Hippocrates concludes,
that the natures themselves, are the curers of diseases; because the indication
which is taken from the conservation of the forces, is that which governs the
whole scope of curing. As reason therefore counsels us, to keep our strength,
and forces: so also she would have us keep our blood, because the one includes
the other, as the blood the forces.


Ph. But Hippocrates in an Athlatical fullness, commands us to let blood
presently, together, and in quantity.


Py. You say true; and that is it which 27. Hippocrates de Athletis, alleged
but not understood.
the Schools proclaim in every place; but this is ridiculously alleged, for
cures of fevers, and diseases. For he commanded it not, out of fear of the
fullness, though their veins did sufficiently abound with blood: but only that
their vessels so filled, might not by the exercising of their strength be
broken, or overstrained: otherwise, what have Wrestlers which are found, to do
with cures belonging unto fevers? For the feverish have no fear of fullness; nor
that their veins should be broken with exercise. It is further to be 28.
Differences of emptyings.
noted, that the letting of blood is of this condition; that if it be done
after the accompanying of women, it makes such an exhaustion of the strength as
is irreparable; because it takes from the inbred spirit of the heart. And to
this exhaustion [of that spirit] by bloodletting, is a very near neighbor;
because it does readily and at once rob the influous Archeus. But a disease,
though it directly also oppugn the forces; yet because it does it not, at
once, and together, but by little 29. A fever hurts less then the opening of
the veins.
and little, therefore it rather shakes, and wearies the forces, then that it
does exhaust them really. Therefore the restoration of the forces, impaired by
diseases, is made more easily, then of those, which are exhausted by blood
letting.


Ph. I should think so too, but what is your reason for it?


Py. My reason is, that such as are weakened by blood letting, are for the most
part deprived of the benefit of a Crisis. And if they do recover, it is but
slowly and that with many perplexities in their getting up again, after many
days indurance, and not without danger of relapses. But such as lie sick of a
disease wherein blood letting has not been used, come presently to their
wonted strength again, and are restored easily. But if by being destitute of
remedies, they sometimes come unto the extremity; yet Nature endeavors a
Crisis, and relievs them; because their forces (though shaken much by the
infirmity) yet they are not perished, as being not exhausted by their blood
letting, which they so speedily and abundantly.


Ph. 30. The obligation of Physicians.
Hence may be gathered that the Physicians, are out of Conscience, and in
Charity bound to cure, not by sudden wasting of the forces; nor by dangers
consequently following it: nor yet by a necessary shortning of the li^e, for
according to the Psalm: Spiritus meus attenuabitny (ergo) dies mei
abreviabuntur.


Py. It Is well gathered: And since (according to the Scripture likewise) the
life glideth in the blood; however this be taken aw^y largely together, it
cannot be done without prejudice of the life also. For the 31. The general
intention in fevers, and blood letting opposed thereunto.
perpe^ual intention in Nature, in the cure of fevers, is to do it by
sweatings; and therefore also the fits of fevers, do for the most part end by
sweatings.


Ph. But you think that blood letting is diametrically imposed to this
intention.


Py. I do so, for this draws the blood inwards, to fill again the vessels,
which are emptyed thereof: But the motion of Nature requisite ^o the cure of
fevers, proceeds from the center, and goes outward; from the noble parts, and
bowels, unto the skin.


Ph. Yet once more I beseech you; how should blood letting necessarily weaken?
Se^ing such as are strong, and ^ull or Plethorick seem to find the contrary by
experience, and to justify it?


Py. If the sacred Text be not of power enough, which warns us of the
inhabitation of the life within the blood: it will at least be made manifest,
if you offend by a more liberal emission thereof. For, presently the Spirits,
and the Patient are dejected. If 32. The Mathematiks prove bloodletting alwais
hurtful.
therefore (in the Mathematics) six do hurt notably: Three cannot choose but
hurt, though not so sensibly. Now, for him to hurt Nature, which should cure
her, and restore her, is not permitted. If Nature must be her own Physician;
and that she is by so much the happier, by how much the stronger, let it
suffice the Physician, that the Patient falls otherwise into an excusable
weakness, through the disease, fastings, wants of appetite, unquiet restings,
pains, anxieties, watchings, sweats, and the like; and let not him who is
called as a faithful helper, add weakness unto weaknesses.


Ph. But is this blood letting [so much cried up; and so much used;] so
fraudulent a rem^dy as you seem to make it?


Py. It is so fraudulent, and so uncertain, that no Physician has hitherto had
the boldness to promise any future cure by it.


Ph. I, but every Artificer does what he promises; the Stone-cutter makes
Statues, the Shoo-maker makes shoes, and that undoubtedtedly; 33. The
incertainty of Physicians argues a defect of their principles.
why should the Physician only want the daring, to uphold what his Art
promises?


Py. Because he builds upon foundations which are uncertain, and therefore he
is by accident alone, and fraudulently profitable. For which way soever the
business be turned, it is a thing that is full of ignorance, to go about to
cure, by a procured weakness, viz. by a sudden emptying, or effusion of the
blood, made at once in quantity together, Nature is for the most part, so
danted, that she neglects the expulsion of her enemy. Which expulsion I have
notwithstanding demonstrated to contain the whole Scene, or Stage of Fevers,
and of Nature.


Ph. But besides this, is it not confessed, that the matter of the Fever
consists not in the vein above the heart?


Py. It is so, but what of that?


Ph. It follows then, that blood letting 34. Blood letting cannot diminish the
cause of fevers.
draws not by any means the occasional matter, or that it effectively cures,
by any direct intention of curing; if I be not deceived.


Py. You are not deceived, therefore let us go on.


Ph. To conclude then, what say you of 35. An Argument drawn a sufficient
enumeratione.
the blood that is let, for the more perspiration of the Arteries?


Py. That is (at the least) in the beginnings, and increase of fevers,
fruitless; when the heat is not yet in its full strength. And seeing that
neither in the state, or height thereof, a vein is to be opened, nor yet in the
declination; when is it good then to let blood?


Ph. Never; but how prove you that it is good to let blood, in the state or
height of a fever?


Py. Because it hinders the Crisis, when Nature (as they write) strugleth,
especially being hindered, and being for the most part conqueress, she may then
least of all tolerate, the loss of forces, or be called from the duel. Now if
in the height, or state Nature be conquered, what will blood letting then b^e?


Ph. A mere Manslaughter.


Py. Right, but if it be not convenient to open a vein in the state of fevers,
whilst the greatest heat, and Anxiety, or difficulty is extant; and the
greatest respiration of the Arteries is required: it will be certainly much
less convenient in the beginnings, and increases of them. Especially
considering, that the fear of a fullness goes presently away in the first days
of those fevers. And by that means the perspiration of the Arteries will be
easy enough.


Ph. What say you to infirmities in their declinations?


Py. I say it is clear, and manifest, and commonly testified, by the votes, and
voices of all men, that then they neither require nor tolerate any blood
letting.


Ph. Let us yet further consider in fevers, 36. Another from the quality of the
blood.
the blood within the veins, what say you thereof?


Py. I say it is either good, bad, or neither; if it be good, it will be good,
to keep what is good, because it adds to the forces. For (as I elsewhere show)
the fear of fullness did even from the beginning cease if there were any.


Ph. But they say, they let good blood to cool it, and breath out the
pu^refaction.


Py. That Is needless. [That is, there is neither heat nor pu^refaction in it,
as is proved] for both are taken away already, and that imaginary good (which
they suppose comes by it) brings a real, and a necessary loss of forces.


Ph. But they teach further, that bloodletting in a fever, is not commanded
for the goodness of the blood, since they suppose it to be both ill and pu^red.


Py. But I have sufficiently taught, that during life, there is no blood in the
veins corrupted, and consequently that the scope of the Schools in letting
blood is ruined. They must show me therefore, what other malice 37. Whereto the
Schools are constrained.
is in the blood besides its corruption. They must also show me, or demonstrate
to me, that this bad blood is detained, in the vein, from the heart to the
hand, if they will have their bloodletting be ratified as such, or as a
Revulsion. They must I say teach us, that this ill blood, is not in the first
Shops, or Offices thereof, and that it being drawn out, by the vein of the arm,
there be not worse blood drawn unto the heart, in that place the hollow vein,
makes the hearts right ventricles. Let them in like manner instruct us, that
the upper veins being emptied, there is not a greater liberty, and impunity,
whereby things feverish, and hurtful may approach unto the heart, then
formerly. So that instead of breathing out of the purrefaction, (which I have
proved to be truly nothing) there be not rather a free access of putted breath
unto the heart occasioned. For whether does the vacuity of the emptied veins
draw the blood downward? Let them show me I say, by what reason, the pouring
out of the blood, and the diminution of the forces by the arm, should hinder
the putrefaction, or should import a correction, or renewing of what is putred.
In like manner, let them express themselves, what they mean when they say, that
blood should be let, or drawn, that the Arteries may breath more freely;
considering that putrefaction, (if there were any such thing possibly to be
found within the veins) affects not the arterial blood, which is the Steward
of our whole Nature. Let them moreover prove, that the good blood being
diminished, and the forces also spent proportionably, there is greater power in
that which is remaining impure and tainted by pu^refaction (as they suppose) of
preserving it self from an imminent purrefaction. Again, let them teach against
the Holy Text, that the life, and soul, are rather, and more willingly in the
defiled residue of blood, then in the puter taken away by bloodletting.
Otherwise regularly the drawing out of the good includes an increased
proportion, and an unbridled liberty of the bad remaining.


Ph. But what if at last the blood in the fever, and veins be bad, and they say
'^is good (as a sign and effect) that in the letting of the blood, the bad
comes out, and that they think, that so much at least of the bad is taken away?


Py. First let them prove that blood which they suppose hurtful, to be truly
hurtful, as I have formerly proved it guiltless. And then let them teach, that
by the hasty, and full emission of this bad blood there is no prejudice brought
upon the forces, and that in the residue of the defiled blood, (the forces
being now decreased) the taking away of the blood will be cause, why the
corruption of that which remains, is of less power to go forward? And whether
they hope at any time, that in the blood, howsoever once infected (viz. by this
privation) a regress may be given in Nature [to perfection.] For let them show
that, it contradicts not, that it is proper to a fever to pollute the blood,
and 38. A vain hope in the changes of blood drawn by Phlebotomy.
that this property is taken away a posteriori, viz. by removing what is
purrefied? For if first the impurer blood be drawn out of the veins, and they
again open the vein, and in the mean time, deject, and trouble or disturb the
forces, and by this means take away the hope of a Crisis; what if it then come
out more red then formerly?


Ph. They will then certainly cry out, as if all the quantity of the bad, had
been taken away by the first effusion; and that the seat of the fever was
extended from the heart, un^ the arm only: and that the good, had its
residence about the Liver.


Py. But in a Dropsy I have noted that the evacuations of the last excrements
were always to be feared, and much more therefore in the naked drawing out of
blood which leads away the vital spirits from the heart in a direct course,
through the wound; whether it be deemed bad, or good, or neuter.


Ph. You have first proved that they offend in a fallacy, as well as in those
things which are supposed, of a Synachae, or burning Petitione principii.
fever, both purred; as of those which are conceived of the emission of a
purred blood. Now therefore to our purpose, what think you of the helps, are
gotten in lieu of the forces which are taken from us.


Py. I always found them full of deceit: that for so little a help, the
strength should be infeebled by bearing the burden of diseases: for it is as
drink in ^he beginning of a fever; which seems for a while to give a
refreshing: but is any man so mad as to drink, if he knew that drink did rob
him of his forces?


Ph. You conclude then, that the help of cooling by bloodletting is trustless,
fraudulent, and momentary. But now, what say you of that neuter blood, which is
nor good, nor bad in letting?


Py. Of this it is best to say nothing, in that, what is denied in dis
junction; may be denied also in copulation. For if that be neuter which
consists, of a commixture of good with bad, (supposing that bad which is not.)
Or that whereinto a neutral alteration is introduced; what is formerly said may
satisfy the event in either of them.


Ph. Have you not yet done with Co-indications?


Py. I shall at length, when I have cut off the hope which is in revulsion: and
so I shall equally take away all co-indications, as the poor, and miserable
sculking-holes of perverseness. It is a mad remedy to let blood, (for 39.
Co-indication of Phlebotomy in fevers, and Menstrue, for Revulsion a vanity.
to this end they draw a great quantity) whether it be in fevers, or in the
menstrues, for revulsion; in that the feverish matter swims not in the blood,
or floateth up and down the veins, but sticks within unto the vessel; as I
shall tell you in its own place, when I speak of the occasional matter. And for
the Menstrue likewise: in that the separation thereof, is made out of the whole,
and not without the separating hand of the Archeus. But Phlebotomy separates
nothing of things separable: because it works without a foreknowledge of the
end, and therefore without election. But the nearest always runs out first, and
as soon as the vessel is open, away goes the innocent blood, which because,
after by a continued thread, others follow, for fear of vacuum: therefore the
Menstrues, about the womb, or Mother, collected there by the industry of
Nature, and of set purpose; are drawn from thence by blood letting, and retire
back again into ^^e whole: what though Phlebotomy may sometime in a full, and
well complexioned woman find success; yet certainly in many others it has
given a most miserable catastrophe.


Ph. But what if the menstrous blood should offend only in quantity, while it
is now gathered together, and set apart in the veins about the Mother?


Py. In this case supposed, I shall willingly admit an individual indication of
Phlebotomy. But if Menstrue, flow in a womb that is well conditioned, it will
abundantly satisfy, and do its own business, And in this case revulsion is
useless; though the Hypothesis suppose an impossibility. For Phlebotomy is
nothing, but a mere and indistinct pouring out, or ensptying of the blood. But
the emptied veins, presently recall unto themselves what blood soever, and
whence soever: for as they are the greedy receptacles of the blood; so they are
impatient of emptiness, And therefore the menstrue (being destined to it is
departing: that is, already once written, 40. Derivation in topical diseases
sometimes profitable But impertinent in fevers.
or inrold by Nature, in the catalogue of Excrements) is drawn [or sucked] by
the empty veins. But derivation because it is a sparing letting of the blood;
so it be done out of fitting veins, was wont often to be profitable in many
topical diseases, but in fevers '^is impertinent.


Ph. But they insist upon this, that bloodletting 41. Blood lettin hurtful in
Pleurisies.
in a Pleurisy, is so necessary, that it is enjoined upon pain of death [to be
made use of.] For they say that unless this blood, which has recourse unto the
ribs, be called back by much effusion thereof, it is to be feared that the
Pleurisy, will presently kill the man by s^ff^cating of him.


Py. But I never let any man blood, that is sick of a Pleurisy; and this kind
of curing is safe, certain, solid and commodious. None fail that run this
course, whereas by Phlebotomy; many of them perish through a slow Consumption,
and they are subject every year unto relapses.


Ph. Indeed according unto Galen, whosoever is not perfectly cured within 40
d^yes falls into a Consumption.


Py. But I cure perfectly this disease, neither are my Patients sensible of
those relapses. But I keep my secret to my self herein. Yet I have seen a
Country-fellow cure all 42. The Schools may learn from Rusticks that their
Axioms are false.
Pleurisies in three times giving a Potion. He used Horsdung, which being
d^ssolved in Beer he strained it well and gave it. Such is the ignorance of
Physicians; and such the pertinacity of the Schools, that God give^ knowledge
unto Clowns, and little ones; which is denied to such as are pufe up with
Ethnic learning.


Ph. But now Sir let us see whether there be any use of Revulsion [of the
bloud] in fevers.


Py. With all my heart, for the work of 43. Revulsion a rule in fevers.
revulsion is primarily nothing else but a bloodletting, or vein-cutting,
whereto by accident it is hoped that the following blood should come, and by
benefit thereof, that it will not flow unto the part affected.


Ph. What may be grounded on this Thesis?


Py. That, by this kind of evacuation, the offending feverish blood (I speak
this winking) dispersed in the veins, which otherwise hiding it self in its own
nest, far from the heart, would not so fiercely communicate the ferment, or
Leven of its mischief. Which is as much as to say, by this Revulsion it will
come to pass, that the peccant humor would be drawn from an ignoble part to one
more noble: In that the more c^ude and feculent blood, is in the M^saraick
veins: but that is better purefied, which comes nearer the heart. Otherwise
Nature had been indiscreet to place the main murdering weapons or instruments
of pa^^icide so near the fountain of life. Seeing therefore the feverish matter
flows, or floats not in the veins, nor has its mansion near the heart: God
forbid we should believe, that it is stirr^d, or moved from place to place, by
vein-cuttings, or blood lettings, howsoever otherwise, by re-iterated
Phlebotomy, blood may be drawn out from thence of diverse colors.


Ph. If then another blood come from remote parts, to the place whereout the
blood must issue, I should think that this may prove a dreadful remedy.


Py. You think as it is, for by that means the mischief of one particular
place, should be communicated to the whole, and so unto the parts more noble,
and there is an easy mingling, and defiling, in, or between such things as
symbolize, partake, or communicate each with other.


Ph. Now growing to the end of our discourse: what if our Modern men should
cast away these Ethnic errors, and look more carefully into the lives of their
neighbors, should they know any thing the more hereby?


Py. In this place they would know that 44. What is by Physicians to be learned
out of this Dialogue.
the Comments of Revulsions are frivolous; that the loss of the treasury both
of blood, and forces is pernicious; also that no hurt results from the blood in
the veins; but only from the enmity of strange, and foreign excrements: As
also that God has ordained sufficient store of emunctories for any sort of
filth that is within us: And that we need not tear the veins to get the victory
of fevers.


THE FIFTH MEETING OF PHILIATRUS, AND PYROSOPHILVS; About the Examination of
Purging in Fevers.
Ph. YOu spoke in your former discourse of two remedies, which you were to
examine; Blood letting, 1. The first confession of the Schools about their
p^rging Medicines.
and Purging, the first is ended, now to Purging.


Py. The Schools acknowledge that their Putgatives, from the highest, down as
far as Agarick want correction, because they injure Nature. And I would those
corrections were not weak and unadvised; but serving rather to beget an
innocence of the Medicine, then to the Gelding, or taking away the strength
thereof.


Ph. Why wish you this?


Py. Because gelding the strength of Medicines 2. Deceit of Correctives.
carries a deceit along with it; as done by reason that the sick, might not
understand that there is a venom under it. Likewise the hemlocked
Shop-remedies, are like tame Wolves, who while they are trusted, turn upon
occasion given, to their accustomed wild and Wolvish nature. By this means they
dare not call corrected Medicines by their proper Etymology: but they hide
Scammony under the veil of Diagridium. And they besmire Colloquintida, with the
paint of Alahaendal. And then the compounded Purgatives in Dispensatories,
fight under a false title of ringleader. In the mean time they cannot 3.
Another confession
deny, but Scammony, and Colloquintida, are the two Pillars whereon, the whole
edifice of Purging leans; which being broken down, what ever was built upon
them falls to ruin. And then the gentler Purges, as Manna, Cassi^, Sena,
Rheubarb, etc. have rendered, or given over to those two anti-signant Leaders,
or Conductors. They confess 4. A third confession
fur^ther, that a Purgative once given is no longer in the power of the
Physician. And by this means they defame Purgatives, and give the precedens to
Phlebotomy.


Ph. But what if a laxative work more cruelly then it ought to do?


Py. Then do they blame either the dose 5. Foul excuses.
thereof, or the correction, or the fluid Nature or looseness of the Patient,
or the Apothecary, or at least his Wife, before the Purgative should lose its
credit. Yet in the mean 6. The 4th. Confession.
season, whether they will or no they do confess, that all Solutives contain a
poison in them, only they have excepted innocent Aloe, by a proverb: Sola Aloe
innocua. But the r^st must be exhibited with additament correction, and
circumspection; and that neither too soon, nor yet too late [but in the proper
time of giving.]


Ph. Why? are there any Presidents of their mischief otherwise?


Py. ^^e tell you one. A jud^cious man, and 7. A frequent history.
Secretary to the Senate of Brabant, for cons^^vation of his health, took a
usual Pill of washed Aloe (viz. gelded) and not finding the accustomed effect
thereof; as the Physician passed he told him of it. He presently blamed the
slowness of the Aloe; and told him he would prescribe Maial Pills for him,
which b^ing taken, he perished miserably. Because the whole Weeks labor after
was spent in vain, to pacify the unbridled effect of that purging medicine.
For he to free himself of a future infirmity, by the deceit of his Physician
died, leaving eleven children fatherless. Whence it prima^ily appears
plainly, that it is as free for a purgative to show its raging f^ry on a sound
man, as a sick one. For its lawful under the name of a Physician, and fraud of
a medicine, to run headlong unpunished, even upon the lives of Princes. Because
the earth covers the cruel illiterature of the curers.


Ph. Purgation, or Depuration (I must 8. Deceit in the ^^me.
confess) are fair, and spetious titles, but full of falsehood: and wish the
Purgatory of Pnysitians might expiate their diseases: In this case I wish it
were not so, that Patients should expect their purgatory from the hands of
Physicians!


Py. Well let us forward. It is a thing to 9. What it is to give Medcines
laxative, when the humors abound or swell, and how full of deceit.
be much grieved at, that they say a purgative being given before the decoction
of a disease, the same humors should be drawn away, which should be drawn
away, after the said decoction. (For they will have purgatives to draw away one
humor by election, and not another) and that yet the purging is unprofitable,
yea and hurtful. And that notwithstanding they do not learn from thence, that
humors drawn away by Laxatives, are not humors nor offending: (for otherwise
both the stations of the disease, and one purgative being supposed, they should
necessarily help ^qually, if they drew from the same ^ffending matter) but by
the poison of the laxatives, they draw only a mere putredness, and consuming
moisture. And this enemy is so much the more unfortunately received into the
body, that should exercise this ravenous inward teating both in the flesh and
blood [together.] I shall tell 10. An history of the penitency.
you a true story of mine own penitency, and the beginnings of my science in
Physic. Being about 15 years of age, having put on the Glove of a young
Gentlewoman, infected with a dry scab, first I got that disease in one hand,
then in the other, which became very foul with Wheales, or Pustules, and with
purulent matter.


Ph. What remedy used you for this disease?


Py. The elder Physicians of our Town were called, who gave command; first that
I should be let blood to cool my Liver, then they prepared a yellow adust
Choler, and salt Phlegm for evacuation by a three days Apozem; and at last by
pills of Fu^^ote^^e they appointed to purge those former humors, and they
brought forth many stool^s, and matter in abundance. I rejoiced that I had
avoided so much filthy stuff. Therefore they gave further order, I should take
the same purgation again, the third day after: and in like manner, the some
again within other three days after it; and these two latter purgations, had
the same success that the first h^d: and in my judgment, if all the excrements
had been joined together, they had well near filled two pretty pails full, with
that filthy stinking matter, which I thought had been humors.


Ph. What effect had this purgation in you?


Py. Bad. For I that was sound, ^heerfull, and full of strength, light in
dancing, leaping, and running: was now reduced to be lean, my knees trembled,
my cheeks fell, and my voice was hoarse.


Ph. What thought you then?


Py. I concluded, that these humors were 11. A Conclusion drawn from thence.
not formerly within me: but were made in me. And I knew certainly, this putred
liquor, was made by the laxative which I had taken: and that it would have made
the same as ost as I had taken it: And in the mean time I was notwithstanding
full as scabby as I was formerly.


Ph. What gathered you from thence?


Py. First, I knew that the scab, was a 12. 9 Things of note destructive to
Physicians.
cont^gion of the skin, and not a distemper of the Liver. S^condly, that the
sault that was put upon these humors in the scab was false: as being gotten
only by the touch of the Glove. Thirdly, that purging medicines, did not
purge, and cleanse but putrefie. Fourthly, that they liqu^fied the substance of
my body, and resolved it into a putred matter. Fif^hly, that they indifferently
d^filed whatso^ver by any means they touched, whether it were blood, or the
flesh it sel^, which was then living: and that they did not draw and separate
by election one rather then another. Sixthly, that the thing defiled, denoted,
that the d^filer th^reof was mere poison liquesying, and pu^resying of the
body. S^v^n^hly, that, that which was contaminated flowed out by Nature's
expelling it, till the force of the purging medicine was inseebled. Eighthly,
that this would come to pass as well in sound men, as in sick. Ninthly, and
that therefore a solutive purgation was dangerous, before such time as Nature
had gotten the victory in diseases, but afterward the hurts thereof, would not
appear so manifest.


Ph. After so many worthy observations, what determination had you?


Py. When I had seriously pondered these things within my self, I forsook
Galen, who is so wholly employed, and entangled in and about those humors, that
he affirms that all disea^es come from thence. But considering that I wanted
better things, to substitute in place of humors, and of laxatives, with
admiration, and comp^ssi^n of m^nkinde, I determined at last to r^spite my
study of Physic, till the Highest out of his good pleasure, should (after
consuming much money, and many years) vouchsa^e to give me (who was seeking)
understanding: which I pray God the world may apply beneficially to it self out
of my works, and endeavors?


Ph. How were you encouraged in this search of yours?


Py. My dating increased my going forward, and I was daily more, and more
confirmed, by continual observation of Phisicians errors.


Ph. Why what errors sound you?


Py. Amongst the rest I remember, that 13. A History of a great man.
the prime Physicians had given a Scamoniated medicine to the Prince, which in
one day gave him one and forty stools. Which being by request weighed, there
were found eighteen pound s^ven ounces of that yellow and putred liquid matter.
Whereupon I said unto him, and his Physicians; v^rily, if this liquid stuff be
Choler, and one of the four humors, there will be yet Phlegm remaining in the
body, which will weigh twenty seven pounds, and ten ounces, (because according
to Galen it is third part more then the Choler.) And by this computation, there
will be yet remaining of mere black Choler, 14. A fifth confession.
nine pound and 3 ounces. That is of Phlegm, and Melancholy not mixed with
yellow Choler, 36 pound, and 13 ounces. And therefore they ought to have
confessed that purgation, is not a purification of the body: but rather a
distempering of the remaining humors (if there be any.) And then that the
former solution, was not an elective cleansing of Choler, or a freeing the
body from superfluous Choler: but a mere pu^refactive liquation of the blood.


Ph. What? Did that blood stink while it was in the veins?


Py. By no means, but presently at the self same instant, that it fell out of
the veins 15. Examination of the former.
into the guts, it got that savor.


Ph. But for Gods sake, what vessel in man shall contain those thirty seven
pounds of Phlegm and bl^ck Choler, that are remaining? Especially
considering, that after that purgation, the veins which formerly were full,
^ell immediately, and disappeared.


Py. Let the Schools satisfy you herein. But in the mean time, The Prince (who
is much to be pitied) committing himself to your arbitrament, did the next
morning confess, he was purefied, but he spoke it with so weak, puling, and
hoarse a voice, such trembling of his hands, such wavering of his knees, with
so hollow eyes, such exhausted veins, and countenance so dejected, with so 16.
A sixth confession.
importunate a thirst, and so lost an appetire; that he affirmed he suffered
much the day before, by so fraudulent and doubtful experience of being
purefied; and that he doubted whether he should turn that way again, in that,
he certainly believed that if 17. Foul, and vain evasions.
the quantity of the Laxative, had been never so little more, the business had
gone ill with him.


Ph. Out of this strong purging in the Prince, the vi^ulent property of
solutives, cannot but presently be clearly manifested. But what answered the
Physicians?


Py. That the easy Nature of the Prince hearkened too much unto the medicine,
and the rather, for the shunning of the former filth, of the remaining humors,
together with their disproportion; in that, Scammony, ^ut of its property did
not only choose Choler unto it self, but out of the blood also, or compound, it
did of four make one melted stuff, avoided downwards: And hence I again 18. A
dart retorted ou^ of the seventh c^fession.
concluded, the imposture and deceit, which supposes either Choler, or Phegme
to be ejected; and which affirms, that one is by choice rather put out then
another, in that, they now confess that they become melted altogether. And
according to Galen, while Blood putrefies, Choler is made; and that it is false
that a medicine pu^ging Choler, should cure choleric diseases; and that it is
a deceit to say, that Choler is brought away, if the other three first
corrupted, shall together be ejected also.


Ph. I should hereupon think that there were no m^n studious of truth, but must
presently understand, that hence the Basis of curing, after the Ancients is
gone to ruin, as well in respect of the humors; as of the choice made by
solutive medicines.


Py. And I am indeed astonished with admiration, that the world, which is
otherwise so soon sensible of every plot that is laid to catch their purses,
takes not as yet any notice of the dangerousness of Laxatives. Seeing it is no
way to be doubted, but Laxatives carry an hidden poison in them, which has
many thousands, both of Widows and Orphans. For, they draw not after them any
particular humor, (which I in a particular Treatise have demonstrated never to
have been in Nature) otherwise then in the Books of Physicians. For if you do
but augment the doses of the Laxative, a deadly poison presently appears unto
you.


Ph. Well, go to now, why should this 19. An Argument of poison from ill smell.
Choler of theirs, following so speedily their Laxatives smell so horridly,
which but a quarter of an hour before, had no ill savor? For the speediness of
the ^ffluence takes away the occasion both of putrefaction, and of Fetour; for
it smells like a carcass, and not like ordure. Neither could it borrow so
soul a smell of ordure from the guts so suddenly. Therefore I should think,
that this ill savor is a sign of poison, and the efficient cause of that
cadaverous matter, taken out of the living creature.


Py. Neither should you think amiss, as I 20. A mechanic proof
shall mechanically, or by practice prove unto you. For if a man shall take a
dragme of white Vitriol dissolved in Wine, it will presently provoke vomiting.
But if he shall presently after drinking it, drink a draught of Beer, water,
etc. upon it, he shall have many stools thereby: yet altogether without fetour.
Therefore Scamony, and Vitriol, do equally liquefie the mesaraick blood. This
by its violent pontici^y: that by the putrefactive, ill smelling poison of the
Laxatives. And therefore out of this consideration alone, purging should by
every man be suspected, as a cruel, and a dull invention. For if according to
Galen, 27. The same out of ^^len.
Blood be made Choler while it putrefies, then is that fe^id and yellow
liquefaction, cast out by Laxatives counterfeiting Choler generated of Blood
putrefied. And consequently Laxativ^s themselves, are putrefactors of the Blood.


Ph. If I be not deceived, this, whether the Schools will or no, may easily be
gathered 22. A prooll from the effect.
out of Galen, and especially out of his commendation of Treacle, as that which
principally resists poison.


Py. It is very well gathered of you, and to the purpose; for he affi^meth that
it is an assured sign of good Treacle, that if it be taken together with
Laxatives, they undoubtedly produce no stools.


Ph. And do not these words then of Galen 23. The Schools impugn^ their ow^
Theorems.
convince Laxatives of being mere venomes? seeing their whole operation is
countermanded by Treacle as their Tamer?


Py. No doubt but they do. For the effects are consonant to that which you
suppose therein^ in that, upon taking of the Purgative, both sick and sound do
equ^lly avoid, a liquid matter of the same color, smell, and condition:
therefore it stirs not the peccant humor more, than it does that which is not
peccant: but indifferently defiles whatsoever it touches.


Ph. Yet further, do not the Schools impugn that choosing liberty which they
attribute to solutives?


Py. They do; for if any humor of the four be putred in Fevers, I do indicate
its taking away: and Laxatives avoid by election an humor out of the Blood,
yea, in such as are sound (as they are persuaded) they liquesie the sound
flesh, that thence they may compass that they aim at, which is, to make that
liquid putrefaction fusible, that the belly may avoid it. Laxatives at least,
will not have a like liberty in Fevers to choose the peccant, and the putred
excrement. For what is putred, has no longer its former e^^ence, and
proprieties, which it had before its putrefaction: as, though a Loadstone draw
Iron, it will not also draw rust therefore. And therefore though a purging
medicine should resolve flesh, and blood, that thence it might draw Choler,
which it draws un^o it as master; by a special propriety: It does not therefore
in like manner draw putred and putrefied [matter^] included in the veins, which
had been causes of the Fevers.


Ph. Surely no man should ever die of Fevers 24. The Hypothesis of the Schools
being granted no man should dle of a Fever. And it should be false that
purgatives should not be given in the beg^nning of fevers.
if two Ax^oms of the Schools were true, viz. If putred humors should be
causes of Fevers: or should by choice be carried out by Purgatives.


Py. And moreover it would be a mad caution, that Purgatives should not be
given in the beginnings of Fevers, before the matter did abound; to wit not
before ma^urity, and concoction of the offending matter. Whence it appears,
that Laxatives would be otherwise ^urtfull. But if they be given after the
matter of the disease is rightly prepated, the former caution includes an
imposture. Because it a^tributes an effect me^rly procured by the benefit of
Nature, to the purging medicine. From which the honest Physician 25. That this
A phorism includes a decelt, and the unadvisedness of Hyp^crates.
shall more justly abstain at that time. Because then he distu^bs the Cris^^,
he induces a danger of a confusion and relapse also. For a purging medicine,
does always, and of it self, bring out that which is not concocted, in the same
manner as it does that, which afterward is alled concocted: because it is every
where (...) and vir^lent. But after Nature (...) come the disease, it brings
less hurt; neither is the fraud of the Laxative so manifestly then perceived.
And by that means if a purging medicine, be at that time given, the Physician
will seem to have conquered the disease by his own Art.


Ph. So that if every Purgative should bring away its own humors by el^ction;
they would necessarily conduce also in every station of the disease, by reason
that they always bring forth the same liquo^s, with the same ill savor.


Py. But they disturb more especially, before Nature has gotten the
superiority, then afterward. And this superiority, or victory 26. An abuse of
the name ^on^oction in dis^^ses.
over the disease, the Schools call concoction. Not that Nature goes about to
digest, or concoct any thing that is vicious, or falls not within limits of her
use, as being governed by an unerring Intelligence. And this admonishm^nt may
suffice, touching both these universal helps in F^vers. And therefore I will
conclude with Hypoerates to Democritus: Every Purgative preys upon the strength
and substance of our bodies.


FINIS.
Reader, These Books following are printed for Nath. Brook, and are to be sola
at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
1. TImes Treasure or Academy for the Gentry, for their accomplishment in
argum^nts of discourse, habit, fashion; summed up all in a Character of Honor:
By R, Brath. Esquire. 2. B. Morton on the Sacrament, in folio. 3. That excellent
piece of Physiognomy and Chiromancy, Me^oposcopy, the Symme^rical Proportions
and signal Moles of the Body; the subject of Dreams: To which is added the Art
of M^mory; By R. Sanders, Fol. 4. Theatrum Chemicu^ Britanicum, containing
several Poetical pieces of our famous English Philosophers, which have written
the Hermetick Mysteries in their ancient language: By the truly noble, Elias
Ashmol^ Esquire. 5. Chiromancy: Or, the Art of Divini^g by the Lines engraven in
the hand of Man by D^me Nature, in 19. Genitures; with a learned Discourse of
the soul of the Worl^: By Geo. Wharton, Esquire. 6. Catholic H^story, collected
and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr.
Vanes lost sheep returned home: By Edward Chesen^ale, Esquire. 7. Tactometrica, or
the Geometry of Regulars, after a new manner, in Solids: with useful
Experiments, never before extant, for Gauging; a work useful for all that are
employed in the Art Metrical: By John Wyberd, Dr. in Physic. 8. An
Astr^logical Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations, proving the influence
of the Planets and fixed S^ars upon Elementary bodies. By Sir Chr. Heydon,
Knight. 9. Magic Astrology vindicated by H. Warren. 10. Catastrophe Magnatum:
by N. Culpepper. 11. Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Culpepper. 12. Lux
Veritatis, Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Demonologie confuted: By W.
Ramsey, Gent. 13. The History of the Golden Ass. 14. The painting of the
Ancients, the beginning, progress, and consum^ating of that noble Art. 15.
Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
earth: By R. M. 16. An introduction to the T^utonick Philosophy, being a
determination of the Original of the Soul: By C. Hotham, Fellow of Peter^he^se
in Cambridge. 17. Teratologia: Or, a Discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by
bloody Rain and Waters: By J. S. 18. Fons Lachrymarum: or, a Fountain of Tears;
with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas, by J. Quarles. 19. O^dipus: or a Resolver
of S^crets in Nature, and resolution in amorous, natural Problems, by C. M. 20.
The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness, by T. Fetisplace. 21. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with
Epigrams, and Epitaphs: by R. Chamberlain. 22. The unfortunate Mother, a
Tragedy; by T. M. 23. The Rebellion, a Comedy; by T. R. 24. The Tragedy of
Messalina, by N. Richards. 25. A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad
and troublesome times, by J. Hall, B. of Norwich. 26. The grand Sacrilege of
the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lords
Table, by D. Featley, D. D. 4. 27. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, and
Profaneness; or a more hopeful way to Grace and salvation: by R. Young. 8.
28. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the
Wavering, to stay the Wandering, to strengthen the Fainting: By J. B. of Yarm.
29. Comforts against the fear of Death, wherein are several evidences of the
work of Grace; by J. C. 30. Jacobs Seed; or the excellency of seeking God by
Prayer: By Ier. Buroughs. 31. The zealous Magistrate a Sermon. by T. Threscot.
32. Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, Aug. 1649, by I. Shaw,
Minister of Hull. 33. The Princess Royal, a Sermon before the Judges March 24.
1650. By I. Shaw, Minister of Hull. 34. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the
Society of Astrolog^rs, Aug. 1651. 35. Quakers cause at second hearing, being a
full answer to their Tenets. 36. Divinity no enemy to Astrology: a Sermon for
the Society of Ast^ologers, for the year 1653. by Dr. Th. Swaddling. 37.
Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in New England, in the
year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the material passages happening there
exactly performed. 38. Select Thoughts: or, Choice Helps for a pious spirit,
beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus: by I. Hall, B. of Norwich. A new
piece. 39. The holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion. To which is
added, Songs in the night: or, Cheerfulness under affliction: by I. Hall,
Bishop of Norwich. A new piece. 40. History of Balaam and Jonah, and John the
Baptist in Verse; with other Poems: by J. Harvie, Esquire. 41. Re-assertion of
grace, Vindici^^ Evangelii: or, the Vindication of the Gospel. Or a reply to
Mr. Anthony Burghess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford, by Robert Town.
42. Anabaptists anatomized and silenced: or a dispute with M. Tombs, by M. J.
Crag, where all may receive satisfaction in that controversy; the best extant.
43. The sum of practical Divinity; or the grounds of Religion in a
catechistical way; by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel: a
useful piece. 44. The Yorkshire Spaw or the virtue and use of those waters in
the curing of desperate diseases, with rules necessary to be known by all that
repair thither. 45. That complete piece called, The exact Surveyor of Land,
showing how to plot all manner of Grounds, and to reduce and divide the same:
also Irish measure reduced to English statute measure, useful for all that
either sell or purchase: by J. Air. 46. Judgment set, and Books opened.
Religion tried whether it be of God or Men: by M. Webster. 47. Milk for
children, or a plain and ^asie method, teaching to Read, and to Write; with
brief Rules for Schoolmasters to instruct their Scholars in, and Masters to
instruct their families in: by Dr. Thomas. 48. Culpeppers last Legacies, left
to his Wife, for the public good, being the choicest and most profitable
Secrets, which while he lived was locked up in his breast, resolved never to be
published till after his death; being experiments in Physic and Chyrurgery,
compounding Medicines, etc. 49. Culpeppers Semiotica, or his Astrological
judgment of Diseases, much enl^rged from the Decumbiture of the sick, the way
to find out the cause, change, and end of the disease: also whether the sick be
likely to live or die, with the signs of life and^ death by the body of the
sick party, according to the judgment of Hippocrates, with a Treatise of
Urines: by N. Culpeper. 50. Cornelius Agrippa, his fourth book of Occult
Philosophy, or G^omancy; Magical Elements of Peter de Abbona, the nature of
Spirits, made Eng^ish by R. Turner. 51. A Glimpse of Divi^e Light, being an
Explication of some passages exhibited to the Commissioners of Whitehall for
approbation of public Preachers, against John Harrison of Lund. Chapel,
Lancasbire. 52. The Qu^ens Closet epened; Incomparable Secret in Physic,
Chyrurgery, preserving, candying, and cooking, as they were presented to the
Queen, transcribed from the true Copies of her Majesty's own Receipt books: by
W. M. one of her late s^rvants. 53. The Conveyancers Light, or the complete
Clerk and Scriveners Guide; being an exact draught of all Presidents and
Assurances now in use, as they were penned and perfected by diverse learn^d
Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers both ancient and modern;
wher^unto is added a Concordance from K. Rich. 3. to this present. 54. A Satyr
against Hypocrites; 4. 55. Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand, to break
in pieces all Antichristian power: by Io^^ Sanders. 56. Wits Interpreter, the
English Paruassus, or a guide to those admirable accomplishments that complete
our English Gentry in the most acceptable qualifications of Discourse or
Writings; also the whole mystery of those pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and
Love, are made easy in the Art of Reasoning, Theater of Courtship, Labyrinth
of Fancies, Love songs, Drollery; the perfect Inditer of Letters a lamode: by
I. C. 57. The Floating Island, a Trage-comedy acted before the King, by the
Students of Christ Church in Oxford: by Dr. Stroude. 58. Paracelsus Occult
Philosophy of the mysteries of Nature, and his secret of Alchimie. 59. Wit and
Drollery, with other Jovial Poems, by Sir I. Iam. 1. Sym. 5. W. D. Never before
Printed. 60. Illustrious Shepherdess, the imperious Brother; translated out of
Spanish: a famed Romance. 61. Monarchy no Monarchy, with the Prophesies of the
White King, and other explained, to which is added several Hieroglyphics: by
W. Lilly, Student in Astrology. With his other Works. 62. Short hand Writing
made most plain and easiest that ever was, newly published by I. Rich. Mr. in
short-writing. 63. Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring all manner of land
squares, timber, stone, Steeples, Pillars, Globes, also the making and use of
the Carpentes rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Landmeters, Joyners,
Carpentets and Masons: by L. Diggs. 64. Heaven and Earth shaken, a Treatise
showing how Kings and Princes, and their Goverments, are turned and changed: by
I. Davis, Minister in Dover. 65. The Tears of the Indies, being an Historical
Relation of the cruelties of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba,
Iamaica, etc. in the West Indies: by Casaus Bishop in Spain, an eyewitness. 66.
Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rossie Cross, written by Count
Mayerus, and now Englished for to inform that honorable Society: by T. H. 67.
Complete Midwife's practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the Birth
of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the Experiences and Writing^, not
only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolure practice of many
French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations, fitted for the weakest
capacities, in a short time to attain the knowledge of the whole Art: by T. C.
and others. 68. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment, a new spring of Drollery,
Jovial Fancies, etc. 69. I. Tradescan's Rarities, published by himself. 70.
Most approved Medicines and R^medies for the diseases in the body of Man: by
Alex. Read, Dr. in Physic. 71. Art of Simplng, an introduction to the
knowledge and gathering of Plants, wherein the Definitions, Divisions, Places,
Descriptions, Differences, Names, Ver^ues, times of flourishing and gathering,
Uses, Tempera^ures, Signatures of Plants. To which is added, a Discovery of the
Lesser World: by W. Coals. 72. Wilsfords Arithmetic, made plain to the easiest
capacity, in two books, viz. Natural and Decimal, being most useful for all
Gentlemen, Merchants, shopkeepers, and all others: by Tho. Wilsford, Gent. 73.
Adam in Eden, the Paradise of Plants, a Description o^ all our English Plants,
wild or otherwise, with their Signatur^s applied to the parts of the body of
Man, which their Physical use, that a man may be his own Physician, the
ingredients being to be had in every field and ga^den: made publ^ck by W.
Coals. M. D. for the ben^fit of all English men. 74. The perfect Cook; a right
method of the Art of Cookety, restoring the whole practice to a more refined
way then was ever before extant. 75. Medicina Magica, Tamen Physica, the method
of curing diseases by Sympathy and Antipathy; a work fit to be known by all: by
S. Bolton. 76. The Treasury of the Soul. 77. The expert Doctors Dispensatory;
the whole Art of Physic restored to practice. The Apothecaries Shop, and
Chyrurgians Closet, with all safe practices are maintained: a useful piece.
78. The History and Nature of Meteors, with the Weathers prediction: by T
Wilsford, Gent. 79. The proceeding of the High Court of Justice against the
late King Charles, with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings,
Ian. 30. 1648. 80. Sir Kellum Digby's and other Ladies of Honor, their Physic
and Chyrurgery; with preserving, etc. 81. Cabinet of Jewels; Man's misery, Gods
mercy, Christ's treasury, etc. in eight Sermons; with an Appendix of the nature
of Tithes under the Gospel; with an Expediency of Marriage in public Assembly:
by Io. Cragg, Minister of the Gospel. 82. The mysteries of Love and Eloquence,
or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing; in which are discovered the pleasures,
recreations of persuasive Language, whether by Letters or other usual or more
secret Dispatches, etc.
FINIS.

