A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right HONORABLE, THE LORDS Assembled in
Parliament, In the Abbey Church of St. Peter's, Westminster, Upon the Fast Day
appointed April 10. 1678.

By WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of St. David's.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Tho. Collins, at the Middle Temple Gate in
Fleet Street; and William Leach, at the Crown in Cornhill near the Stocks
Market* 1678.

Die Jovis 11o Aprilis, 1678.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Thanks of this House be given to the Lord Bishop of St. David's, for his Sermon
preached yesterday in the Abbey Church at Westminster, before the House of
Peers; it being appointed by His Majesty to be observed as a Public Fast Day
in the Cities of London and Westminster. And his Lordship is desired by this
House to Print and Publish the said Sermon.

JO. BROWN. Cleric. Parliament.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable, The HOUSE of PEERS, At the Abbey
Church of S. Peter's Westminster, on April 10. 1678.
S. Luke 13. ver. 5. I tell you, Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.
OUr blessed Savior having, in the close of the former Chapter, treated of the
disconsolate close of life, of the dismal state of Man dying unreconciled to
God, in security, impenitency; (it being a symptom of the most irrecoverable
misery, not to commiserate ones self; Nil miserius misero, non miserante
seipsum. Aug.
to be upon the brink of the greatest peril, and not to dread the least.) Some
Passengers that accidentally intervened, boulted out the fresh Tragical
Intelligence of the destruction of the Galileans.

This is the Novel (and for ought I find) single conjecture of Maldonate.

It is more credibly and generally asserted, that some of Christ's set Auditors
here, took the hint, and mentioned the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their Sacrifices; as if a singular impiety had rendered them liable
to this singular cruelty; as if God had culled them out for vessels of his
indignation to be poured into; as if he had set them for Brands of an
unparalled unremitted guilt.

Our humane corrupt Nature is no less prone to impeach, to doom wickedness at
distance, than to espouse, embrace it at hand.

Christ, the true Oracle, teaches the Israelites better Divinity, not to usurp
Gods Throne of Judicature, to pass Sentence of Condemnation upon others, but to
erect a Tribunal in their own bosom, to arraign themselves.

Christ reproves their erroneous sentiment touching the Galileans, embrued in
their own Oblations (the Offerer being become the Offering.) And touching the
Eighteen persons, shivered to their first Principles, by the sudden demolition
of the Tower of Siloam. As for both, the estimate, the measure of their vices
is not to be taken by their calamities.

I tell you, Nay; but except you repent, you shall all likewise perish. The
Text is checkered with Clemency and Severity; it blunts the edge without, to
restrain our censure; and sharpens it within, to excite our repentance.

It is a Pillar of Cloud by day, to enwrap the offenses of others in an obscure
concealment; it is a Pillar of Fire by night, for the discovery of our own, to
enlighten our judgments, to inflame our zeal: not to be Satyrists, Critics;
but Penitents, Converts.

The Text is twice recited within the compass of five verses; it is a
reiterated smart admonition, the same sacred advertisement upon a double
dysaster; the one permitted by God, executed by Pilate; the other has the
aspect of a more immediate stroke of the Divine Justice.

The Text brancheth it self to two Propositions.

The one negative, implicit, wrapped up; I tell you, Nay.

The other, positive, explicit, unfolded; Except you repent, you shall all
likewise perish.

The first may be thus unvailed.

Neither the Galileans slaughtered amidst their Sacrifices, nor those Eighteen
Persons crushed at the Tower Siloam, were greater Transgressors, than the other
Israelites. It is Debtors above others, (...), Luke 13. 4.
in the immediate precedent verse. It is a frequent Syriack Idiom: They were
not more chargeable for the Talent misemploy'd, embezel'd, than other
accomptants in Israel.

The Proposition admits a double surveigh, Historical, and Doctrinal.

In our Historical consideration, there is an harmony among Expositors touching
those that perished at the Tower of Siloam. A Narration scarce any where else
extant in Sacred or Profane Records.

Touching the former Calamity (that of the Galileans) there has been started
variety of Opinions.

Some gloss the Title Galileans to be a disguise for Samaritans; Galilee (being
out of the Verge of Pilat's Jurisdiction.) St. Cyril of Alexandrina, and others
in his Track, unmasque the Galileans to be the Disciples of Judas the
Gaulonite, a grand turbulent Incendiary, who had trained his Scholars in a
Lecture of the blackest grain of Sedition, ( Nigriani in the primitive style)
who instructed them to withdraw their obedience from the Roman Empire, Nec
Nigriani, nec Cassi any. Tertul.
and their intercession for the Emperor. Whereof Pilate being certified,
surprised, massacred these Galileans, as they were celebrating their Sacrifices.

Samaritans they might be for Climate, for extraction; and yet denominated
Galileans for their Sect, for their Tutor.

There is a third Relation of a famous, or rather infamous Magician of Galilee,
who, in the notion of a Messiah, had encouraged multitudes (says Aegesippus)
conducted them to Mount Ge^izim, alleging he would thence ascend to Heaven.
Which Imposture, Pilate blasted in the bud, confuted their blasphemy, not by
the Tongue or Pen, but by the Sword.

To decline the Historical view of the Proposition, the Doctrinal may be thus
displayed.

The greatest pressures, the sharpest miseries, the saddest periods of this
Life, are no demonstrative Arguments, to conclude the greatest sinners.

The Clouds distill their soft dew, pour down their fertile showers; the Sun
darts its warm beams, its benign influences to all sorts of men.

God freely communicates secular blessings to Saints and Miscreants; he is thus
kind to the unthankful, and to the evil; gracious to the ungrateful, to the
ungracious, notoriously vicious, (...).
as the Original imports. The accommodations of this World are bestowed upon
good men, Luke 6. 35. Dantur bonis ne putentur summa mala, dantur malis, ne
putentur summa bona. August.
lest they should be deemed, branded to be absolutely evil; and upon evil men,
lest they should be reputed, magnified to be absolutely good.

As the prophanenest Wretches have some commendable qualities to be
recompensed. So to poise the Scale of the Doctrine, the severest Votaries have
some infirmities to be corrected; being pure Bullion from the Oar, not the
Furnace, to be refined by afflictions, which are their purgations. Christ does
not vindicate the slaughtered Galileans, nor those mangled at Siloam from being
offenders.

Their calamities were the transcript of their vices.

Death is the stipend of guilt, (...). Romans 6. 6.
(in the Apostles phrase) it is the vilest wages of the vilest warfare of sin.
The denial is fastened on the Comparative, not the Positive, they were not
greater sinners. If Gods Spiritual favors were to be proportioned by Temporal,
Mahumetans must be preferred before Christians, Babylon would shine with a
brighter luster, than Jerusalem or Antioch.

No Country has been more polluted, branded with Idolatry, with Sorcery, than
Egypt; and yet none more abounded with plenty; it was the Granary of the Roman
Empire, the Sanctuary of the Israelites in their exigencies of a Famine.

It was the blasphemous Argument of Cicero, to extol the false Roman gods, and
to vilify the true Deity, the holy One of Israel; because the Jews were
distressed, in eclipse, in umbrage; whereas the Romans flourished in grandeur and
splendour.

It was the bad Logic, and worse Divinity of Jobs pretended Friends, his
uncommission'd Judges, who made his tribulations Topics to prove, to infer his
crimes.

By this Test, the Bible must vail to the Alcoran, Martyrs must pass for
Malefactors, the name of the first Christian Martyr St. Stephen signifies a
Crown.

This is the state of Triumph in Heaven. The Ensign of Conflict on Earth is not
a Throne, or Scepter; the Standard is a Cross. We must not fancy to be
translated from Carnal delicacies to Spiritual, to Eternal; from a Mahumetan
Paradise to a Christian; from depraved sensualities below, to untainted
Felicities, to unbounded Glories above; that we should frolic, revel with the
World, Nimis delicatulus silvis gaudere cum seculo, and regnare cum Christo.
Hier.
and yet rejoice, reign with Christ.

The Israelites passage, as to that earthly, so to that heavenly Canaan, was
through a Wilderness of Briers. The path of Bliss is not strowed with Roses,
but with thorns.

Our travel to that Jerusalem that is above, is pestered with difficulties,
encumbrances; like Hannibals march to Italy, over the Alps, over Rocks, to be
wrought with Fire and Vinegar.

If we surveigh the whole Catalogue of Gods faithful Servants, recorded in
Sacred Writ, their character will appear like Pictures drawn in dim and sullied
Colors.

To produce some instances therein, to take our rise from Adam: To deny his
repentance, his acceptance with God, was the Heresy of the Taciani, no less
destitute of truth, than candor.

The more charitable Tenet of the Justification, the Salvation of the First
Adam, by the merits of the Second, has been asserted, vindicated in the purest
antiquity of the Church.

And yet his calamities were multiplied, in the Consort, the Mate of his bosom,
Ne contristaretur delitian Hieron.
become the Engine of Satan, to inveagle him; he swallowed her poison (more
fatal than that of Messalina to Claudius) to prevent her melancholy.

Afflicted he was in his Offspring, in all succeeding Ages, by an irreversible
Entail of misery, of mortalit^.

Distressed in his Person, his Possession; ejected out of Paradise, garrisoned
against him with a flaming Sword.

The whole Earth doomed upon his account; its verdure withered, its fruit
imbittered, to render his diet a penance more than a repast, Genesis 3. 17.
( In sorrow shall thou eat of it.) The delicious Flowers of the Field
transformed to venomous Weeds, to noxious Thistles.

Being, by a Sentence of Proscription, not to be repealed, banished out of
Eden; to continue, to complete his anguish, he lamented three hundred years
upon the Indian Mountains (if the Eastern Tradition may be credited.)

His most gracious Son Abel was least prosperous; his fate was legible in his
name, which denotes sorrow: Though his Oblation was accepted in Heaven, (an
Incense, a Perfume of Piety) yet his Person was wounded on earth, wallowed in
blood: the slaughter sudden, without provocation, and, for aggravation, acted
by a Brother, who murdered whilst he courted him, during the infancy of the
World, snatched away in the maturity of his Grace, rendering him in his life a
Saint, and in his death a Martyr, in vindication of Gods present Providence,
Targ. Hierosol.
and future Judgment, in opposition of the Atheistical Tenet of Cain.

The Ark, the Type of the Church, (in the judgment of the Fathers) was in a
floating condition, exposed to fierce surges, to blustering storms.

Noah, the Pilot of it, like Janus with two Visa^ds, who saw two Worlds, the
Old and the New, was (in Helvicus's account) the most afflicted man interested
in either: Origin reckons him the middle person betwixt Adam and Abraham; he
abundantly shared in the miseries of both.

Even Abraham, a greater Believer before the Law (in the opinion of St. Jerome)
than the Centurion in the Gospel, applauded by Christ's Elogy of a Non pareil,
S. Matthew. 6. 10.
no such faith found, no not in Israel Abraham, not only a Dignitary in Gods
Court, but a Privado in his Closet, linked, associated with the complacencies
of a Friend, whose bosom on Earth was the seat of Grace, and being in Heaven,
S. Luke 16. 23.
is the phrase, the eloquence, for the receptacle of Glory; he who had large
Promises of a prosperous Progeny, had ample Experiments of adversity in himself.

Discomposed he was, disquieted with the ejection of Hagar, of Ismael; with the
dissatisfaction, the Pett, the animosity of Sarah; endangered in her
endearments, her attractive ravishing beauty being the bait for his destruction.

Sequestered he was from his Family, his Country, translated, not for
preferment, but peregrination, an Exile without a Trope.

His Ten Temptations (as the Rabbis account them) were sharp afflictions,
though sacred Exercises of his Virtues, yet severe evidences of his miseries.

With what yearning, bleeding bowels, with what piercing conflicts betwixt
carnal and spiritual Interests, was he traveling three days toward Mount
Moriah, to effect (as to the estimate of the World) a most inhumane, unnatural,
prodigious cruelty, to make his most ingratiated Son an Holocaust, a whole
Burnt-offering: His darling Son Isaac, no less the Issue of his Faith, than of
his Loins, did but equivocate with delight; it was varnished in his name, not
imprinted in his bosom; his eyes were dim, not darkened with years, Augustinus
Totius hominis debilitas oculos perdidisse. Quintil.
but diseases; (the deprivation of sight being the infirmity, not of one
Member, but of all.) This affliction was aggravated by the duration of it above
forty years.

His heart was chilled and dampt by the depravation of Esau, the dissimulation
of Jacob.

That Jacob, who did inherit his Fathers Graces, though not his Incomes; his
Piety, though not his Fortune; and Scholast. Hist. Optimum contemplativae and
activae vitae exemplar. Bern.
consecrated in his Mothers womb, that most accomplished pattern of a
contemplative and of an active life, mournfully confessed, that his days were
evil not in a notion of Morality, but in the dress, the style of an Haebraism,
not for crimes, but calamities; days overcast with mists of tribulation.

In the flower, the vigor of his age, his condition was servile, his service
debased to a vassalage, that vassalage embittered by imposture: His Wedlock not
a solace, but an anguish; his Progeny a scourge.

His nearest Relatives were the procurement of his sharpest anxieties; chased,
persecuted by Esau, by Laban; racked in spirit by the carnal defilement of
Dinah, the heinous Incest of Reuben; the treacherous rage, the monstrous
cruelty of Simeon and Levi, more wounded by their impieties, than the
Shichemites were by their Swords.

His most honored Son Joseph, in whom the blessing of all his Progenitors were
accumulated, was maligned by his Brethren, a Merchandise of distress, sold to
the Midianites, Egyptians; he was defamed, impeached, imprisoned; he had his
three years Manacles before his Robes.

Moses, more exalted than Joseph, not only in the Court of Pharaoh, but on the
Mount of God; more ingratiated to God than Abraham, (in the opinion of S.
Gregory advanced above a Humane condition, in the judgment of S. Ambrose) I had
almost said, above an Angelical perfection, not without a Divine Warrant, Exodus
7. 1.
( Thou shall be a God to Pharaoh) and yet his whole life was a black Scheme of
varied, continued distresses. His birth was attended with the doom, though not
the fate of death. As if his entrance into the World were to resemble that of
Cato to the Theater, only to depart. He was many years banished in Midian,
oppressed in Egypt, reviled, affronted in the Desert by those whom he obliged,
protected, who requited the prudence, the courage, the success of his Conduct,
with the gall of reproach, his Miracles with regret; taunted by Aaron, by
Miriam, by Zipporah, (the wound of the Tongue being more envenomed, than of the
Sword.) It is related of Sylla, That he had been happy if he had not married;
and of Adrian, if he had not Reigned.

Moses (King of Jeshurum) was alike disconsolate in the Nuptial Bed, and in the
Regal Throne.

After the toils, the troubles, the conflicts of many years march in the
Desert, not admitted to set his foot in the Land of Canaan. No Scutcheon of
Descent, no Titles of Honor, no Revenues of Manors derived to his Posterity;
no Monument for a Memorial erected for himself, but interred in obscurity,
Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
his Sepulcher unknown to this day.

The Royal Prophet David, stamped with a Divine Transcendent Impression, ( A man
after Gods own heart) was squinted at by Eliab, worried by Saul, scoffed by
Michol, curbed by Joah, tortured by the foul ravishment of Tamar, the fierce
revenge upon Ammon; rebelled against by Absalom, aspersed, accursed by Shimei:
His miseries were like the waves, the surges of the Sea, one rolling upon
another.

I am here straightened with plenty, variety of matter. -- Inopem me copia fecit.

It was the slur of Demosthenes, that he was expert what to speak, but was to
learn what to omit, to wave in silence.

Justin Martyr selects Josiah as most conspicuous for the eminent mixture of
Piety and Calamity.

Not to muster up the Prophets, despised, detested, persecuted; Elijah scared
to a flight, (unless Ravens had been his Caterers) famished; Isaiah sawed,
Jeremy apprehended, arraigned, traduced, pent up in a Dungeon, stoned; Ezekiel
slaughtered in Babylon, Amos club'd to death, Micah cast headlong from a
Precipice, Zacharias slain in the Temple, (the Priests being become the
Sacrifice) leaving an impression of his innocent blood in the Pavement The
Baptist beheaded, treated by Herod as a Prisoner, a Captive, was by Flaminius
(in the Roman History) to gratify at once an impure dalliance, and an
implacable fury.

I shall not fix on these Fixed Stars of the Firmament of Israel, since the
brightest Luminary (the Sun of Righteousness) was Eclipsed.

The purity of his Doctrine, the innocence of his Conversation, (whose sole
Crimes were his Virtues, and his Miracles) did irritate the malice of the
Scribes and Pharisees, did expose him to the vilest infamy, the smartest
torment of the Cross.

Traced he was by his select Retinue, the Apostles, hurried to their
Executions. St. Peter, Andrew, Philip, Simon Zelotes, crucified. St. Paul,
Matthew, Matthias, James the Brother of John, beheaded. St. James (the Just)
hurled down from the pinnacle of the Temple. St. John (the Evangelist)
Bartholomew, cast into boiling Oil. S. Mark and Barnabas endured the fiery
trial, (without a figure) burnt to cinders. This was the portion of the
Primitive Saints, Confessors, Martyrs they were in the first Ten Persecutions
of the Christians: Lectures they are of Patience, Charms of Consolation, to
Candy the bitterest Pills of Calamities; disgusted they may be by a Natural
Palate, not by a Spiritual.

They serve as pregnant Presidents to correct the fancy of Augustus, of a calm
recess, a serene departure out of a miserable world.

Devout Souls may be wafted to a smooth Port, by a rough tempestuous Gale.

In a higher Key, they who are piously qualified, may be transported in
extremities of Fevers, and other violent Diseases; to utter loose, vain,
phrantick, profane expressions; yet are they not to be branded for reprobate
Miscreants.

These undecencies, impieties of Language, may be interpreted the effect of
sickness, not of sin; to be ascribed to the indisposition of the Body, not the
Soul; to the distempered humors of the one, not to the depraved affections of
the other.

The habit of Grace may be retained, where the acts are not exerted, evidenced.

The exercises of Virtues may be obstructed, obscured, like sparks of fire
smothered in embers. Though we may yearn with unrighteous Balaam, that we may
die the death of the righteous, -- * Sic sic juvat ire sub umbras, yet the
distinct character of the Sons of God and Belial, is not to be taken from our
dissolution, how plausibly, fairly, we quit the Stage of this World; but from
our deportment, how we act our part, how exactly, how uprightly, we acquit our
selves upon it.

How ever the distresses, the dysasters of others, ought not to excite our
virulent dooms, but our contrite sorrows: Which conveys me to the Second, the
Positive Explicit Proposition in my Text, Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

This Proposition, at the first blush, discovers a Duty to be discharged, and a
Penalty to be inflicted, in case of defailance.

Before I insist on either, there is a remarque to be set on the restrictive,
adversative Particle, [ But.] This conduces to link the parts of the Text, and
to regulate our Censures

Sometimes the Hand of God avenging, is within the Ken of familiar observation.

As in Antiochus, Herod, not subdued by Legions of Soldiers, by powerful
Armies, but by despicable Vermin.

Eusebius records Gods just indignation against Pilat, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l.
2. c. 7.
who condemned our Blessed Savior (against the dictate of his own Conscience)
he became his own Judge, his own Executioner.

He who would be impious, injurious, to be popular, was justly impeacht by that
People, whom he gratified by injustice.

Nebuchadnezzar, who was not contented to be homaged as a Sovereign, but would
be adored as a God, was degraded below the station of men, sorted among Beasts;
not in a Parable, (as Origin asserted) not imaginarily only, (as others would
mince it to a Phantasm, a Dream) but really, visibly his inward endowments
perverted, his Rational Faculties alienated; as for his outward Members, Dan.
4. 33.
his hair became like Eagles feathers, his nails like Birds claws.

Two signal Characters there are of the Divine destructive displeasure;

The first is, When the Judgment reteins the feature, the complexion of the
Guilt; as face answers face in water.

Thus the unnatural heats, the impurities of the Sodomites, were punished by
unnatural flames; Gehenna e coelo descendit. Salv.
Hell descended from Heaven, (in a Fathers expression.)

Pharaoh, who decreed the Male-children of the Israelites to be drowned,
himself, and the Males of Egypt (...) of martial, vigorous years) were plunged,
swallowed up in the Red Sea.

Absalom's hair was the subject, the motive of his arrogance, wherewith he was
enamoured; this became the Engine, the Instrument of his bane, wherewith he was
entangled fettered.

God threatens to walk contrary to those, Levit. 26. 21, 24.
who walk contrary to him.

He will baffle their enterprises, who transgress his Precepts.

He will deride their anxieties, who spurn at his summons: Prove. 1. 26.
I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. It is
expressed after a corrupt humane manner (in condescension to our infirmities)
it is to be apprehended in an unblemished Divine notion. (...). Theodoret


Julian the Apostate, who shot poisonous Arrows, scurrilous indignities against
Heaven, was himself pierced with an envenomed Dart from Heaven; with that mouth
he acknowledged Christ a Conqueror, an Avenger, wherewith he blasphemed, denied
him a Redeemer.

The damned rich Caitiff in the Gospel, S. Luke 16. 24.
was most tormented in his tongue, whereby he had most offended.

Those Donatists who, S. Optatus testifies it.
in the Primitive Church, did cast away the Sacramental Elements of the
Eucharist, were themselves torn in pieces by Dogs.

The second eminent stamp of the Divine Justice, is, when the trespass and the
scourge are like the Twins of Rebecca's Womb, the later, like Jacob, a
Supplanter, taking hold of its elder Brother by the heels.

Thus when Nebuchadnezzar raised his Crest, Dan. 4. 3.
Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of my Kingdom, for
the might of my po^^, the honor of my Majesty? Built, erected it was by
Nimrod, fortified by himself; whilst he o'er-spread his plumes, whilst the word
was yet in his mouth, Dan. 4. 31. Statim punitur a Deo. Hier. in Dan.
he was terrified, thunderstruck with a voice from Heaven, The Kingdom is
departed from thee.

So quick, so fierce is God's resentment of arrogance, of vainglory.

Whilst Balthazar riotously frolickt it in the Vessels of the Sanctuary, the
Wall became a Tribunal to condemn him; He saw a handwriting on the wall, Dan.
5. 5.
(proceeding out of the Wall, according to the Arabic Translation) a visible
Character of an invisible Scribe.

In that room, in that house, he was anxiously shivered, wherein he
presumptuously transgressed.

Whilst Herod owned the flattery, the blasphemy of the People, not rejecting,
not reprehending it; there appeared not a Screech-Owl (according to Josephus)
to presage a Judgment, but an Angel was employed to inflict it; not a damned
Fiend, Acts 12. 25.
(according to Lorinus) but an Angel of the Lord, both an Assertor of his
Honor, and an Executioner of his Sentence.

Not to pursue this Meditation too far: It will become us to be nicely
critical, to be strictly inquisitive within the precinct of our own bosoms, to
apply Gods particular scourges to our particular offenses.

But when the Scene of Gods judgments is laid at distance, they ought not to
elate, to swell, to leven, to imbitter us, but to deject, to envenom our
spirits.

Not to be Lamia's, putting on the Spectacles abroad, but putting them off at
home.

Monitors they are to mortify, reclaim us, to keep aloof from their
iniquities, Quorum vestigia terrent, Whose judgments we tremble at, lest we
close in the same Tragical period. To this end they are punctually recited,
distinctly sorted by the Apostle, (...). 1 Cor. 10. 11.
recorded for examples to deter us, (according to the Original, as Types
figuratively to instruct us.) Repentance is the sole expedient to rescue us
from perdition, to be like brands snatched out of the fire. Which casts me on
the Tasque in my Text.

Except ye repent. Though Origin, in too wide a candor, has extended
repentance to the damned Spirits; yet others have confined it to too narrow
bounds: the Montanists not admitting it to those that offend after Baptism; the
Novatians not allowing it to a recidivation of transgression, to a relapse, a
return of guilt.

Happy it is for us, that the Book of Life of a merciful God, is not subject to
the razures of opinionated men.

That the Keys of Heaven are not within the restraint of Heresies or Sects on
earth. The experience of all Ages manifests, that where Truth has been
deserted, Charity has been discarded also. The Divine Goodness commiserating
humane frailties, has ordained repentance to be a continual Physic for a
continual malady, a reiterated Medicine, for a reiterated wound.

A Cure that exacts not so much the Lamp of the Sanctuary, the Gloss of the
Pulpit, as the practice of the Chamber; without which, the devotion, the
humiliation of the Temple this day, is but a Pageantry of Piety; without which,
repentance may be sought in our repentance, and not found, as Florus complained
of Samnium demolished.

Confession is but a scanty essay of this duty, the first step of repentance.

Pharaoh acknowledged himself and his People wicked, Exodus 9. 27.
when they were plagued; but they relented not, the festered wound of the Soul
was unmasked not lanced; the veil withdrawn, not the putrefaction. In a further
gradation, Esau was pensive, not penitent: Heb. 12. 17.
He found no place for repentance, (says the Apostle) though he sought it with
tears. Tears they were of indignation, of bitter wrath; not of contrition, of
an humble sorrow; he had a flood, yet not the grace of tears, Da gratiam
I^chrymarum. Aug.
which St. Augustine sued for. He had a melting eye, but not a bleeding heart.

God does not pour the oil of his mercy, Deus non infundit oleum misericordiae
nisi in vas contritum. Be^n.
but into a broken Pitcher, into a contrite heart.

Our hearts, like our Spices, are the sweetest fragrance of Oblation, when they
are bruised. The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit; Psalm. 51. 17.
a troubled spirit, that in it self is afflicted; not a troublesome spirit, that
is an affliction to others.

The Vulgar Latin renders it in the Plural Number, Sacrifices; all other
Sacrifices are comprehended, completed in this.

The trouble, the grief of Attrition will not serve, though eek'd out, assisted
with the absolution of the Priest.

God will not set his Seal of Remission to a Blank, not to a defective or
defaced character.

A true penitential sorrow is not attrite, (in the Schoolmens style) merely the
product of our miseries; but primarily, sincerely contrite; it accrues from the
due recollection, the deep impression of our sins: When we are more dejected,
saddened, that we are depraved, than that we are distressed.

The most impenitent Malefactors in their Executions, will mourn for their
sufferings, not for their crimes.

The Original phrase in my Text denotes not the piercing of the mind with
anguish, (...)
(this is preparatorily requisite) but the renewing of it with grace.

The remorse of Conscience for any guilt will not bestead us, without the
rectifying it. The most obdurate sinners, in their recesses, exigencies, have
their bosom qualms, their secret damps, their piercing regret.

Judas resented, bewailed his horrid offense, Judas deflevit crimen non
correxit. Ambr.
but he renounced, corrected it not.

There is a Worm to corrode, there is dread and anxiety, there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth in Hell. There is a Probe to search the most rankled
corruptions of the heart, but there is no balsam to heal them.

Aquinas's definition of Repentance is Concise and Orthodox. Repentance is a
sorrow for sin, with a purpose of amendment.

St. Austin's counsel corresponds herewith; Mourn for past sin, Dole de
praterito peccato, cave de futuro. Aug.
beware of future. Let not our resolutions, like Embrio's, perish in the womb.

Let not these cords be untwisted, unravelled by the opportunities, the
blandishments of inveigling darling vices.

The repentance of life, is the life, the power, the luster of repentance;
without which, the profession of it is but a collusion.

We do but personate repentance this day in the Church, our Religious Exercises
are but scenes, disguises; if whilst we solemnly deplore our offenses, we do
not sincerel desert them. It is the sorrow of a Crocodile to lament for that
mischief we yet indulge, pursue; secretly to embrace, caress that wickedness,
which we openly declare to nauseate; not to abandon that guilt, which we
profess to abhor.

Our Fasts, our Austerities, are proper Auxiliaries of repentance; our reformed
practices are the choice accomplishments of it.

Our mortification initiates, begins this duty; our reformation consummates,
perfects it.

In this notion, the Thesis of Luther, so much bogled at, That true repentance
is a new life, is opposed by Invectives more than Arguments, confuted by Satyr
more than Logic.

Neither the Divinity, nor the Grammar of the Text, will warrant or dispense
with the dilatoriness of the Task; to resemble the Circassians, not to be
devout till impotent, decrepit; not to resort to the Temple, till we are upon
the brink of the Grave. The Powers of Darkness are not staggered with a sigh,
nor o'er-whelmed by a tear; they are not vanquished by a faint, languishing,
gasping breath.

Could Satan, having fortified his interest by vicious habits and customs be so
easily ejected out of possession, Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non prom-sit
peccanti poenitentiam Aug.
dethroned out of his Dominion; yet that God, who has promised remission to
him that repents, has not promised repentance to him that sins,
especially voluntarily, deliberately. We are not ascertained of future grace,
to excite, to promote this duty; nor of time to actuate, to exercise it.

In all the pomps, the jollities of life, we are upon the border of death.

Drusus received a deaths wound by a pear, Adrian by a hair.

An excessive delight has, to some, by a sudden dilatation, dispersion of the
spirits leaving the heart unguarded, ushered in the terror of death.

Gods sharpest judgments, inflicted or dreaded, are the most piercing motives
of penitential duties.

That there is wrath to come, S. Matthew. 3. 7. 8.
is the Baptists rousing Topic to awe the repentance of his Auditors.

My Text produces a more powerful Spel to conjure it.

You shall all likewise perish. This short menace is more piercing, than Ehud^s
Dagger. This is no pannick terror. This Prophecy was reduced to a History in
Sacred and Secular Interests, to the impenitent Israelites. It imports not a
particular, personal; but a National, Universal destruction, of Temple, City,
People.

They perished before they perished, (as Salvian observes of his Gallican
Contemporaries) being divided, Perierunt antequam perierunt. Salv.
depraved, before they were destroyed.

Crumbled they were into factions, Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, Herodians.
Their Civil dissentions were more fatal than Foreign Invasions; whilst they
were attacked, stormed by the Roman Soldiers, they were bandi'd, engaged
against themselves, sheathing their swords in one another bowels, under the
conduct of fierce Zelots, of Religious Assassinates. Joseph. lib. 6. c. 11. de
Bello Judaico.
They drank to one another the blood of the People. The edge of the famine was
yet sharper than of the Sword, more dismal than that of Athens, wherein a
Father and a Son fought a duel for a prise, the provision of a Mouse.

In a more prodigious instance at Jerusalem, Joseph. l. 7. de Bello Jud. cap.
8. Aegesip. de Exc. Hieros.
an eminent Matrone, of a Noble Exstraction, of an ample Fortune, butchered and
cooked her own Child; made the Issue of her womb, the repast of her stomach; a
savage unnatural Sacrifice to her keen appetite.

This is no Tragical Romance, but an Historical truth, solemnly asserted by
Josephus and Aegesippus.

As there was a general Convention from all parts of Palestine, to celebrate
the Feast of the Passover, when the Jews crucified Christ; so also when the
City was surrounded by Titus.

The Judgment was as diffusive, as the guilt. The multitude of those that
perished in the Siege of Jerusalem being computed to amount to 110000 persons,
besides 90000 prisoners.

No Nation more perversely impure, none more irrecoverably miserable.

Christ (the Mirror of Candor) pathetically lamented, when he denoun'cd their
destruction; and Titus (renowned for singular clemency) when he inflicted it;
and yet the obdurate Jews relented not, when they sustained it: more
impenetrable than Iron, not softened in the fiercest Furnace of affliction. And
the extent of the Fate is observable, You shall all perish; so is the
similitude, You shall likewise perish.

Some, like the Galileans in the Temple, were mixed, mangled with their
Sacrifices. Others, like those crushed, shattered at the Tower of Siloam, were
covered with the rubbish of the demolished, battered Structures of the City.
The Inhabitants and the Habitations were, in the same devouring flame, consumed
to ashes.

Their crimes were yet greater than their punishments; Humiliati. non humiles.
Bern.
vile, despicable they became, not contrite, humble; like Ivory blackned,
sullied they were by that fire (that tribulation) which should have refined,
beautified them.

Their state of living, dying impenitents, sharpens the doom in my Text with
two edges, (in Lyrd's gloss) You shall perish temporally, you shall perish
eternally. The distresses of the Earth are, to persevering, unrepenting
sinners, the Prologue to the black Scene, the succeeding torments of Hell.

The impenitent Egyptians, that pursued the Israelites, were transmitted from
the fierce surges of the Red Sea, to the fierce flames of the burning Tophet.

Having thus accomplished my first Task, the Explicatory part of my Text; said
I, Accomplished it? rather hudled it undigested, unpolished; as the Israelites
did their dow, unkneaded, unleavened at their sudden departure out of Egypt.
There remains a requisite Applicatory Meditation, without which, I should
entertain this great Assembly with an Harangue, rather than a Sermon.

In order hereto, to recapitulate, to sum up what I have enlarged;

I have unclaspt my Text to two Propositions. The one Negative, Implicit; the
other Positive, Explicit. The Negative, Implicit, being thus unveiled:
Neither the miserable Galileans, nor those unfortunate Wretches at Siloam, were
greater offenders than other Israelites.

I have offered at a double surveigh of the Negative Proposition, Historical,
as to each instance severally, Doctrinal jointly, in this tenor. The greatest
pressures, the sharpest miseries, the sadest periods of this life, are no
demonstrative arguments to conclude the greatest sinners.

In the second Proposition, I have pointed out the restrictive, adversative
Particle, [ But*] that links the parts; regulates our censures.

Every man, Si stultum quaeram meipsum reperio. Sen.
upon an impartial scrutiny for a sinner, like Seneca's inquest for a fool,
(both being of the same lineage) will return the same Verdict with that Stoic,
I find my self.

When Christ advertised his Apostles, that one of them should betray him; they
impeached not, defamed not one another, but each suspected the corruption of
his own heart, wherewith he was best acquainted, most strictly examined, S.
Mark 14. 19. (...).
They said to him one by one, Is it I? According to the Original, Is it not I?
A good man being a rigid Interpreter of no defailance but his own.

He who with a contrite severity will put his hand into his bosom, will, like
Moses, take it out white as snow, not for innocence, but leprosy.

I have observed two evident symptoms of the Divine destructive displeasure,
when the sin and the doom are like parallel lines, and when the latter is the
close train of the former.

I have, in the second Proposition, recommended the Duty to be discharged,
Repentance, to bewail that guilt we have committed, not to commit that guilt we
have bewailed; not to be scanty, dilatory in the exercise of it, but
expeditely, vigorously to rectify our judgments, to refine our affections, to
reform our lives; to crucify those lusts that have crucified our Redeemer,
that these Scorpions may afford medicines for their own stings. To abstain from
our Viands, and not iniquities, is the Fast, not of sacred Converts, but of
damned Fiends.

It is a disconsolate severe determination of St. Augustine, plures perierunt
poenitentia, quam peccato. Aug.
which I can never recollect without anguish of spirit, More have perished by
repentance, than by sin.

This Restorative has degenerated to a Bane; this Balsam of Life,
misapprehended, misappli'd, has wounded multitudes to death.

To promote an accurate unblemished repentance, I have set out the penalty to
be incurred upon the neglect of it. A Sentence like Elijah's little Cloud
scarce discernible at first aspect, but being dilated, blackens the Heavens,
teems with showers of perils, disasters.

I have pointed out the extremity of the Judgment, not a decay, but a period, [
You shall perish] the Universality [ All] the Similitude [ Likewise] enwrapt in
the same dismal fate. It was an interval of forty years before this doom was
fulfilled. Christ thus long protracted the Execution, after he pronounced the
Sentence. Nebuchadnezzar had a years respite after Judgment was past, for
transforming him from a humane to a brutish shape. The Ninivites were reprieved
forty days, and they repented in sackcloth and ashes. Non mutat voluntatem, sed
vult mutationem.
God then reverst his Judgment, without any stain of instability, inconstancy;
not by changing his will, his purpose in himself, but willing, purposing a
change in the effect, as the Schoolmen state it; whose decision not
apprehended by Jonah, excited his peevish regret. He preferred the imaginary
reputation of a Prophet, before the real preservation of a populous Kingdom;
being discomposed, that God was more merciful than himself.

Let not these Ninivites rise up in judgment against us. If we do not
seasonably dread the menace, arrest the judgment, we shall irrecoverably sink
under the pressure, the horror of it.

We have of late years enjoyed tranquillity, plenty, the delicious fruits of
peace, whilst other Countries have been Aceld^ma's, fields of blood, exposed to
the rapines, the outrages of War; Cities besieged, battered, stormed, defaced,
rifl'd: Proprietaries, Masters, treated as Aliens, not only as strangers, but
prisoners, vassals in their own houses; (the Edict of insulting Soldiers, being
no less unmerciful, unreasonable, than Egyptian Taskmasters) whilst populous
Territories, furnished with the choicest accommodations, have been depopulated,
wasted, even reduced to Deserts.

They have been subjects of intelligence, of discourse; no motive of
commiseration toward others, of reflection upon our selves. Who less
afflicted, have been more depraved. I wish from my Soul it were a scandal to
assert it.

Our ingratitude, clogged with our impenitence, Vna cademque dies vidit
civitatem magnam, and nullam. Sen. Evagr. l. 4. c. 5.
may reserve for us the dregs of the Vi^l of Gods indignation. Our safety may
be least, when our security is greatest. One and the same day was the
computation of a great City, and of none at all, as of Antioch; part buried in
an Earthquake, and the rest made its own Funeral Pile, burnt to ashes.

That day that produced fire and brimstone to Sodom and Gomorrah, might shine
with as clear, as bright a morning-dawn, as any other.

The intemperance of the inhabitants of the Old World, did serve to introduce,
to usher in the Deluge. They were eating (the Original imports rioting with
brutish appetites) and drinking; (...)* S. Matthew. 24. 38, 39.
their sensualities indulged, pursued, till the Flood overwhelmed them.

When enormities of vices, prodigies of crimes, pass for garbs, for ornaments;
when it is generous to be intemperate, courteous to be debauched, modish to be
unchaste, fashionable, reputable, to be profane; gallantry of humor, elegancy
of style, to blaspheme; a Master piece of wit to carp at, to deride the wisdom
of God; when Theaters are more resorted to, more regarded, than Temples; when
mortification of body is ascribed to distraction of mind; when Prayers and
Fasts become incitements of Drolleries, of Scurrilities; when there is not so
much piety as hypocrisy; not so much beauty of holiness, as the paint, the
varnish of it, even to outstrip the spirit of darkness, not to regard to
appear Angels of Light. We may then imagine God pathetically expostulating the
case, Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? When the
indignation of that God is inflamed who is a consuming fire; when all the
expedients, the methods of the Discipline of Heaven, prove ineffectual for
reclaiming a People; then a day, an hour, a moment may suffice to blast the
most flourishing Dominions of the World, to deprive the greatest Peers and
Potentates of luster and of life.

When Phoc^s raised Walls and Bulwarks to out-brave Heaven, he was advertised,
There is wickedness within; which being enclosed, immured, will demolish the
firmest Structure, uncement every stone, lay Turrets flat and level with the
ground. The Fabrics, the Houses, the Palaces of impenitent sinners can fall no
lower, themselves may:

The Poets solace is a fallacy in Divinity, Qui cadit in terram, non habe^^
unde cadat.

There is a lower descent than the grave, than being inmates with wretched
Worms, in being consorts with the damned Spirits; lower than the putrefaction
of the earth, the damnation of hell.

But I forbear. I must start back from this dreadful dungeon, lest I be taxed,
as Oecolompadius was, that I am Commissioned to Evangelize, to preach the glad
tidings of the Gospel; not the terrors, the thunderbolts of the Law. That I am
sent, not to be a Herald, to denounce fire and sword; but to be a Legate for
reconciliation, to be a Factor to negotiate the best Merchandise, Peace; to
promote the best Peace, not with Earth, but Heaven.

The Romans would not treat with Pyrrhus, Plut. in vita Pyrrhi.
unless he would first depart out of Italy. There is an Italy of Transgression
as well as Climate.

There can be no League, no Correspondence betwixt a carnal, polluted Italy
below; and a spiritual refined Jerusalem above.

When a grave Athenian Ambassador repaired to Corinth to agitate a Confederacy,
observing a greater Traffic there of Vices than of Commodities, their
arrogance plumed with their wealth, Strabo Geog. l. 8.
a riot, a debosh, being their civility, their lasciviousness being their
piety, above a thousand beautiful Damsels being Votaries of Venus, not
consecrated, but prostituted in the Temple; he resolved to desist from his
Embassy, apprehending so vicious a place not worthy of the close amity of
Athens. The holy One of Israel will unite, confederate with none that persist
to be profane, impure. Though God will heal the bleeding wounds of a contrite
disobedience, yet he will not cure the fester'd ulcer of an obdurate heart, an
unrelenting spirit.

That I may not close my Sermon with my Text, in perdition, in perishing, lest
I seem to depart hence, not with the benign influence of a Star, Non
comminaretur non poenitenti nisi ignosceret poenitenti. Tertul. de poen. c. 8.
but with the malignity of a Comet; I shall, in the last place, invert the
Scene. God would not threaten to doom, to destroy the impenitent, unless he
would remit and save the penitent. Gods mercies are intermingled with the
severities of his menaces, like the Sunbeams in showers of rain. He denounces
his judgments, that he may not inflict them. He shows his Ax before he wields
it; it is like that carried before the Roman Consuls, wrapped up for an abatement
of severity: When he lays it to the root of the tree, he expects we should
prevent the fatal stroke. It is the Prophets insinuating address, his cajoling
eloquence, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason
together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white
as snow; though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool. O that this
rational overture might not only convince, but convert the pretended Oracles
of Reason, the modern Gnostics, who outvigh the Ancient for intellectuals and
impurities, for wits and vices. An unhappy faculty, to be ingeniously
ungracious, acutely profane and miserable. To stagger such Sophistry of
Miscreants, the Prophet Amos sets out Gods fierce displeasure, as the Painter
did Agamemnon's deep sorrow (for Iphigenia) covered with a vail: having
impeached their impenitence, more obdurate than Marble, (not to distill a tear
in a reiterated storm) not to relent in varieties of distresses, it being the
sharp accent of every judgment, the tragical aggravation of each affliction,
Amos 4. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11.
(five times recorded in one Chapter) Yet have ye not returned to me, says the
Lord. God at length pronounces a Maze, a Riddle of a doom, to perplex and scare
untractable offenders, Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel. It is a
clap of thunder, without a flash of lightning, a Relative without an
Antecedent, a locked Cabinet without a Key. No judgments expressed, that all
may be expected; all to be dreaded, that none may be sustained. It is the
Prophets practical inference in the same verse, ver. 12.
Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. This is the best refuge, as in National, so
in Personal anxieties, distresses. Let us meet the Lord of Hosts in his
fiercest marches, in the approaches of his judgments; that either with Ahigal's
prostrate submission, 1 Samuel 25. 35.
we may prevent, or with Hezekiah's devout humiliation we may reprieve, Isa.
38. 5.
or at least with Elias entire resignation of himself, his Family, his
Posterity, to the Divine Pleasure, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
( It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good) we may, if not unsting,
yet unvenom the sharpest tribulation, we may render this Viper a Restorative.

I shall conclude with the borrowed Rhetoric, Parcite regi, parcite populo,
pascite animabus vestris.
the Sacred Charm of a former Age, overcast with clouds, the wombs of tempests,
Spare your Sovereign. A vicious person is no less an enemy to his Prince, than
a Rebel against God.

A Religious Joseph did support the dignity of Pharaoh's Throne; did preserve,
secure the prosperity of his Dominion for his time. Spare the people. A wicked
man is a pest to the generation wherein he lives, his private mischief (like
Achans) may produce a public calamity. Kings 2. 12.
Elisha accounted Elijah the Chariot and the Horsemen of Israel. St. James the
Just was called, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. ^ 24.
Oblias, as being the Fence, the Bulwark of the City of Jerusalem, of the
Region of Palestine. The justice, ^umb. 25. 8.
the zeal of Phineas, did restrain the contagion of a spreading, pernicious
Pestilence. Let our devout repentance stand in the gap, to divert a destroying
Angel.

Lastly, Spare your own Souls, since they are ransomed by no corruptible
treasure; let not them again be captivated by any vile secular interest, nor
yet by a more vile, impure, sensual delight, since they are the purchase of
Christ's precious Blood; let them not become the prize of his and our malicious
Enemy: Let us shun his baits, his snares here, that we may eschew his fetters
hereafter.

From which; God of his infinite mercy preserve us, for the Merits of his
blessed Son, by the Graces of his holy Spirit. To which Sacred Trinity be
ascribed Glory and Honor, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, this day and for
evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

