Master William Thomas Esquire His SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, June 1641.

Concerning Deanes, and their Office, what it was originally, and what it is at
this present, and being proved to be for little use, yea of great abuse,
therefore declared not only unnecessary, but ought rather to be utterly
abolished.

Printed at London by Tho Harper, 1641.

Mr. WILLIAM THOMAS his speech in Parliament.
I Have heretofore delivered the reasons, that induced me, to yield my several
votes touching the corruption and unsoundnes of the present Episcopacie and
Church government, so for their unlawfulness of their intermedling in secular
affairs; and using civil power, as also the harm and noxiousnesse of their
sitting as members in the Lords house, and Judges in that most honorable and
high Court: Now I crave leave to do the like in showing the reasons of my vote
concerning Deanes and their office: I say that my opinion then was and now is
that as the office is unnecessary, them selves useless, so the subsistence of
the one and continuance of the other needless; nay rather, as I will declare,
most hurtful, therefore may be easily spared, any rather ought to be
abolished; my reasons are these, that the office of D^anes does ^^^ther tend or
conduce (as some have alleged) to the honor of God, the propagation of piety,
the advancement of learning, or benefit of the Commonweal, but ^ contra, that
they occasion the dishonor and disservice of God, the hinderance, if not
destruction of piety, the suppression and discouragement of learning and
learned men, and the detriment and prejudice of Church and Common weal; this
(...) conceive I shall make most apparent, if time and your patience will
permit: But first I humbly crave leave (and I think it will not be
impertinent) to declare what Deanes were originally in their first birth;
secondly, what in their increase and further growth; and lastly, their present
condition, being at their full, and, as I think, their final period.

As to their original, it is not to be denied but themselves and office are of
great antiquity, St. Augustine declaring both; but I do not say that it is an
ancient office in the church, but what Officers Deanes then were, be pleased to
hear from Saint Augustines own delivery in his book (...) M^ribus Ecclesi^
Gatholica, if that book, as also that of Monachoru^ be his, which Erasmus and
others have doubted: The Monks (says he) for their more retiredness and
better contemplation, appointed Officers which they called De^^^^, the office
of them, and why they were so called, how delivers in these words as (...) as
I remember, Opus a^tem (...) quas Decanos vocant, e^ quad sunt denis pr^pos^^^
(...) (...) suicorpor is tangat, neque in (...) in vestimento, neque so quid
^luid vel qu^tidiane necessitate vel mutate (nt asso^e^^) vale^^dini, hi (...)
Decani magna solicitu dine, omnia dispo^enses and presto facientes quicquid
illa vita propter imbecilitatem corpor is postulot.

Here we see the office of Deanes in Saint Augustins time, antiquity
sufficient, but not antiquity for being officers of the Church, therefore they
do not rightly pluad antiquity, as to the point now controverted, the question
being whether the office as now it is exercised, be the same that it was then,
sure they shall find it not only diff^rent, but in a manner quite contrary;
they are deceived that urgo in, but alloy (...) to know that this (...) is able
to discern and distinguish and (...) face of (...) from the true, and in vain
do they (when the Gib.) labor to deceive as by old (...); old shoes, old
garments, old (...), and old bread that is dry and ^^ould^ ^y therefore to no
purpose, and causeles^^ (...) they charge unto (...) novelty; and to offer to
take away Church-governors and government. What those men, I mean Deanes, were
originally we had how they came to be (...) and of the Ministers, and for what
cause, I shall here after declare; but we may not think this charging of us as
innovators strange; when as Christ himself had his doctrine censu red as new;
what Doctrine is this says the Jews; Mark 1. 17. we are not then to expect
that we shall escape the like censure of innovating.

The servant is not above his Lord, nor the Disciple above his Master; and
indeed so St. Paul found it, for the Grecians made the same demand to him: May
we (say they) know what this new doctrine is where of thou speak; Acts17.
But let us liberare animas nostras; conscientiae satisfaciamus, nihil infamam
laboremus, consentiamus i^ ea quod convenit, non in eo quod traditum.

But to return where I left, granting the name and office, we find them to be
only Caterers or Stewards to provide food and raiment for the Monks, whose
garments, as they were not costly, so was not their fare dainty, being but
bread and water; as witnesses St. Hiero^^, Athanasius, Theodoret, and others.
And Surius in the life of Pacho mus, written 1200 year since, testifies the
same. To have the like employment now, I neither deny nor envy them.

Well now, let us see how they increased in authority, and came to be
accounted officers of great dignity; then thus, when for the austeritie of
their lives, and opinion of their sanctity, Princes and othere did besto^e
lands and revenues upon the Monks, then their praposits the Deans did partake
of their honors and possessions, and then began the corruption and poisoning
of them; Tunc venenum (...) in Decan. religio peperit divit^^ and filia (...)
(...). Answerable whereto is that of Saint Hierom, In vitas Patrum, since holy
Church increased in possessions, it decreased in virtues; the like has Saint
Bernard, and many others.

Thus we see that the spring that was clear in the barren mountains,
descending down to the richer valleys, becomes thick and muddy, and at last
is swallowed by the brinish Ocean; Salsum perdulces imbibet Aequor aquas. But
to deliver. It in the words of an Honorable Author: Time, says he, is most
truly compared to a stream that conveyeth down fresh and pure water into the
salt Sea of corruption which invironeth all humane actions, and therefore if a
man shall not by his industry, virtue, and pol^cy, as it were with the oar,
row against the stream and inclination of time, all institutions and
ordinances be they never so pure) will corrupt and degenerate; which we shall
sea verified in Deanes and their officers. For now being endowed with great
possessions, it was ordained they should be chosen out of the Presbytery to
that place, Ne sit Decanum nise Presbyter, as I find in Saint Bernard. Well,
did they test in this state and condition^ No, they must be civil Magistrates,
Chancellors or Keepers of the Scale, Lord Treasurers, Privy Counselors, or
what have they not of lay offices dignities, and titles? I will not ^^^^ ble
you with enumeration of particular Dea^^s I will ouely cite one, though (if the
time permitted) I might cite 21. and that is a Deane of Paul, about Anno 1197.
who was made Lord Treasurer, who carrying that office, quickly hoorded up a
great treasure; at last falling into a deadly disease past recovery, he was
exhorted by the Bishops and great men to receive the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood, which he trembling at refused to do; whereupon the King admonished
and commanded him to do it, he promised him thereupon to do it the next day.
Being admonished to make his will, he commanded all to void the room but one
Scribe. Who beginning to write his Will in the accustomed forms, In the name
of the Father, of the Son, etc. the Deane perceiving it, commanded him in a
rage to blot it out, and these words only to be written: I bequeath all my
goods to my Lord the King, my body to the grave, and my soul to the Devils;
which being uttered, he gave up the ghost. The King hereupon commanded his
carcass to be carried into a cart, and drowned in the River. Good God, what a
change is this from being humble servants to poor Monks, to become proud
Prelates, Peers to Princes, Quan tum mutati ab illi^, nunc Cigni quomodo Corvi.
They now forsake their Templa paupe(...), and Templa pietatis, tanqum noxia
nomins and only ^llow and make choice of Templa honor is, and Templa fortunae.
They then took care for the ^oore Monastery, but now poorly care for the
Ministry: and to speak no less truly then plainly, they do either just
nothing, or (what is worse) nothing that is just. But not to tra^e them
further, let us examine what their present office is, which we find so
honored and dignified.

In the Constitutions of H. 8. and E. 6. thus I read, Decani quoque cum in
Clero amplu^ dignitalem and locum honoratum in Bcclesia soitiantur Presbyteri
sun^o, viri graves docti and magna prudentlainsignes Cathedrales Ecclesias
juxta illarum Constitutiones regant, Collegiotam Canonicorum quam Clericorum
Ecclesiae majoris praesint, neque discipli^^m lab^ sinant, providiantque s^rmma
diligen^ia ^t in^sna Ecclesia sacrd vitue or (...) just a rat^ene perigantur
(...) omni ordine and convenienti gravitat^ a^fratrum ^tilitat. agantur, (...)
^rehidiaconi (...) (...) domi hoc est in Ecclesia Cashedrali and ejus Ca^nicis
and Clericis Episcopo sint adjumento quast duo (...) membr. utilissima and
necessaria. Quare (...) Decani abesse debent asua Ecclesia (...) maxima and
^words gentissima causa ab Episcopo approbanda. I have delivered the whole
Chapter entire, because I would deal clearly.

Afterward in the ninth Chapter I read preaching to be part of their duty.
Concionens habeat hecanus in Ecclesia Cathedrali singulis diebus dominicis

Thus their office is declared to be these particulars following.

1. To rule and order the Church, and to look to the repair, and for the
decoration thereof, as is also elsewhere enjoined.

2. To preserve discipline and holy rites.

3. To be adjuments or assistants to the Bishops in Cathedrals, as be the
Archdeacons abroad.

Part of which assistance is, as seems, to preach for them, but the Bishops
will excuse them that service as too painful, nay forbid it as too dangerous;
but though they will not busy themselves in preaching, yet have they leisure
to be inventive and operative in poor beggarly toys and trifles, which
neither bring honor to God nor good to the Church and people; their preaching
and godly life did anciently win the peoples hearts to love God, and them as
his Ministers, whom they received as Angels of God, Ambassadors from heaven:
Humility, piety and industry laid the foundation of all those magnificent
structures, dignities, titles, places, revenewes and privileges wherewith the
Churchmen were anciently endowed, what has or is likely to wast and demolish
them is easy to conjecture; King James has delivered it in these words. The
natural sickness that has ever troubled and been the decay of all Churches
since the beginning of the world, has been pride, ambition, and avarice, and
these infirmities wrought the overthrow of the popish Church, in this Country
and diverse others; but the reformation of Religion in Scotland was
extraordinarily wrought by God, though many things were inordinatly done by
such as blindly were doing the work of God. Thus far that wife and religious
Prince.

But lest I should forget a principal part of the office, Church Music, it
shall have here the first place, the rather, for that as I read the first
coming in thereof was to usher Antichrist, for Idoe find in my reading that
Anno 666. the year that was designed or computed, for the coming of
Antichrist, Vitalian Bishop of Rome brought to the Chirch singing of service
and the use of Organs, etc. as we read in Plas, Baleus, and others, in the
life of Vitalian, who therefore was called the musical Pope, although at that
time there was greater occasion of sorrow, the Longobards having entered and
wasted Italy, and therefore fasting and praying had been more proper then
music and melodious singing. Here upon (says mine Author) ignorance arose
among the people, lulled, (as it were) asleep by the confused noixe of many
voices. This carried color of advancing devotion, although it was no better
(as the case then stood) then the Altar erected to the unknown God, Acts 17.
Hereby the key of knowledge was hid, Luke 11. When the common people understood
not what was sung. and the heat of (...) quenched in men of understanding whose
ears were tickled, but hearts not touched, whilst (at St. Augustine
complains of himself) so most were more moved by the sweetness of the long
then by the sense of the matter, which was ^ung unto them, working their bane,
like the deadly touch of the Aspis in a tickling delight, or as the soft touch
of the Hien^, which does infatuate and lull asleep and then devoureth; if
Service in the Latin or unknown tongue, whereof the simplest people
understood somewhat, was justly censured, certainly this manner of singing
Psalms and Service, whereof the most learned can understand nothing, is to be
condemned: I dislike not singing, though by music of Organs and other
instruments, but I wish that what (...) sung may be understood; and as
Justinian the Emperor commanded all Bishops and Priests to celebia^^ prayer
with a loud and clear voice, (...) mode, that the minds of the hearers might
be sti^red up with more devotion to express the praises of God, so wish I,
that Service and Psalms may be so read and sung that they may be understood,
and so edify the mind as well as please the ear.

Now I am to declare that this office does neither tend to the honor of God,
the propagation of piety, the advancement of learning, or benefit of the common
weal, but to the contrary, as I have delivered, rather to the dishonor, etc.
But the day being so far spent, I will not assume too much boldness to press
upon your patience, for further hearing thereof, but will crave leave for
further rendering thereof at fitter opportunity and your better co^veniency.

FINIS.

