ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A LATE TREATISE, Entitled The Protestant Reconciler;
Humbly pleading for Condescension to Dissenting Brethren in things Indifferent
and Unnecessary for the sake of Peace.

And showing How Unreasonable it is to make such things the Necessary
Conditions of Communion.

By a WELL-WISHER to the Churches Peace, and a LAMENTER of her Sad Divisions.

My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change. Prove. xxiv. 21. Qui deliberant, jam desciverunt. Tacitus.
(...). Qui spirnit modica, paulatim decidet. Ecclus. xix. 1. LONDON, Printed
for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
Thou will find in these Papers some public Memorials both of Church and
State, which tend to maintain just and charitable Thoughts of our present
Establishments and Governors; with certain Considerations of no small moment
to be duly weighed by all, that importune or attempt a Change; and may
possibly evince, That our Peace and Happiness depends rather upon a teachable
Spirit, and Christian Obedience and Submission in the Subject, than any great
Necessity of Condescension or Alterations by Authority, which yet are left
entirely, as they ought to be, to the Religious Prudence of those who are over
us in the Lord; to whom they properly belong.

(...). Eccles. 7. 16. SOME ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Protestant Reconciler, etc.
SECT. I.
The Reconcilers Apology in his Preface.
GOD is my Witness, what I have discoursed in these Papers, is my fixed
Judgment, which I have taken up upon Convictions, which I am not able to
resist, and not from any carnal Motives or any Prejudices whatsoever.

Yet, being sensible of my own weakness and proneness to mistake in judging,
and most unwilling to do the least dis-service to the Church, of which I am at
present an unworthy Member, or to those Reverend Superiors, whom from my heart
I honor and own, as the true Apostolic Guides and Rulers of the Church,
(which, if I be mistaken in my Judgment, I unwillingly may do) I therefore do
entreat my Brethren of the Clergy, who shall peruse these Lines, to do it with
the exactest scrutiny, and, if, upon perusal, they do find, or judge my Reasons
unconcluding, and that my Judgment in this Matter is not according to Truth,
that out of their abundant Charity they would be pleased to convince me of my
Error.

There being nothing in the World, in which I shall more heartily rejoice, than
a clear Conviction, that in that part of my Discourse, which does concern my
ever-honour'd Superiors, I have been mistaken.

Teach me, my Reverend Brethren, and I will hold my peace; cause me to
understand, wherein I have erred, and I will thankfully, yea I will publicly
retract it.

I hope, I shall not be accused of Singularity, or Unkindness to the Church of
England.

Since, what I plead for in this Book, Ibid. p. 55
is only the Religion of my King, and that which I have learned from his most
excellent Declaration, etc.

Since I my self do from my heart conform to all that is required by the Church
of England, etc.

Since I verily believe all separate Congregations in the Nation, which are not
subject to the Government of our Diocesans, are schismatical, and all they,
that do abet and head them, and exercise among them a spiritual Jurisdiction
independent on them, do set up Altar against Altar, and therefore out of pure
commiseration to their souls do plead in their behalf.

Since I do only plead for this Condescension, because I do really believe;
it is for the Glory, the Safety, the Advantage of the Church of England, and of
the Protestant Religion; that it will be highly instrumental for the Good of
Souls, and will conciliate so great Renown and Credit to our Reverend Bishops,
as to make future Generations rise up and call them Blessed. And therefore, if
I have been somewhat transported beyond the measures of my Station, it is pure
zeal for my Religion, and the Good of Souls, and for the Honor, Safety, and
Advantage of the Church of England and her Apostolical Governors, which caused
me to be thus transported.

Since I, who do now humbly plead for Condescension, do intend, God willing, to
plead, as stiffly, and, I hope, with more Conviction, for submission to the
Constitutions of the Church of England.

Since, lastly, I am very willing and desirous to be convinced of my Error,
and, such conviction being given, to retract, what I have writ on this Subject.

I hope, what is written with all the P. 60.
modesty I could, and as much deference to my most honored Superiors, as the
application of the present Subject would permit: I say, if these things be
considered, I hope, that I have given no just occasion of offense to any Member
of the Church of England.

[All this I allow of, so far as it is not evidently protestatio contra factum;
for in that case the Reconciler himself will excuse P. 118.
us from believing of men's demurest Protestations.]

[He entreats his Readers, who shall peruse these Lines, to do it with the
exactest scrutiny, and professes, wherein-soever he shall be convinced of
Error, not only thankfully to accept of it, but publicly to retract, etc.]

SECT. II.
The Reconciler's Proposition laid down.
[THat things indifferent, which Chapter 1. P. 4.
may be changed and altered without sin, or violation of God's Laws, ought not,
especially under our present circumstances, to be imposed by our Superiors, as
the conditions of Communion, or as conditions, without which none shall
minister in sacred things, though called to that work, and none shall be
partakers of the public Ordinances, which Christ has left to be the ordinary
means of Grace and of Salvation to Mankind; but shall upon refusal to submit to
them for ever be excluded from the Church, and from the Privileges belonging
to the Members of it.] A farther Declaration of what he means to contend for.
(1.) He, who says, that it is sinful P. 2.
and mischievous to impose these unnecessary Ceremonies, and to retain these
disputable expressions of our Liturgy, which may be altered and removed
without transgressing the Law of God says true.

(2.) And he also, who pleads, that Separation from Communion with us on the
account of these few scrupled Ceremonies and disputable expressions of our
Liturgy, is sinful and unreasonable, as well as mischievous, does also speak
the words of Truth and Soberness. Or,

That one should not impose these P. 3.
things as conditions of Communion; and that the other should not, when they
are once imposed, refuse Communion upon that account.

Elsewhere, it is only the doing that, P. 333.
which the first Reformers declared to be lawful upon great occasions. The
Churches using her Liberty in matters wholly lest to her Liberty.

Not, that the Ceremonies be abolished, Ibid.
or the Conformists forbid to use them, but that others should be dispensed
with in their omission.

[The few Ceremonies are frequently expressed to be Kneeling at the Communion,
the Cross in Baptism, and the Surplice.

The scrupled and disputable expressions in the Liturgy are no where set down.
So that of these no definite Conclusion can be made.]

Elsewhere, he refers to the Treaty of the Savoy.

In the Treaty of the Savoy, abatement P. 330.
of the Ceremonies, and alteration in some disputable passages in our Liturgy,
were all that was contended for. [Though, I think, there was there also a spick
and span new Liturgy, or Directory by some drawn up, and pleaded for.]

Elsewhere, he refers to the Agreement Pref. p 10.
between Dr. Bates, Dr. Manton, and Mr. Baxter, in a Conference with the Bishop
of Chester and Dr. Burton, at the invitation of the Lord Keeper Bridgeman,
drawn up in form of an Act by the Lora Chief Justice Hales, for a
Comprehension, Chapter 10. 331
and limited Indulgence, or a new Act of Uniformity, which should neither leave
all at liberty, nor impose any thing but necessary. Upon which, says he, Mr.
Baxter queries, Whether, after such an Agreement, it be ingenuity, to say, we
know not what they would have? [And yet the Query will remain unsatisfied, till
we are told who empowered them to act in the Name of the rest, or how we may be
assured, their Brethren are of the same mind.]

Elsewhere, to His Majesty's Declaration Pres. p. 5.
from Breda, April 4. 1660. of Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no man
be disquieted or called in question for Differences of Opinion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, etc. And, His other Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, October. 25. 1660. of which more particularly afterward.
These, says he, are the very terms of Ibid. p. 7.
Peace, which here I plead for, etc.

Elsewhere, to the Excellent Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Preface to the
Unreasonableness of Separation, where he propounds this material Question. Is
there nothing Pref. p. 15.
to be done for dissenting Protestants, who agree with us in all Doctrinal
Articles of our Church, and only scruple the use of a few Ceremonies, and some
late Impositions? [Add, says the Reconciler, and some disputable expressions
in our Liturgy.] The short of his Concessions in Answer hereunto is this. (1.)
As to the Ceremonies. The Sign of the Cross either wholly taken away, or, if
that may give offense to others, the use of it confined to the public
Administration of Baptism, or left indifferent, as Parents desire it. (2.)
They, who scruple Kneeling at the Lord's Supper, to receive it with the least
offense to others, and rather Standing than Sitting. (3.) As to the Surplice in
Parochial Churches, it is not of that consequence as to bear a Dispute one way,
or other: And, as to Cathedral Churches, there is no necessity of Alteration.
(2.) As to the use of Godfathers and Godmothers: The Parents to be permitted
to join with the Sponsors, or publicly to desire the Sponsors to represent
them in offering the Child to Baptism; Then, the Sponsors to perform the
Covenanting part, representing the Child; and the Charge afterward given in
common both to Parents and Sponsors. (3) As to some Temper in the manner of
Subscriptions. An absolute Subscription to all those Articles, which concern
the Doctrine of the true Christian Faith; And a solemn promise under their
Hand, or Subscription of peaceable submission to the rest, so as not to oppose
or contradict them, either in Preaching or Writing, upon the same penalty, as
if they had not subscribed to the 36. Then, as to the other Subscription
required, 1o. Jacobi, to the Three Articles. The First, (says he) is provided
for by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. The Third the same with that to
the 39 Articles: And, as to the Second about the Book of Common Prayer, it
ought to be considered, (says he) (1.) Whether for the satisfaction of the
scrupulous, some more doubtful and obscure passages may not be explained and
amended, etc. (2.) Whether, upon such a review (by wise and peaceable men not
given to wrath and disputing) it be not great Reason, that all persons, who
officiate in the Church, be not only tied N. B.
to a constant use of it in all public Offices, which they ought in person
frequently to do; but to declare at their first entrance upon a Parochial
Charge, their approbation of the use of it after their own Reading of it. (3.)
Whether such a solemn use of the Liturgy, and approbation and promise of the
use of it may not be sufficient, instead of the late Form of declaring their
Assent and Consent. These, says the Doctor, are all the Things which appear to
me reasonable to be allowed in order to an Union, and which, I suppose may be
granted without detriment or dishonor to our Church.

And these, says the Reconciler, are Pref. p. 19.
all I plead for in this Book. For as for those, who deny the Lawfulness of
Liturgy,
and the right Constitution of our Churches, and who would be exempted from the
Jurisdiction of their Bishop, and set up Congregations separate and independent
on him, I know not, how to plead for them, without pleading for Schism,
Confusion, and Disorder. [And yet these, I fear, are the greatest part of
Conscience-non-Conformists.]

[Those likewise who revile our Reverend Bishops as Tyrants and Usurpers, and
profess, not to know what is meant by the Church of England, must here
consequentially be excluded.]

I note also, that the Excellent Dr. St. Ibid. p. 16.
had answered, (and that truly, says the Reconciler) That there is no good N.
B.
ground for any scruple of Conscience as to the use of our Ceremonies, much
less for separation from other Acts of Communion on these accounts. That the
primitive Church did anciently receive in the posture of Adoration; [where the
Reconciler adds of his own, He durst not say Kneeling; of which more
hereafter.) And that he does not question, but the practice of our Church in
the use of Godfathers and Godmothers may be justified.

Next he refers to Dr. Tillotson, in his Ibid. p. 19.
Sermon on John 13. 34, 35. It is not for private persons to undertake in
matters of public Concernment; but I think, we have no cause to doubt, but the
Governors of our Church (notwithstanding all the Advantages of Authority, and
we think of Reason too on our side) are persons of that piety and prudence,
that for Peace-sake, and in order to a firm Union among Protestants, they would
be content, if that would do it, not to insist on little things, but to yield
them up, whether to the Infirmity, or Importunity, or, perhaps, in some very
few things to the plausible Exceptions of those, who differ from us.] If then
(says the Reconciler hereupon, this be not done, it must be in his Judgment
through defect of piety and prudence in some men, or of content with what is
reasonable in others.

[Here should be noted farther, that the Dean said excellently well. (1.) It is
not for private persons to undertake in Matters of public Concernment. (2.)
Supposes Authority to have the Advantage of Reason too on its side. And (3.)
speaks of these Concessions in little things for Peace-sake, and in order to a
firm Union among Protestants, with that hypothetical clause of principal Remark
in the present Matter. 'If this would do.] B. N.


But I will not transcribe all his particular References, but content my self
to annex some of his more general expressions.

Although some little Reason may be P. 132. P. 139.
pleaded for their use: Although the Rulers of the Church have certainly a
Right to impose Things Indifferent, yet, with submission to them, I conceive
they should not exercise it to give occasion to them that desire occasion to
traduce them, as men, that do more regard a Ceremony than an Immtortal Soul,
the exercising of their commanding Power, than the preserving of poor Souls
from damning Schisms, and the Church from sad Divisions, when it hinders the
Preaching of the Gospel to their Flock, as this imposing seems to do. P. 29.
Sometimes he would have the Ceremonies laid aside or left indifferent;
frequently, not imposed as Conditions of Communion. Governors to abstain from
using their lawful power of imposing, P. 149.
what is not edifying but destructive, and therefore not expedient to be
imposed. They may demonstrate their imposing power (says he) in such
Expressions P. 153.
and such Ceremonies, as are less subject to Scruple. He would have them
forbear, (...): or, to show, that it is better to comply with their
Injunctions, and yet not necessitate him, P. 126.
that cannot come up to them, lest a greater sin, viz. a Soul-destroying
Schism, should follow.

Elsewhere. If our Superiors are P. 157.
pleased to abate those things or to restrain them, not as sinful to be
practiced, or with a protestation that they do not esteem them so; but purely
for peace-sake and unity, and to prevent the ruin of the weak, the scandal of
Religion in the general, and reproach of the Protestant Religion in particular.
This will be satisfactory to those, who scruple the use of them, and granting
all they plead for.


What is here pleaded for, is neither a denial, nor a dissembling of the
imposing P. 159.
power in Superiors, but only an abatement of the exercise thereof toward
some weak Dissenters.

Which may be done, with asserting of Ibid.
the power, and a profession, that they do suspend the exercise thereof, not
through conviction, that it may not lawfully be used, but out of pure
commiseration and bowels of compassion toward their weak Brethren.

The Dissenters would put no restraint upon others, as to the Ceremonies in P.
160.
contest, but only humbly crave a freedom of Indulgence to themselves, and
would be thankful for it, and contented with it, (...) out of mere pity and
commiseration to their weakness.

An abatement of these Ceremonies, P. 164.
purely on the account of pity and condescension to the weakness of our
Christian Brother.

We contend about such things, as may be laudably performed by Inferiors P.
167.
at the command of their Superiors, and may as laudably be left indifferent by
Superiors in the prosecution of higher Ends.

If seems to be the Duty of Inferiors to comply rather with the commands P.
177.
of their Superiors, though they conceive them burthensom and inconvenient,
than to administer occasion to all those dreadful evils both to Church and
State, of which we have so sad experience. And it does also seem, to my poor
Judgment, to be praiseworthy in Superiors, should they so far comply with
the peevishness and stiffness, the weakness and infirmities of their
Inferiors, as not to give them occasion of doing so much mischief to
themselves and others, and to the Church of God, by imposing of those things,
which do but very little good.

Is not the power in your own hands, P. 332.
to grant, or refuse, as you shall see expedient to the great ends; of your
whole Ministry, the Glory of God, the peace of the Church, and the salvation of
Souls? If therefore they demand any thing which is apparently repugnant to
these Ends, you have good warrant to reject all such unreasonable proffers.

What is desired to be removed, but Ibid.
Things indifferent and unnecessary, and by our Church acknowledged to be such?
If therefore their demands only concern such things, I hope the benefit of such
Concessions, here laid down, will fully satisfy the Reasonableness of them. If
they do not concern them, they are not pleaded for by me, nor can be
rationally pleaded for by them.

If this Condescension only be allowed P. 343. N. B.
upon these Conditions; That men engage by Oath or solemn promise, that they
will never speak, or preach, or write against the little things, wherein they
are indulged, nor give disturbance to the Church about them:

And with smart Penalties on them, which upon these accounts do make or
contribute to any Factions in the Church, I know not what is further requisite
for the prevention of such Factions.

Now Thus would the more moderate Dissenters be content to be admitted;
and thus alone can any wise man plead for their Admission.

[The Controversy depends on this N. B.
Issue,

Whether it be better that myriads of P. 195.
Souls should be continually kept in danger of eternal ruin, or a few needless
Ceremonies and Expressions should be waved to prevent that ruin?]

Again, [The Question honestly and N. B.
truly stated is only this,

Whether those Rules of the Church, P. 338. 339.
which concern Things indifferent, and in their own nature by our own
confession alterable, should not be altered or relaxed, when it so happens,
that an horrid Schism, with all its dreadful Consequences, is by the Imposition
of them caused throughout the Body of the Nation, and the salvation of
innumerable Souls is hazarded thereby?] Thus I have laid together the fairest
Representations of the Reconciler's Proposal.

And thus I could be content to leave it recommended to the Consideration of
our ever honored Superiors, with all humility and deference, as the
Reconciler professes P. 280.
sometimes to do; only, there are these two or three Queries to be resolved
distinctly, as I conceive, in the determination of it.

Q. (1.) Whether this horrid Schism with all its dreadful Consequences, is
justly to be charged on the imposition of these Ceremonies, and disputable
expressions of our Common Prayers, as the Cause of them?

Q. (2.) Whether the waving these few Ceremonies and Expressions on the
Conditions prescribed, would contribute to the prevention or cure of them?

Q. (3.) Whether there is no other way of Redress for these Mischiefs more
reasonable and probable on the Subjects part?

SECT. III.
BUt I observe farther, That the Reconciler has inserted diverse passages, that
tend to prove the utter unlawfulness
of imposing any Ceremonies, especially that are insignificant, without respect
had to such Restrictions, as he at other times propounds; and such as slander
our Reformation and the Defenders of it.

Of this nature is that Citation out of Pref. p. a.
Beza's 8th. Ep. to which he puts an Hand in the Margin, and marks it out in
distinct Letters.

[I affirm, That Men so often do grievously sin, as they do introduce into the
Church of God any Sacramentals, that is, any Ceremonies significative of
spiritual things; and, that all symbolical Rites should be utterly excluded
from the Christian Church, into which they never could rightly be introduced;
and I believe the Church can never be restored to her native beauty, whilst
they do remain.] Again, out of the same Author. As P. 26.
to the Rite of Crossing, though it be most Ancient, I cannot see what good it
does: I would by no means reckon it among things indifferent; but think it less
so, than the brazen Serpent of Hezekias, the Example of which good King in this
matter, that is, in destroying the Idols of the Cross and Crucifixes, it
behooves all Christian Princes to imitate.

[And upon this the Reconciler afterward expostulates, Why do we not rather
follow the Example of good King P. 43.
Hezekiah, who broke the brazen Serpent, and carefully removed that occasion of
the Idolatry of Israel, etc? This indeed is an Instance, which the
non-Conformists have all along been copious in dilating on.]

Again, from the same Epistle, with another hand in the Margin. [They indeed P.
26.
seem to me to do best of all, who, no less diligently than open Idolatries, do
abolish such things, which, though they are not impious of themselves, yet are
unnecessary, and profitable for little, if a man use them aright, but very
noxious when abused.]

And, according to this rigor of Reformation, the Reconciler afterward applies
that serious Question in the Homily of the Peril of Idolatry, directed there
against Chapter 1. p. 31
the makers, setters-up, and maintainers of Images in Churches, to the case of
imposing our few indifferent Ceremonies; How is the Charity of God, or Love of
our Neighbor in our hearts, if when we may remove such dangerous
stumbling blocks to the weak and simple people, we will not remove them? etc.]

Again, out of Mr. Baxter; It is a Cruelty next to Diabolical to lay before men
an occasion for their damnation for nothing. p. 327.]

Again, from the same Author Beza still. Pref. p. 27.
If the Apostle did rightly chide the Galatians, that they, having begun in the
Spirit, fell back unto the Flesh, with how much greater reason may this be said
of you of England, if, when you have begun in the Spirit, you fall back, not as
they to the Flesh, that is, unto the Coremonies of Moses, but to the Trifles
and Refuse of humane Traditions? which God forbid!]

[Which Things should they once happen, they would most certainly be the
beginnings of much greater Calamities, Ibid.
than what you have yet felt.] The truth of which Prediction (says the
Reconciler) we have found by woeful
experience: Laying the Load of all our great Calamities upon this Imposition.
Then he cites Zanchius his vehement Declamation against the Surplice to Queen
Elizabeth, upon the Misinformation given him by some male-contented Brethren.
P. 28.


The fire of Contention about certain Garments, is now again to the incredible
offense of the Godly, as it were raised from Hell, and kindled afresh in your
Majesty's Kingdom; and that the occasion of the Fire is, because your most
Gracious Majesty, being persuaded by some, otherwise great men, and carried
with a zeal, but certainly not according to knowledge, to retain Unity in
Religion, has now more than ever resolved and decreed, yea, does Will and
Command, that all Bishops and Ministers of the Churches [here we have an Hand
in the Margin] shall in Divine Service put on the white linen Garments, which
the Popish Priests use now in Popery: Yea, it is to be feared, that the Fire is
so kindled, and casts its Flame so far and wide, that all the Churches of that
most large and mighty Kingdom, to the perpetual disgrace of your most Renowned
Majesty, will be set on a flaming Fire. [Here the Reconciler
inserts, Oh true Prophet! Though never Prince reigned with greater Quiet,
Security, and Honour] Seeing the most part of the Bishops, men greatly renowned
for all kind of Learning and Godliness, had rather leave their Office and Place
in the Church, than, against their own Conscience, admit of such Garments.

[And upon this the Reconciler bestows a N. B. thought it be, in truth, an evil
Note and false Suggestion concerning the most part of the Bishops; for we read
of but one, Bishop Hooper by Name; who also, though he for some time stood it
out, yet upon long Conference at last reformed himself, and yielded to the
public judgment of the Church.]

Of the same nature is that other rash assertion of Zanchius. It is out of all
doubt, P. 30.
that by This Law concerning Apparel all Godly men will be offended.

And as vain was the Fear of the Return of Popery by This means, which he so
Rhetoricates upon. Methinks I see P. 31.
and hear the Monks crying out with loud voices in the Pulpits, both confirming
their followers in their ungodly Religion by the Example of your Majesty, and
also saying; What, does not the Queen of England also, a most learned and
prudent Princess, begin by little and little to come back to the Church of
Rome? The holy Vestments of our Clergy being again received, we are in good
hope the day will come, wherein she will at length recall all the other Rites
and Sacraments of the holy Church of Rome.]

Then, upon the Instance of the brazen Serpent before mentioned, taken away by
godly King Ezekias, he assumes, How much more then are those unclean P. 32.
Garments to be banished out of the Church of God, seeing the Apostles never
used them, but the Whore of Rome has used them in her Idolatrous Worship, and
to seduce men?

Again, [which the Reconciler marks out in distinct Characters] All men know,
that the most part of all the Churches, Ibid.
who have fallen from the Bishop of Rome for the Gospel's sake, do not only
want, but also abhor these Garments.]

The contrary to which is to be seen in
the learned Mr. Durel's View of the Government and public Worship of God in
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, wherein is showed their Conformity and
Agreement with the Church of England, as it is established by the Act of
Uniformity.

Next I challenge that passage from Mr. Baxter's Dispute of Humane Ceremonies,
P. 45.
which the Reconciler thus introduces. It Is shrewdly argued by Mr. Baxter,
This seems to be coming after Christ to amend his Laws, and make better Laws
and Ordinances for his Church, than he has done, etc.] which is only the old
Argument varnished afresh, There is but one Law giver.

Next, That of Acontius, which goes farther, to the excluding any public
Confession of Faith in the Church besides the Reading of the holy Scriptures to
the People.

This excellent Observation (says the P. 52.
Reconciler) That in the Jewish Church the Restitution of Divine Worship was
often made by pious Princes, but never did they make any public Confession of
P. 53.
their Faith, but only read the Scriptures to their People, abolished Idolatry
and all the footsteps of Impiety, and the owning of the Scriptures was to them
a Confession of their Faith. And why N. B.
(says he) are we wiser than they were? In my Judgment it seems best agreeing
in one public Symbol to abolish all other Confessions of particular Churches.
Here now is a Door wide enough to
send the three Creeds packing with the three Ceremonies; and some, I fear,
would be well enough contented so to do.

I cannot excuse these Passages from some unkindness, and dis-service to the
Church of England, and those Reverend Superiors, whom the Reconciler
professes from his heart to acknowledge the true Apostolic Guides and Rulers
of it. I cannot but think, that those, who thus modestly plead for
Condescension, do want somewhat of due Reverence to our Dear Mother, as he yet
vouchsafes to Pref. p. 9.
own her. I must needs tax him as somewhat transported beyond the measures of
his Station, as his own heart, it seems, misgave him that he might be. Pref. p.
59.


And I have some farther Reasons so to judge.

Whosoever (says he) shall peruse Chapter 1. p. 3.
the Writings of the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet and his Defenders, will find
that they have been very silent on this Head, [saying any thing to justify the
exercise of imposing Authority] and have upon the Matter left our Rulers in the
lurch. And so, for ought I find, he is willing to leave them; not without an
Applause of the Triumphs of their Adversaries upon this Occasion.

This is the import (says he) of many P. 202.
shrewd Questions, which I meet with in the Books of the Dissenters, to which I
find no Answer in the Replies of any of their Adversaries; and which I do
entreat our Champions for the Church of England, as they respect the Credit of
our Church Governors, the Reputation of our Church, and of her Discipline, not
to pass by, without the least notice taken of them, as hitherto they have done.
Some Untoward Questions of this nature have been collected from Mr. Baxter's
Works by Mr. Barret in his Reply to the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's. -- Moreover
Mr. Barret himself P. 205.
has offered many Questions of like nature, which being slow of understanding,
I cannot answer to my own satisfaction, and therefore do cry out, Men of Israel
help. [As the Jews of Asia did, when they saw Paul in the Temple, stirring up
all the people, crying out, Men of Israel help; This is the man that teaches
all men every where against the People and the Law, and This Place, etc. Acts
xxi. 27. 28. This is the unluckie Pattern, which the Reconciler here,
unwittingly I am persuaded, writes after.]

Among these Questions one is,

What, if the Old Liturgy, and that P. 206.
new one compiled and presented to the Bishops at the Savoy 1661. had both
passed, and been allowed for Ministers to use, as they judged most convenient?
might not several Ministers and Congregations in This case have used several
modes of Worship, without breach of the Churches peace, or counting each other
Schismatics? What if our King and Parliament should make a Law enjoining
Conformists and Non-Conformists that agree in the same Faith and Worship for
substance, to attend peaceably on their Ministry, and serve God and his Church,
the best they can, whether they use the Ceremonies and Liturgy
[here our Reconciler hooks in scrupled expressions of the Liturgie] or no,
without uncharitable Reflections or bitter Censures upon one another either in
word or writing? where would be the sinfulness of such a Law?] Here now is a
plain Confession (to the contrary of what we heard before) that somewhat else
was insisted on at the Savoy, than the Abatement of Three Ceremonies, and some
scrupled Expressions of the Liturgy. And here is a door set open for those
independent Schismatics, our Reconciler says, he dare not, and cannot plead
for, agreeing, as they also allege, in the same Faith and Worship for
substance. And the truth is, They who scruple the Ceremonies, do for the most
part scruple the Liturgy; and they who scruple some Expressions, had, it may
be, as lief be without the whole. And, in the case of these two Liturgies
allowed, what must be done, where one part of the same Congregation is for the
old and another for the new? What, where the Minister is for the old, and the
People for the new? Or, the Minister for the new, and the People for the old?
Or, the Minister for neither, new, nor old? etc. At this rate it were easy to
multiply Questions, and there is a Proverb in that case, which I list not now
to mention.

I pass by diverse other things, at present, some of which we shall meet with,
by the way, hereafter.

There are two smart Inferences, wherein the Excellent Dr. Stilling fleet is
particularly concerned, as he will justify his Truth and Sincerity.

(1.) Hence we may see how little P. 297.
semblance of Truth has that pretense, that these things are to be retained,
and appointed out of due Reverence to Antiquity, [referring in the Margin to
Dr. Still. Hist. Account, p. 16.] For if men will endure things to be called by
their proper Names, is it not very like Hypocrisy, to pretend to retain three
Ceremonies, etc? Moreover, to retain P. 298.
this kneeling posture out of due Reverence to Antiquity, when no such posture
was used by Antiquity, [he calls it elsewhere a novel Thing] I fear cannot be
P. 293.
well excused from Falsehood, or from imposing on the People.

[2.) Hence we may see, how vainly it is pretended, that these Ceremonies were
retained or imposed to manifest the Justice and Equity of the Reformation, by
letting their Enemies see, they did not break Communion with them for mere
indifferent things; or that they left the Church of Rome no farther, than she
left the ancient Church, [quoting again in the Margin, Still. p. 14.]

And he chews the Cud upon it, and goes over with it again in the close of his
Postscript.

He will be convinced, if he be skilful P. 363.
in Antiquity, of the great Insincerity of these two Pretenses. 1. That we,
laying the rest aside, have kept our present Ceremonies out of due Reverence to
Antiquity. And 2. that we have left the Church of Rome only in those
Ceremonies, in which she has left Antiquity.] Thus he treats the Ingenious and
most Judicious Dr. Stillingfleet, as he sometimes P. 270. P. 81. P. 109. Pref.
p. 15.
caresses him, the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet,
the Excellent Dr. Stillingfleet -- and, through him, I fear, casts some dirt
upon his Dear Mother the Church of England in her public Declarations.

The reading of some Dissenters Books, seems unto me to have a little
inspeevish'd him, and disturbed the more calm and temperate disposition of his
nature; so that he treats his Adversaries, now and then, with too much
slighting and contempt. Thus, what Dr. Womock alleges out of Meisner, a
Learned Lutheran, P. 155, etc.
he calls trifling Arguments, giving the lie to St. Paul, Falsehoods and
Fooleries, miserable Trifles.

But particular persons may the better bear with him, since he sometimes
forgets himself in his Duty of Reverence to the Church and the Apostolical
Governors thereof. That passage, I think, is somewhat scandalous and vain,
where he tacitly resembles the Ceremonies (which he elsewhere calls trivial
things) unto the P. 208.
May Pole. Let him, that will have a May Pole, have it, and he, that would P
341.
not have it, have no May Pole.

Sect. IV.
I Desire, it may be well considered, by how great and sacred Authority, and
that upon the maturest examination, the things excepted against stand
established; Authority both Civil and Ecclesiastical, that of the Convocation,
which is the Church of England Representative, and of the Parliament, which
includes King, Lords and Commons, the Consent of the whole Nation involved; and
This, not once, but often, time after time, the Objections to the contrary
frequently canvassed and deliberated upon. All sorts of Authority meet here
with Advantage.

This the Reconciler had in his eye, when he said, with a deal of Reason for it.

I know that it is not in their power (meaning the Reverend Bishops) at present
Pref. p. 9.
sent to make such Concessions, they being as much tied to the observing of the
Laws, as any order of men, and having no power to dispense with them, or to
make any Proposals for the healing of our Breaches, till by his Majesty's
Authority they meet in Convocation for that end: And therefore wonder at the
wickedness and injustice of those men,
who clamor so much against them, because such Condescensions are not
immediately made, that is, because they do not change the Laws, which is not in
their power to do. All the Arguments therefore, which the Reconciler does so
copiously insist upon, for an enlarged Charity in the censuring and judging of
others, whose Consciences, as he says, we cannot know but by their
professions, (he should have added, and open practices) do reach P. 88.
more strongly against the harboring, or insinuating of undue Fears and
Jealousies concerning our Superiors, whom the fifth Commandment enjoins us to
honor. We cannot be too careful of all unjust and uncharitable Imputations to
our Governors.

Let me here call to mind some few Clauses of the Act of Uniformity, in the
first year of Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, confirmed again in the eight
year of her Reign.

If any Minister shall preach, declare, Prim Eliz.
or speak any thing in derogation or depraving of the said Book (of
Commonprayer etc.) or any thing therein contained, [The crime and Penalty of
derogating from, depraving, or despising any thing contained in the Book of
Commonprayer.]
or of any part thereof, and shall be thereof lawfully convicted according to
the Laws of this Realm, by Verdict of twelve men, or by his own Confession, or
by notorious Evidence of Fact, he shall lose and forfeit to the Queens
Highness, her Heirs and Successors, for his first offense, the profit of all
his spiritual Benefices or Promotions, coming or accruing in one whole year
next after his Conviction; and also, that the person so convict, shall for the
same offense suffer Imprisonment by the space of six months without Bail or
Mainprise, etc.

And it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
or persons whatsoever after the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist
next coming, shall in any Interludes, Plays, Songs, Rhimes, or by other open
words, declare or speak any thing in the derogation, depraving, or despising of
the said Book or any thing therein contained, or any part thereof, -- Then
every such person, being thereof lawfully convict in form aforesaid, shall
forfeit to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her Heirs and Successors, for the
first offense, and hundred [The zeal of the Queen, Lords Temporal and commons
in urging the Bishops, and other Ordinaries, as they will answer it before God,
to see to the execution of this good and wholesome Law.]
Marks, etc.

And, for a due execution hereof, the Queens most Excellent Majesty, the Lords
Temporal and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in God's
Name earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves, to the uttermost of their
knowledge, that the due and true execution hereof may be had throughout their
Diocesses and Charges, as they will answer before God for such Evils and
Plagues, wherewith Almighty
God may justly punish his people for neglecting this good and wholesome Law.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, [A Provision touching such Ornaments of
the Church and Ministers, as are to be retained; with a power left to take
farther order about Rites and Ceremonies.]
That such Ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers thereof, shall be
retained and be in use, as were in this Church of England, by the Authority of
Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of King Edward; until other order
shall be taken by the Queens Majesty, with the Advice of her Commissioners
appointed and authorized under the Great Seal of England, or, of the
Metropolitan of this Realm.

And also, That if there shall happen any Contempt or Irreverence to be used in
the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by the mis-using of the Orders appointed
in this Book, the Queens Majesty may by the like Advice of the said
Commissioners or Metropolitan, ordain and publish such farther Ceremonies, as
may be most for the advancement of God's Glory, the edifying of his Church, and
the due Reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments.

And, now, I have occasion to remember, that the first step of the Reconciler's
Apology is in these words; [Since what I plead for in this Book is only the
Religion of my King, etc.] And that he Pref. p. 58.
begins his Preface with some remarkable Sayings (ad amoliendam invidiam) of
King James, King Charles the Martyr, and his present Majesty. It may not be
amiss to show a little more particularly, how far it may be said with ingenuity
and truth, that he has learned of them, or pays a deference to their
Judgments and Authorities.

[To begin therefore (says he) Pref. p. 3, 4.
with the Testimonies of our Learned and Judicious Kings; That excellent
Determination of King James is worthy to be had in perpetual Remembrance, Apud
Causab. Ep. ad Card. Perroon.
viz. His Majesty thinks, that for Concord, there is no nearer way than
diligently to separate things necessary from things unnecessary; and to bestow
all our labor, that we may agree in the things necessary, and that in things
unnecessary there may be Christian Liberty allowed. Now His Majesty calls those
things simply necessary, which the Word of God expressly commands to be
believed or done, N. B. or which the ancient Church did gather from the Word of
God by necessary consequence, [here he had done as well to have added a N. B.
too] But those things, which by the Constitution of men without the Word of God
were for a time received into the Church of God, though piously and prudently
introduced, His Majesty conceives, they may be changed, mollified, antiquated:
And what Pius the second said of the Celebacy of the Clergy, that being
anciently established by good Right, by better it might now be antiquated; that
His Majesty believes may in the general be said of most Ecclesiastical
Observations introduced without the Word of God.] This, says the Reconciler,
is a golden Sentence, and fully justifies all that I plead for in these Papers.]

Now here I observe, (1.) That this was proposed by His Majesty, for Concord
between different Churches: And whereas the Reconciler, elsewhere, demands,
What Reason can be given, why Pref. p. 57.
the Conditions of Communion betwixt Reformed Churches, should not obtain
amongst the members of the same Christian Church?] I think, That Reason, which
the Church in her 34th. Article, assigns, is here considerable: [Every
particular and National Church has Authority to ordain, change, and abolish
Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained by men's Authority, so that all
things be done to edifying,] which words he sets down in another place. -- Chapter
2. p. 36
And This our Parliament in the Act of Uniformity had an eye unto. Provided,
That the Penalties in this Act shall not extend to the Foreigners, or Aliens
14 Car. 11.
of the Foreign Reformed Churches, allowed or to be allowed by the King's
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors in England.] The Laws of every Church and
Kingdom are for their own members. In these our doings we condemn no other
Nation, nor prescribe any thing but to our own People only, etc.] Second Pref.
to the Liturgy.

But then (2.) I note farther, That King James his opinion was, That even
things by the Constitution of men without the Word of God, might be piously and
prudently introduced into the Church of God, as well as upon occasion changed,
mollified, or antiquated. And, what he asserts in the close, is ((...)) of most
Ecclesiastical Observations introduced without the Word of God, not of all of
them.

That useful distinction of King James between things necessary and
unnecessary, is well declared by one of the eminent Divines of our Church.

Mr. Mason's Sermon. on 1 Cor. 14. 40. P. 4.
Necessary I call That, which the eternal God has in his Word precisely and
determinately commanded or forbidden, either expressly or by infallible
consequence. Indifferent, which the Lord has not so commanded, nor forbidden,
but is commanded in the holy Scripture rather potentially than actually,
comprehended in general Directions, not precisely defined by particular
Determinations. Whatsoever God has in his Word precisely commanded, is
necessary to be done, for not doing of it is a sin. Whatsoever God has
forbidden, so long as it is forbidden, is necessary to be left undone, for the
very doing of it is a sin. Whatsoever is neither commanded nor forbidden, that
(whether it concern Church, or Commonwealth) is left to God's Vicegerents
upon Earth, who, according to the exigence of the State, may by their direction
command it to be done, or to be left undone, and both without sin.

And this is much more distinct, than, what the Reconciler cites from the Lord
Falkland's Reply to White. [I am confident, Pref. p. 12.
that all, who receive the Scripture for the only Rule, and believe, what is
there plain to be only necessary, would, (if they truly believed, what they
professed, and were not led aside, either by prejudice, or some Popish relics
of holding what they have been long taught, or following the Authority of some
persons either alive or dead by them much esteemed) soon agree in as much as is
necessary, and in concluding no necessity of agreeing in more, there being no
doubt, but it would soon appear plainly, what is plain.]

There is need of a great deal of Caution in declaring the Scripture to be the
only Rule, that it be restrained to matters peculiarly of divine Revelation,
and necessary in order unto salvation. [Haec sententia fuit omnium piorum
patrum, qui etsi in liberis ritibus agnoscebant Authoritatem Ecclesioe, tamen
in Dogmatibus Fidei eam ad solius Scripturoe Regulam alligatam putabant. Bishop
Davenant ad Colos. 4. 4.]

But to return again to King James.

What his Judgment was in these matters, he particularly declared at the
famous Conference at Hampton Court in the beginning of his Reign; where one of
See, Sum of the Conference (by Dr. Barlow, Dean of Chester) 1603. P. 86.
the Lords said, He was fully persuaded, His Majesty spoke by the instinct of
the Spirit of God. The then Lord Chancellor said, I have often heard and read,
that Rexest mixed a persona cum Sacerdote, but I never found the truth of it
till this day. And the Archbishop of Canterbury affirmed, That undoubtedly P.
96.
His Majesty spoke by the special assistance of God's Spirit.

Now His Majesty there declared, It was his happiness above others, (his
Predecessors) because they were fain to alter all things they found
established, but he saw yet no cause so much to alter and change any thing, as
to confirm that, which he found well settled already, not without Gratulations
to Almighty God for it.

And the Bishop of London put His Majesty in mind of the Speeches which the
French Ambassador, Mr. Rogne, gave P. 38.
out concerning the Church of England, both at Cantorbury after his arrival,
and at the Court afterward, upon the view of our solemn Service and
Ceremonies, namely, that, if the Reformed Churches
of France had kept the same Orders among them, which we have, he was assured,
there would have been many Thousands of Protestants more there, than now there
are. When Mr. Knewstubs took exceptions to the Cross from the offense of weak
P. 67.
Brethren, grounded on the words of St. Paul, Romans 14. and I Cor. 8. (which P.
68.
the Reconciler so industriously amplifies in his Treatise.)

His Majesty first began with the general Rule of the Fathers, Distingue
Tempora and concordabunt Scripturoe, showing the difference of those Times and
ours: Then a Church not fully planted nor settled, but ours long established and
flourishing: Then Christians newly called from Paganism and not thoroughly
grounded, which is not the case of this Church, since that Heathenish Doctrine
for many years has been from hence abandoned. 2. He added a Question
unanswerable, asking them, How long they would be weak? Whether 45years were
not sufficient for them to grow strong in? Then 3. Who they were, who pretended
this weakness? For we, says His Majesty, require not Subscription of Laics
and Idiots, but Preachers and Ministers, who are not still, I trow, to be fed
with milk, but able to feed others. And, 4ly, that it was not to be doubted,
some of them were strong enough, if not headstrong; and, howener they in this
case pretended weakness, yet some in whose behalf they now spoke, thought
themselves able to teach Him and all the Bishops of the Land. The Question
afterward being put, Whether the Church had power to instistute an external
significant Sign?

Mr. Dean of the Chapel alleged the Practice of the Jews, who unto the
Institution of the Passover prescribed by P. 69.
Moses, had, as the Rabbis witnessed, added both Signs and Words, eating
sour herbs and drinking wine, with these words to both, Take and eat These in
Remembrance, etc. Drink This in Remembrance, etc. Upon which addition and
Tradition of Theirs our Savior instituted the Sacrament of his last Supper, in
celebrating it with the same words, and after the same manner, thereby
approving That Fact of Theirs P. 70.
in particular, and generally, That a Church may institute and retain a Sign
significant; which satisfied his Majesty, says Dr. Barlow, exceeding well.

Here his Majesty enquired of the Antiquity of the Sign of the Cross. Dr.
Reynolds confessed it to have been ever since the Apostles time; but, of what
ancient use in Baptism, was the Question. The Dean of Westminster answered, out
of Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin and others, that it was used in immortali
lavacro; and some other affirming obit^r, that in Constantine's time it was
used in Baptism, What, says the King, and is it now come to that pass, that we
appeach Constantine P. 71.
of Popery and Superstition? If then it were used, I see no reason, but that
still we may continue it.

Then, the Question being put, How P. 72.
far such an Ordinance of the Church was to bind them, without impeaching their
Christian Liberty?

His Majesty seemed much moved, and told Mr. Knewstubs, He would not argue That
point with him, but answer therein, as Kings are wont to speak in Parliament,
Le Roy s'avisera; adding withal, that it smelt very rankly of Anibaptism --
And, in the close, I will have N. B.
none of That. I will have one Doctrine P. 73.
and one Discipline, one Religion in Substance and in Ceremony. And therefore I
charge you never to speak more to That Point, (How far you are bound to obey?)
when the Church has ordained it.

Dr. Reynolds afterward objecting the Ibld.
example of the brazen Serpent demolished and stamped to powder by Ezekias,
because the people abused it to Idolatry, wishing that in like sort the Cross
should be abandoned, because in time of Popery it had been superstitiously
used. (As the Reconciler also, with many others, argues.)

His Majesty answered. 1. Though I be sufficiently persuaded of the Cross in
Baptism, and the commendable use thereof in the Church so long; yet, if there
were nothing else to move me, This very Argument were an Inducement to me for
the retaining of it, as it is now by Order established: For, in as much, as it
was abused, (so you say) to Superstition in time of Popery, it does plainly
imply, that it was well used before Popery. I have lived among This sort of
men, (speaking to the Lords and Bishops) ever since I was Ten years old, P. 74.
but I may say of my self, (as Christ did of himself) though I have lived among
them, since I had ability to judge, I never was of them. Neither did any thing
make me more to condemn and detest their courses, than that they did so
peremptorily dislike of all things, which at all had been used in Popery. For
my part, I know not how to answer the
Objection of the Papists, when they charge us with Novelties, but truly to
tell them, that their Abuses are new, but the things which they abused we
retain in the primitive use, and forsake only the novel Corruption.

[ King James, it seems, is here liable to the Reconciler's double Charge
against Dr. Stillingfleet.]

2. What Resemblance, says His P. 75.
Majesty, is there between a brazen Serpent, a material visible Thing, and the
Sign of the Cross made in the Air?

3. I am given to understand by the Bishops, and I find it true, that the
Papists themselves did never ascribe any power or spiritual grace to the Sign
of the Cross in Baptism.

4. You see, that the material Crosses, which in time of Popery were made to
fall down before them, as they passed by, to worship them, (as the Idolatrous
Jews did the brazen Serpent) are demolished, as you desire.

Then for the wearing of the Surplice, P. 76.
whereas it was objected to be a kind of Garment, which the Priests of Isis
used to wear.

Surely, says His Majesty somewhat pleasantly, until of late, I did not think,
it had been borrowed from the Heathen, because it is commonly termed a Rag of
Popery. But, were it so, yet neither do we border upon Heathenish Nations,
neither are any of them conversant with us or commorant among us. -- But,
seeing it appeared out of Antiquity, that in the celebration of Divine Service
a different Habit appertained to the Ministry, and principally of white Linen,
He saw no Reason, but that in This Church, as it had been, for comeliness and
for order sake, it might be still continued. This being His constant and
resolute opinion, That no Church ought further to separate it self P. 77.
from the Church of Rome, either in Doctrine
or Ceremony, than she has departed from her self, when she was in her
flourishing and best estate, and from Christ her Lord and Head. [Here His
Majesty again falls under the Lash of the Reconciler.]

It is there farther noted, that all the P. 79.
Dissenters approved of the Cornered Cap.

And, in the close, His Majesty, (not without some commotion from the Idleness
of their Exceptions) said, If This be all P. 84.
they have to say, I shall make them conform themselves, or I will --

Then, touching Subscription, His Majesty intimated, 1. How necessary P. 93.
Subscription was in every well-governed Church, that it was to be urged for
the keeping of the Peace. For as Laws to prevent Killing did provide there
should be no Quarelling, so to prevent greater Tumults in the Church
Subscription was requisite. 2. Because the Bishop is to answer for every
Minister whom he admits into his Diocese, it were sit for him to know
the affection of the Party before his Admission. And the best way to know him,
and to prevent future Factions, was to urge his Subscription at his first
entrance; for Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hospes. 3. As Subscription
was a good means to discern the affection of the persons, whether quiet or
turbulent, withal it was the principal way to avoid confusion. --

Concluding, That, if any, after P. 94.
things were well ordered, would not be N. B.
quiet and show his obedience, the Church were better without him. Praestat ut
pereat unus, quam unitas. -- Only adding at last, That the weak were to be P.
97.
informed, the wilful to be punished.

If any thing farther be desired of King James his Judgment, we may read it in
the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical 1603. ratified and confirmed by his
Authority, among which we have Those that require Subscription; a Defense and
Explication at large of the Cross in Baptism; the last Three declaring a
National Synod to be the Church Representative, concluding the absent, as well
as present, with a Censure upon all the Depravers of it. And, touching the
Rites and Ceremonies, the 6th. Canon runs in these words: [Whosoever shall
hereafter affirm, that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church Canon 6 Jacobi.
of England, by Law established, are wicked, Antichristian, or superstitious,
or such as being commanded by lawful Authority, men, who are zealously and
godlily affected, may not with a good Conscience approve them, use them, or as
occasion requires, subscribe unto them, let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not restored, until he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked Errors.]

The Reconciler indeed tells us, from Chapter 1. P. 7.
Josias Nichols, Plea of the Innocent, 1602. (a worthy Witness in the Case
against his dear Mother) That some five years together, before the unhappy
time, that Subscription was so generally offered, there was such unity between
the Ministers, and they joined in all Places so lovingly, and diligently
together, that many Thousands were converted from Atheism [ The Dissenters have
been all along given to Multiplication, by Thousands and Myriads, many
Thousands.
and Popery; but when Subscription came abroad, how many godly and worthy
learned Preachers were silenced, deprived, and distracted? How were the
Christian Subjects grieved and offended? and the Papists and wicked men
encouraged and emboldned? What a Damp brought it to all Godliness and
Religion?] And This the Reconciler quotes, as true History, (for what else does
it there?) who yet begins his Preface with the Honor of King James his
Judgment.


Mr. Calvin would have pronounced otherwise in This Matter. Let it be
denounced, says he, that he is no longer to Ep. ad Farell.
be holden for a Brother, who disturbs the common Discipline with his
Contumacy. This has been always of force in the Church, as being decreed by
ancient Councils, That whoever will not be subject to the Laws of common
Discipline, [munere abdicetur] be deposed from his Office. And there is not any
need, says he, here to seek for humane Authority, since the Holy Ghost has
pronounced concerning such, Ecclesiam non habere morem contendendi. Let them
therefore bid him Adieu, who refuses the Rights of common Society.]

And here let me drop a Note of a Reverend Mr. Masvn's Sermon. p. 23.
Divine of our Church, worth the considering.

[They, which are such Admirers of foreign Churches abroad, let them a little
in This very Point compare the Church of England, with that famous Church of
Geneva. 1. The Church of England requires Subscription of the Ministers and
not of the common People, but the Church of Geneva urges not Ministers only,
but the People also. 2. The Church of England requires This approbation, that
her Rites are not contrary to the Word of God; but the Church of Geneva will
have her Discipline received in a more high and glorious manner. 3. The Church
of England contenteth her self only with Subscription, but the Church of Geneva
is more peremptory, requiring a solemn Oath.] Now, if any one shall enquire,
How, notwithstanding the care of King James, as well as Queen Elizabeth, the
Sectaries yet increased so much? We have the observation of a wise and learned
Prelate of the Church of England, (as the Reconciler calls Bishop Tailor
Disswas.
him, though he was an Irish Bishop, one, whom he cites abundantly out of) That
in the days of Queen Elizabeth and of King James, This Nation was so watchful
to prevent the Growth of Popery, that they neglected other Sects, till by
connivance they became too numerous, and overran both Church and State.] And
This I have quoted from the Reconciler. -- But Chapter 1. p. 9.
enough of King James, and his golden Sentences, which, notwithstanding the
stamp of his Learning, Judgment, and Authority upon them, will hardly pass for
current in our days.

Sect. V.
WE come next to King Charles the First, the Royal Martyr, p. 4.
and best of Kings and men, as the Reconciler deservedly calls Him.

[The Royal Martyr, and Best of Kings and men, in His Declaration made with
Advice of His Privy Council, in Answer to the Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom, Jan. 1641. speaks Thus, says he. As for Differences Biblioth. Reg.
among our selves, for matters Indifferent in their own nature, concerning
Religion, We shall in tenderness to any of Our loving Subjects, very willingly
comply with the Advice of Our Parliament, that some Law may be made for the
exemption of tender Consciences from punishment, or prosecution for such
Ceremonies, and in such Cases, which by the Judgment of most men are held to be
matters Indifferent, and of some to be absolutely unlawful.

I confess, I like not the Arguings from 41. to 82. (whatever be to be said of
Those from 60. Pref. p. 9. [It looks ill, when men incline with any degree of
affection, to the Beginnings of the last War, or the Capitulations of some upon
His Majesty's Return.] Chapter 1. p. 16.
) And the greatest check upon my mind against the Condescensions pleaded for,
is the dreadful prospect of what that Incomparable King at the long Run was
brought unto by His Condescensions; whilst they continually made the Granting
of one thing, the foundation only of asking another with the like importunity.

[It concerns us most to be affected (says the Reconciler elsewhere) with that
which most concerns us, and is still fresh in our memories, even the sad
desolations which were brought on Church and State, and That inhumane slaughter
of our Fellow Christians in This Nation, caused by our Contests about Trifles.]
Infandum Regina jubes. -- But, whoever were the cause, the Best of Kings and
men, I hope, was Innocent. He was at all times willing to comply wit the Advice
of Parliament, for the case of His loving Subjects, in all matters of
Indifferency. But That would not content or satisfy; till he had yielded so
much, that he was forced at length to yield His Sacred Head to the Block; and
Those, whose tender Consciences bogled at a Ceremony, could well enough
dispense with the shedding of that Royal Blood.

It Is very well known to every one, how grounded a value His Majesty had of the
Church of England, and all the Establishments of it, which he did, upon all
occasions, as ably defend and vindicate, as at last meekly and Christianly dye
for.

His judgment was for the settled continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England established by Law, from which, says He, We will D^^la^.
before XXXIX Articles.
not endure any variance or departing in the least degree.] -- And the
Reconciler's thoughts might easily have reflected back from 41, to the
Constitutions and Canons the Year before made in Convocation, summoned by His
Majesty's Writ, and afterward Ratified and Confirmed by His Letters Patent
thereto annexed, Among which we know, what Offense the Oath injoined for
preventing innovations in Doctrine and Government, was entertained with by
them, who pretended at first as modestly, as the present Dissenters do. And the
viiith. Canon was of Preaching for Conformity, in These words.

[Whereas the Preaching of Order and Decency, according to St. Paul's Canon.
viii. 1640]
Rule, does conduce to Edification; It is required that all Preachers (as well
Beneficed men, as others) shall positively and plainly preach and instruct the
People in their Public Sermons twice in the year at the least, that the Rites
and Ceremonies now established in the Church of England, are lawful and
commendable, and that they, the said People, and others, ought to Conform
themselves in their practice to all the said Rites and Ceremonies, etc.] This
lay immediately next to another Canon which the Reconciler has taken some
notice of, but to expose it to derision, rather than to recommend it; and by
it, indeed, to vilify all other Constitutions of the Church concerning Rites
and Ceremonies.

[The Convocation held An. 1640. P. 208, 209.
speaking of the laudable Custom of bowing with the Body, in token of our
Reverence of God, when we come into the place of Public Worship, says Thus,
In the Practice, or Admission [it should be Omission] of This Rite, we desire
the Rule of Charity prescribed by the Apostle may be observed, which is, that
they, who use this Rite, despise not them who use it not; and they who use it
not, condemn not them that use it. Now says the Author of the Mischief Pref.
of Impositions, [The Buffoon of the Nonconformists, who pleads against a
National Church for Those Independent Congregations, which the Reconciler owns
to be Schismatical] I would gladly hear a fair Reason given, why the Apostle
should prescribe the Rule of Charity to be observed in This one Rite or
Ceremony, more than another, why the Rule of Charity should take place in
bowing toward the Altar, (for so he, contrary to the very Canon, speaks) and
yet the Rule of Severity in the sign of the Cross, and kneeling at the Lord's
Supper. The Apostle prescribes a Rule, and they will make use of it, when,
where, and in what cases they please; and in others, where it is as useful, lay
it by like one of their vacated Canons. Is it, because we are bound to walk
according to the Rule prescribed by the Church? Why, are not they bound to walk
according to the Rule prescribed by the Apostle? Are we more bound to obey
them, than they the Lord Christ, speaking in and by his immediately inspired
Servants? Why could they not have relaxed the other Canons to the moderation of
This? or screwed up This to the inflexible rigor of the others? Was it for
Peace-sake, that we were indulged in This one? Let the same Motive prevail for
the same Indulgence in the Rest.]

This is one of Those shrewd Things, P. 202.
which the Reconciler observed in the Books of Dissenters, and which he
entreats the Champions of the Church of England, as they respect the Credit of
our Church-Governors, the Reputation of our Church and her Discipline, [which,
it seems, he is not concerned for] not to pass by without Answer. -- And does
not This strike at the Royal Martyr, the Best of Kings and men, as well as the
Church of England Representative?

Does such Stuff, as This, in good earnest deserve or need an Answer? Is it not
evident enough, that the Apostle himself did not prescribe That particular Rule
of Charity for all Cases? Is it not evident, that This charitable Apostle
prescribes a decent Rite and Ceremony elsewhere, without leaving the matter to
This Liberty of using it or no? 1 Cor. xi. 2. 7. 10. Is it not evident, that
the Rule of Severity, may be sometimes the Rule of Charity too And there are
some other Rules besides, such men should do well to study and think on a
little better. There is the Rule of Modesty and Humility; and the Rule of
Peace, and the Rule of Obedience, etc.
What an odd kind of perverseness is This, to argue, that, because the Church
thinks meet to show her Indulgence in forbearing to impose one Rite or
Ceremony, which yet she seriously recommends; that therefore she cannot as
charitably show her Authority in imposing others, as she apprehends to be for
Edification? Because St. Paul says, I beseech Evodias, and beseech Syntyche,
etc. Phil. 4. 2. might he not, consistently with the Rule of Charity, have
commanded also? Might he not have been bold in Christ, to injoin Philemon that
which was convenient, though for Love's sake he did rather beseech him?
Philemon xi. 8, 9. What will please This humorsome sort of men? Forbear them in
One or Two, or Three Points, for Peace-sake: That will signify Nothing, unless
you do so in all the Rest. -- But, to return to what I before suggested.

Hear we the Royal Martyr, the Best of Kings and men, in His Ratification of
Those Canons and Constitutions.

Forasmuch as we are given to understand, that many of our Subjects, being
misled against the Rites and Ceremonies now used in the Church of England, have
taken offense at the same, upon an unjust Supposal, that they are not only
contrary to Our Laws, but also introductive unto Popish Superstitions; whereas
it well appears unto Us, upon mature Consideration, that the said Rites and
Ceremonies, which are now so much quarreled at, were not only approved of, and
used by Those Learned and Godly Divines, to whom at the time of Reformation
under King Edward the Sixth, the compiling of the Book of Common Prayer was
committed, (diverse of which suffered Martyrdom in Queen Mary's days) but also
again taken up by This whole Church under Q. Elizabeth, and so duly and orderly
practiced for a great part of her Reign, (within the memory of diverse yet
living) as that it could not then be imagined, that there would need any Rule
or Law for the observation of the same, or that they could be thought to savor
of Popery. And, albeit since those times, for want of an express Rule N. B.
therein, and by subtle Practices, the said Rites and Ceremonies began to fall
into disuse, and in place thereof, other foreign and unfitting usages by little
and little to creep in; yet, forasmuch as in Our own Royal Chapels, and in
many other Churches, most of them have been ever constantly used and observed,
We cannot now but be very sensible of This matter, and have cause to conceive,
that the Authors and Fomenters of these jealousies, though they color the same
with a pretense of zeal, and would seem to strike only at some supposed
iniquity in the said Ceremonies; yet, as We have cause to fear, aim at Our own
Royal Person, and would fain have Our good Subjects imagine, that We Our Self
are perverted, and do worship God in a superstitious way, and that We intend to
bring in some Alteration of the Religion here established. Now, how far we are
from That, and how utterly. We detest every Thought thereof, We have by many
public Declarations, and otherwise, upon sundry occasions, given such
assurance to the world, as that from thence We also assure Our Self, that no
man of wisdom and discretion could ever be so beguiled, as to give any serious
entertainment to such Brain sick jealousies; And for the weaker Sort, who are
prone to be misled by crafty Seducers, We rest no less confident, that even of
them, as many as are Loyal, or indeed but of charitable hearts, will from
hence forth utterly banish all such causless fears and surmises, upon These our
Sacred Professions, so often made by Us, a Christian Defender of the Faith,
their King and Sovereign. And therefore, if yet any person, under whatsoever
Mask of Zeal, or counterfeit Holiness, shall henceforth by speech or writing,
or any other way, (notwithstanding These our right hearty, faithful, and solemn
Protestations made before Him, whose Deputy We are, against all and every
intention of any Popish innovation) be so ungracious and presumptuous, as to
vent any poisoned conceits tending to such a purpose, and to cast These
devilish aspersions and jealousies upon our Royal and Godly Proceedings, We
require all Our Loyal Subjects to make the same known to some Magistrate,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, etc. -- Read the Rest before and after the said Book
of Canons, too long to be here transcribed. See we the very Image and
Transcript of This Royal Martyr's Soul in the midst of all His Sorrows and
Sufferings; And when He had Death before His Eyes, in some of His Last words to
the Then Prince of Wales, our Now most Gracious Sovereign.

You may never expect less of Loyalty, Justice, and Humanity, than from (...)
c. xxvll.
Those, who engage into a Religious Rebellion. Their Interest is always made
Gods; under the colors of Piety, ambitious Policies march, not only with
greatest security, but applause, as to the Populace: you may hear from them
Jacob's voice, but you shall feel, they have Esau's hands.

Nothing seemed less considerable
than the Presbyterian Faction in England for many years; so compliant were
they to public Order: nor indeed was their Party great, either in Church or
State, as to men's judgments: But as soon as Discontents drove men into Sidings,
(as Ill humors fall to the Disaffected part, which causes Inflammations) so did
all at first, who affected any Novelties, adhere to That side, as the most
remarkable and specious note of difference (then) in point of Religion. All the
Lesser Factions at first were Officious Servants to Presbytery their Great
Master; till Time and Military Success, etc.

Let nothing seem little or despicable [ Never had Prince more reason to
inculcate This excellent Advice, O^^a principlis: s^r^ medi^i^a pa^atur, Cum
mala per longas inv^luere moras.]
to you in matters which concern Religion, and the Churches Peace; so as to
neglect a speedy Reforming, and effectual suppressing Errors and Schisms, which
seem at first but as an handbreadth, by seditious spirits, as by strong winds,
are soon made to cover and darken the whole Heaven.

If you never see my Face again. -- I do require, and entreat you, as your
Father and your King, that you never suffer your heart to receive the least
check against, or disaffection from the True Religion established in the Church
of England. I tell you, I have tried it, and after
much search, and many disputes, have concluded it to be the best in the world,
not only in the Community, as Christian, but also in the special Nation, as
Reformed, [ Virtus est medium vitio^um utriaque relactum.]
keeping the middle way between the pomp of superstitious Tyranny, and the
meanness of Fantastic Anarchy. Not, but that (the Draught being excellent as
to the main, both for Doctrine and Government in the Church of England) some
lines, as in very good figures, may happily need some sweetning, or polishing,
which might here have easily been done by a safe and gentle hand, if some men's
precipitancy had not violently demanded such rude Alterations, as would quite
have destroyed all the beauty and proportion of the whole.

The Scandal of the Late Troubles, which some may object and urge to you
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to
them, or your own Thoughts, in This,
That scarce any one, who has been a Beginner, or an active Prosecutor of This
Late War against the Church, the Laws and Me, either was, or is a True Lover,
Embracer or Practiser of the Protestant Religion established in England; which
neither gives such Rules, nor ever before set such Examples.

It Is true, some heretofore had the boldness to present Threatening Petitions to
their Princes and Parliaments, which others of the same Faction (but N. B.
of worse spirits) have now put in Execution, etc.

Thus the Royal Martyr, the Best of Kings and men. And may we not say upon it,
with the Widow of Tekoah, As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King, to
discern good and bad? 2 Samuel xiv.

Sect. VI.
WE are now come to the Suffrage of His present Majesty, the Living Image of
the Royal Martyr, whom God preserve, as the Reconciler well prays, in the
Contents of his Preface.

[His present Majesty in His Dechbration Pref. p. 5.
from Breda to all His loving Subjects, April 4. 1660. speaks thus, We do
declare a Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no Man shall be disquieted,
or called in question for Differences of Opinion, which do not disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom; and that We shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon mature doliberation shall be offered to Us, for the full
granting that Indulgence.] And, in His Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, October. 25. 1660. When We were in Holland, We were, says he, attended
by many Grave and Learned Ministers from hence, who were looked upon as the
most able and principal Assertors of the Presbyterian Opinions: And, to Our
great satisfaction, We found them [and I would His Majesty had always found
them so in England, as well as There!] Persons full of Affection toward Us, of
Zeal for the Peace of the Church and State, and neither Enemies to Episcopacy
nor Liturgy, but modestly to desire such Alterations in either, as, without
shaking the Foundations, might best allay the present distempers, which the
Indisposition of the Time, and the Tenderness of some men's Consciences had
contracted. For the better doing whereof, We did intend to call a Synod, and,
in the mean time, We published in Our Declaration from Breda, a Liberty to
tender Consciences, etc. [The Declaration from Breda then is here
acknowledged to have been an Interim or Temporary Concession only, until a
Synod was called; and as it was limited to such differences of Opinion, as do
not disturb the peace of the Kingdom, so it had reference plainly to an Act of
Parliament, which upon mature deliberation should be offered to His Majesty.
But there was no such Act thought sit by the Wisdom of the Nation to be
offered. 'Nay, the Henourable House of Commons, in their Address to His
Majesty, did Thus express themselves, Febr. 28. 1663. We have considered the
Nature of Your Majesty's Declaration from Breda, and are humbly of Opinion,
that Your Majesty ought not to be pressed with it any farther.]

It Is This Other Declaration therefore, which we are particularly to attend
unto: and, though it be somewhat long, I will not forbear the representing of
it again to view, so far as the Reconciler refers unto it. So then he proceeds.]

And again, we must for the honor of all those of either Persuasion, with whom
we have conferred, declare, that the professions and desires of all for the
advancement of Piety and true Godliness are the same, their profession of zeal
for the peace of the Church the same, of Affection and Duty to us the same,
They all approve Episcopacy, N. B.
They all approve a set Form of Liturgy, and they all disapprove and dislike
the sin of Sacrilege, and the alienation of the Revenue of the Church. And, if
upon these excellent Foundations, in submission to which there is such an
Harmony of affections, any Superstructures shall be raised to the shaking Those
Foundations, and to the contracting and lessening the Blessed Gift of Charity,
which is a vital part of Christian Religion, we shall think our self very
unfortunate, and even suspect that we are defective in that Administration of
Government, with which God has entrusted us. We need not profess the high
Affection and Esteem, which N. B.
we have for the Church of England, as it is established by Law: Nor do we
think That Reverence in the least degree diminished by our Condescensions, not
peremptorily to insist upon some particular Ceremonies, which, however
introduced by the Piety and Devotion, and order of former times, may not be so
agreeable to the present, but may even lessen that Piety and Devotion, for the
improvement whereof they might happily at first be introduced, and consequently
may well be dispensed with. 'And we hope This charitable compliance of ours,
will dispose the minds of all men to a cheerful submission to that Authority,
the preservation whereof is so necessary for the Unity and Peace of the Church.
-- And we have not the least doubt, but that the present Bishops will think the
present
Concessions now made by us to allay [ Have They not well Answered This Hope?
Even as they did His Majesty's most Hearty desire, that in the mean time They
would not Totally lay aside the Book of Common Prayer, but Read the parts
against which there can be no Exception, etc.]
the present distempers, very just and reasonable, and will very cheerfully
conform themselves thereunto.

Lastly, As for Ceremonies, which have P. 7.
administered so much matter of difference and contention, Our present
consideration and work is, to gratify the private Consciences of those who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to and dispensing with
their omitting those Ceremonies, not utterly to abolish any, which are by Law
established.

And therefore by This Royal Declaration it is provided, 1. That none shall be
denied the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, though they do not use the gesture
of kneeling in the Act of receiving. 2. That no man shall be compelled to use
the Cross in Baptism, or suffer for not so doing. 3. That all men shall be left
to their Liberty, as to the using of the Surplice, to do as they shall think
fit, without suffering in the least degree, for wearing or not wearing it.

And, because some men, otherwise pious and learned say, They cannot conform
unto the Subscription required by the Canon, nor take the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, We are content, and it is Our Will and Pleasure, (so they take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy) that they may receive Ordination,
Institution and Induction, and shall be permitted to exercise their Function,
and to enjoy the Profits of their Livings, without the said Subscription, or
Oath of Canonical Obedience. So they read and declare their Assent to all the
Article of Religion, which only concern the Confession of the True Christian
Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in the Book of Articles.]

These, says the Reconciler, are the very terms of Peace, which here I plead
Ib. and p. 8.
for, and which I humbly conceive would very much conduce unto the healing of
our Breaches. And, if ever a Divine Sentence was in the Mouth of a King, and
his Mouth erred not in judgment, [which I hope is not doubted of, because it is
Scripture] I verily believe Prove. xvi. x.
(says he) it was thus with Our present Majesty [which is a mere (...), we
have again, p. 9.] for His present Majesty] when he composed that admirable
Declaration, which, next to Holy Scripture, I Adore, and think, that the United
judgment of the whole Nation cannot frame a better, or a more unexceptionable
Expedient for a firm and lasting concord of these distracted Churches.]

Now I observe, (1) That His Gracious Majesty did here sufficiently Testify
and express his high Affection and Esteem for the Church of England, as it is
established by Law; and suppose, that the Ceremonies scrupled were introduced
by the Piety and Devotion, and Order of former Times, ann for the improvement
of the same; and assert, that He would not utterly abolish any which are by Law
established, but only by a Dispensation and Indulgence gratify the private
Consciences of Those, who were grieved with the use of some of them.

(2.) That His Majesty did testify an extraordinary charity in his Opinion of
the persons to whom This Indulgence was designed, as full of Affection toward
Himself, of Zeal for the Peace both of Church and State, and neither Enemies to
Episcopacy or Liturgy, (without Equivocation or Mental Reservation, of
Parochial Episcopacy, or Directorian Liturgy) but modestly desiring such
Alterations only in either, as might not shake the Foundations, and best allay
the present distempers. And pity it is so extraordinary a Charity should in any
thing be imposed upon. I wish heartily, that we had once Reason to believe, or
that we could persuade the People to believe, as His Majesty upon the
Professions of some then did; That the most able and principal Assertors of the
Presbyterian Opinions, did with an Harmony of Affections submit to These
excellent Foundations, which were to lie unshaken at the bottom of all His
Majesty's designed Superstructions; that we might pronounce of them to their
perpetual Honor, They are all zealous for the Peace of the Church; They are
all
Loyal in their Duty to their King; They all approve Episcopacy, English
Diocesane Episcopacy; They all approve a Set Form of Liturgy; and do only with
modesty desire such Alterations in the Common Prayer Book, as may not shake the
Foundations of it; They all disapprove and dislike the sin of Sacrilege, as
well as Rebellion, and the Alienation of the Revenue of the Church, the Sale of
Bishops, Deans and Chapter-Lands. -- Did their Followers thus think and believe
of them, they would, I am persuaded, be soon reconciled to a good Opinion of us
of the Church of England by Law established, and cry out of them, as the
strangest Assertors of Presbyterian Opinions in the world.

(3) In order to this Indulgence, Commissioners, we know, were under the Broad
Seal Appointed, and the Result of their Debates commended to the Convocation or
Synod; and so tendered to the examination and consent of Both Houses in
Parliament, the Product whereof we had at last in the Act of Uniformity, which
His Majesty did pass into a Law. And it is, to me, a Transport of Admiration in
the Reconciler, so to adore a Declaration of His Majesty's by the Advice of His
Council only, as to prefer it beyond tho maturer Thoughts of That Sacred Person
upon the united judgment of the whole Nation.

We have lived in days, wherein a Vote or Ordinance of Parliament has born
down both the Obligation of Laws, and the Repute of His Majesty's most solemn
Declarations; And, how the Reconciler may escape, I know not, but, sure I am,
that some others would be looked upon with a very evil Eye, as Popishly
affected, and so many Friends to Arbitrary Government, should they presume
almost to Deifie a Proclamation from the King, at This Rate, beyond an Act of
Parliament, wherein the United Wisdom of the King, and all Estates of his
Subjects, the Wisdom both of Church and State is concerned. What a miraculous
Cure would it be to our present Convulsions, were the Dissenting Populace but a
little leaning to the Reconciler's mind, That a Divine Sentence is in the
King's Mouth, and his Lips transgress not in Judgment, even where the United
Judgment of the whole Nation may possibly Opine otherwise? -- But we will leave
him undisturbed in his Extatical and Rapturous Loyalty, and content our selves
with That of the more Current Stamp, which is like best to hold.

It will not be amiss therefore, here to take notice, how the Wisdom of the
Nation did utter it self in the aforenamed Act of Uniformity, not without some
reference made to This Declaration: XIV. carel. II.
And so to add This other Text of Solomon to the Precedent. 'In the multitude
of Counselors there is safety, Prove. 11. 14. And This properly too, while the
Sentence is still the King's, and the Council his Subjects.

Whereas in the First year of the late Queen Elizabeth, there was one Uniform
Order of Common-Service and Prayer, and of the Administration of Sacraments,
Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, (agreeable to the Word of God,
and Usage of the primitive Church) compiled by the Reverend Bishops and Clergy,
set forth in one Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, etc. and enjoined
to be used by Act of Parliament holden in the First year of the said late
Queen, entitled, An Act for the Uniformity, [ Commendation of the
Common Prayer Book.
etc. very comfortable to all good People desirous to live in Christian
Conversation, and most profitable to the Estate of this Realm, upon the which,
the
Mercy, Favor Mercy, Favor and Blessing of Almighty God is in no wise so
readily and plentifully poured, as by Common Prayers, due using of the
Sacraments, and often preaching of the Gospel, with Devotion of the Hearers:
And yet, This notwithstanding, a great number of People in diverse parts of
This Realm, following their own sensuality, and living [A Character of the
dissenting and separating Multitude.]
without Knowledge and due Fear of God, do wilfully and schismatically
abstain, and refuse to come to their Parish Churches, and other public Places,
where Common Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and preaching of the
Word of God is used, upon the Sundays and other days ordained and appointed to
be kept and observed as Holy days: And whereas by the great and scandalous
neglect of Ministers in the said Order or Liturgy, so set forth and enjoined,
as
aforesaid, great Mischiefs and Inconveniences, (...)
during the times of the [The head of Nilus.]
late unhappy Troubles, have arisen and grown, and many People have been led
into Factions and Schisms, to the great decay and scandal of the Reformed
Religion of the Church of England, and to the hazard of many Souls: For
prevention whereof in time to come, for settling the Peace of the Church, and
for allaying the present Distempers which the indisposition of the Time has
contracted, [His Majesty's Declaration, October. 25. 1660. referred to.] with his
commission for a Revien.]
the King's Majesty (according to his Delcaration of the five and twentieth of
October 1660.) granted his Commission under the Great Seal of England, to
several Bishops and other Divines, to review the Book of Common Prayer, and to
prepare such Alterations
and Additions as they thought fit to offer: And afterward the Convocations of
both the Provinces of Canterbury and York, being by his Majesty called and
assembled, (and now sitting) His Majesty has been pleased to Authroize and
Require the Presidents of the said Convocations, and other the Bishops and
Clergy of the same, to review the said Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of
the Form and Manner of making and consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons:
And that after mature consideration, they shall make such Additions and
Alterations in the said Books respectively, as to them should seem meet and
convenient: And should exhibit and present the same to His Majesty in Writing,
for his farther allowance or Confirmation: Since which time, upon full and
mature Deliberation, they the said Presidents, Bishops and Clergy of both
Provinces, have [ The Alterations and Additions made upon That Review by the
Convocations of both Provinces, upon full and mature deliberation; exhibited
and presented to his Majesty. And b^ his Majesty upon due consideration, (...)
approved, allowed, and recommended to This Parliament.] And thereupon the Book
enacted.]
accordingly reviewed the said Books, and have made some Alterations, which
they think fit to be inserted to the same, and some Additional Prayers to the
said Book of Common Prayer, to be used upon proper and emergent occasions; and
have exhibited and presented the same unto His Majesty in writing, in one Book
entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and
other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, etc. All which His Majesty having
duly considered, has
fully approved and allowed the same, and recommended to This present
Parliament, that the said Book of Common Prayer, with the Form of Ordination
and Consecration of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, with the Alterations and
Additions which have been so made and presented to His Majesty by the said
Convocations, be the Book which shall be appointed to be used by all that
ossiciate in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and in all
Chapels of Colleges and Halls in both the Universities, and in all
Parish-Churches and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and by all that make or consecrate Bishops,
Priests or Deacons in any of the said Places, under such Sanctions and
Penalties as the Houses of Parliament shall think fit: Now, in regard that
nothing conduces more to the settling the Peace of N. B. [The Benefits of Uni
formity.]
this Nation (which is desired of all good men) nor to the Honor of our
Religion, and the Propagation thereof, than an universal Agreement in the
public Worship of Almighty God; And, to the intent that every Person within
this Realm may certainly know the Rule, to which he is to conform in public
Worship and Administration of Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, and the Manner, how, and by whom Bishops, Priests and
Deacons are and ought to be made, ordained, and consecrated: Be it enacted by
the Kings most excellent Majesty, by the Advice, and with the consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in This present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, etc.

And be it farther enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the several good
Laws and Statutes of This Realm, which have been formerly made, and are now in
force [ The farmer good Laws and Statutes for Uniformity of Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, confirmed with Reference to this Book.]
for the Uniformity of Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments within this
Realm of England and places aforesaid, shall stand in full force and strength
to all intents and purposes whatsoever, for the establishing and confirming of
the said Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, etc. herein before
mentioned, to be joined and annexed to This Act, and shall be applied,
practiced, and put in ure for the punishing of all Offenses contrary to the
said Laws, with Relation to the Book aforesaid, and no other.

Provided also, that the Book of Common Prayer and Administration, [ The Book
of Q Eliz. continued till This was to take place.]
etc. heretofore in use, and respectively established by Act of Parliament in
the First and Eighth years of Queen Elizabeth, shall be still used and observed
in the Church of England, until the Feast of St. Bartholomew, which shall be in
the year of our Lord God 1662.] when by This Act the other Book aforesaid was
to take place in the room thereof; so that there was no period of time, wherein
there was a Liberty or Exemption from the Legal Obligation to Uniformity.

Such now is That August Authority, by which the Things in Question are
determined and established: And as the Reconciler cites it out of Bishop
Tailor, A peaceable mind, and willingness to learn, P. 224.
and a charitable Exposition, are the just Dispositions of Subjects.] God Grant
they well perform it! As He there devoutly and piously adds.

This was the Religion of Queen Elizabeth,
whose Motto was, Semper eadem. This was the Religion of King James, whose
Motto was, Beati Pacifici. This was the Religion of King Charles, The Royal
Martyr, and best of Kings and Men. And This is the Religion of His Gracious
Majesty, the Inheritor of his Fathers Kingdoms and Princely Virtues, who calls
aloud upon his Subjects to make the established Laws Their Rule, because he
protests, They shall ever be His. And the Reconciler has told us, that it is
only the Religion of His King, which in This Book he pleads for.

SECT. VII.
IN the next place, before I leave. VII.
This Subject, I desire all my Countrymen diligently to hearken unto the
Church Her self in her public Apologies about These Matters, in the Book so
established; which, because so few do observe in Their Common-Prayer-Books; I
will here present them with,

The Preface of our Governors concerning the Alterations made in the public
Service.
It has been the Wisdom of the Church of England, ever since the first [ The
constant moderation of the Church of England]
compiling of her public Liturgy, to keep a mean between the Two Extremes, of
too much stiffness in refusing, and of too much easiness in admitting any
variation from it. For, as on the one side common experience shows, that
where a change has been made of [ The danger of unnecessary changes.]
things advisedly established (no evident necessity so requiring) sundry
inconveniences have thereupon ensued, and those many times more and greater
than the evils Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, erlam quae utilitate adjuvat,
novitate perturbat, D. August. Ep. 118.
that were intended to be remedied by such change; so, on the other side the
particular Forms of divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to
be used therein, being [Necessary changes to be made by Authority only, in
things alterable, and upon weighty and important considerations.]
things in their own nature indifferent and alterable, and so acknowledged, it
is but reasonable, that upon weighty and important Considerations, according to
the various Exigencies of times and occasions, such Changes and Alterations
should be made therein, as to those that are in place of Authority from time to
time seem either necessary or expedient. [This is quoted by the Reconciler, as
the chief groundwork of his Proposals; P. 35, 36.
but let us hear the whole.]

Accordingly we find, that in the Reigns of several Princes of blessed Memory,
since the Reformation, the Church [ The practice of the Church accordingly.]
upon just and weighty Considerations her thereunto moving, has yielded to
make such Alterations in some particulars, as in their respective times were
thought convenient; yet so, as that the main Body and Essentials of it, (as
well in the chiefest materials, as in the frame and order thereof) have still
continued the same unto This day, and do yet stand firm and unshaken,
notwithstanding all the vain attempts and impetuous [A Character of the
Adversaries of the Church.]
assaults made against it by such men, as are given to change, and have always
discovered a greater regard to their own private Fancies and Interests, than to
that Duty they owe to the public.

By what undue means, and for what mischievous purposes the use of the Liturgy,
[The Illegality and Mischief of the disuse of the Liturgy suggested.]
(though enjoined by the Laws of the Land, and those Laws never yet repealed)
came, during the late unhappy Confusions, to be discontinued, is too well known
to the World, and we are not willing here to remember. But when, upon His
Majesty's happy Restoration, it seemed probable, that amongst other things,
the use of the Liturgy also would return of course, [ The concern of its
Enemies at the King's Restoration in opposing it.]
(the same having never been legally abolished) unless some timely means were
used to prevent it: Those men, who under the late usurped Powers, had made it a
great part of their business, to render the People disaffected thereunto, saw
themselves in point of Reputation and Interest concerned (unless they would
freely acknowledge themselves to have erred, which such men are very hardly
brought to) with their utmost endeavors to hinder the Restitution thereof. In
order whereunto diverse Pamphlets were published against the Book of
Common Prayer, the old Objections mustered up, with the Addition of some new
ones more than formerly had been made, to make the number swell [whereof the
Reconciler has thought good to bring several again upon the Stage.]

In fine, great Importunities were used to his Sacred Majesty, that the said
Book might be revised, and such Alterations therein, and Additions thereunto
made, as should be thought requisite for the ease of tender Consciences;
whereunto His Majesty out of [ His Majesty's gracious Condescension for a
Review.]
his Pious Inclination to give satisfaction (so far as could be reasonably
expected) to all his Subjects of what Persuasion soever, did graciously
condescend.

In which Review we have endeavored [The moderation of the Church observed
therein.]
to observe the like moderation, as we find to have been used in the like Case
in former Times. And therefore of the sundry Alterations proposed unto [
Rejecting some Alterations offered, because of dangerous consequence, or
frivolous.]
us, we have rejected all such as were either of dangerous Consequence, (as
secretly striking at some established Doctrine or landable Practice of the
Church of England, or indeed of the whole Catholic Church of Christ) or else
of no Consequence at all, but utterly frivolous and vain. But such Alterations
as were [ Admitting all that seemed explaient.]
tendered to us (by what persons, under what pretenses, or to what purpose
soever tendered) as seemed to us in any degree requisite or expedient, we have
willingly and of our own accord assented [And that not of necessity, but
willingly.]
to: Not enforced so to do by any strength of Argument, convincing us of the
Necessity of making the said Alterations;
for we are fully persuaded in our Judgments, (and we here profess it to the
World) that the Book, as it stood before established by Law, does not contain
in it any thing [The Churches Protestation with reference to the Book before
established, in vindication of the Honor of it.]
contrary to the Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or, which a godly man may
not with a good Conscience use and submit unto, or, which is not fairly
defensible against any, that shall oppose the same; if it shall be allowed such
just and favorable Construction, as in common N. B.
Equity ought to be allowed to all humane Writings, especially such as are set
forth by Authority, and even to the very best Translation of the holy Scripture
it self.

[And here I call to mind, what I have read in Bishop Gauden, touching an
eminent Person concerned in the Tendry of diverse Alterations. I cannot but
commend ( says [Consid. touching the Liturgy in reference to His Majesty's
late Declaration.] P. 33.
he) the Candor, Justice and Ingenuity of Mr. Baxter, who lately professed to
me, that he saw nothing in the Liturgy, which might not bear a good
Construction, if men looked upon it, as it became Christians, with eyes of
Charity.] But to proceed.

Our general aim therefore in This Undertaking was, not to gratify This [The
Integrity of the Church in her Proceedings.]
or That Party in any their unreasonable Designs, but to do That, which, to our
best Understandings, we conceived, might most tend to the preservation of Peace
and Unity in the Church; the procuring of Reverence and exciting of Piety and
Devotion in the public Worship of God; and the cutting off occasion from them,
that seek occasion of Cavil or Quarrel against the Liturgy of the Church.

And, as to the several Variations from [A general account of the several
Variations admitted.]
the former Book, whether by Alteration, Addition, or otherwise, it shall
suffice to give This general account, That most of the Alterations were made,
either First, For the better Direction of them that are to officiate in any
part of Divine Service, which is chiefly done in the Kalendars and Rubricks:
or, Secondly, For the more proper expressing of some words or phrases of
ancient usage, in terms more suitable to the language of the present Times, and
the clearer explanation of some other words and phrases, that were either of
doubtful signification, or otherwise liable to misconstruction: or, Thirdly,
For a more perfect rendering of such portions of holy Scripture, as are inserted
into the Liturgy, which, in the Epistles and Gospels especially, and in sundry
other places, are now ordered to be read according to the last Translation.
And, That it was thought convenient, that some Prayers and Thanksgivings fitted
to special Occasions, should be added in their due places; particularly for
Those at Sea, together with an Office for the Baptism of such as are of riper
years; which, although not so necessary, when the former Book was compiled,
yet, by the Growth of Anabaptism, through the Licentiousness of the late Times
crept in among us, is now become necessary, and may be always useful for the
baptizing of Natives in our Plantations, and others converted to the Faith. If
any man, who shall desire a more particular account of the several [The more
particular account referred to ocular Inspection.]
Alterations in any part of the Liturgy, shall take the pains to compare the
present Book with the former, we doubt not but the Reason of the Change may
easily appear.

And, having thus endeavored to discharge our Duties in This weighty Affair,
as in the sight of God, and to approve [The Churches Sincerity in all asserted.]
our Sincerity therein (so far as lay in us) to the Consciences of all men;
although we know it impossible (in such variety of Apprehensions, Humors and
Interests as are in the World) to please all; nor can expect, that men of
factious, peevish and perverse spirits, should [ who like, after all, to
quarrel still against Her.]
be satisfied with any thing that can be done in this kind by any other than
themselves: Yet we have good hope, that, what is here presented, and has been
by the Convocations of both Provinces with great diligence examined and
approved, will be also well accepted and [ Who to acquiesce in her
Determinations.]
approved by all sober, peaceable, and truly conscientious Sons of the Church
of England.]

Now such an one the Reconciler professes himself to be: A well-wisher to the
Churches Peace, who does from his heart conform to all, that is required by
her. And therefore he must be presumed to have a singular value for This
serious Manifesto and Protestation of our Governors: That They have already of
their own accord assented to such Alterations, as seemed
to them in any degree requisite or expedient; and did esteem Those which they
have rejected, as either frivolous and vain, or of dangerous consequence, as
secretly striking at some established Doctrine, or landable Practice of the
Church of England, or indeed of the whole Catholic Church; and that in This
Review they have behaved themselves with all Sincerity, as in the sight of God,
and done That, which, to their best Understandings, they conceived might most
tend to the preservation of Peace and Unity in the Church; the procuring of
Reverence, and exciting of Piety and Devotion in the public Worship of God,
and the cutting off occasion from them that seek occasion of Cavil or Quarrel
against the Liturgy; that is, That they have already endeavored to discharge
their Duty, so far as lay in them, to all those excellent purposes, to which
the Reconciler with so great vehemence persuades afresh.

The Church of Englands Declaration of Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and
some retained.
Of such Ceremonies as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by
the Institution of man, [ Difference to be made of Ceremonies.]
some at first were of godly intent and purpose devised, and yet at length
turned to Vanity and Superstition; some entered into the Church by undiscreet
Devotion, and such a Zeal as was without knowledge; and, for because they were
winked at in the beginning, they grew daily to more and more abuses, which not
only for their unprofitableness, but because they have much blinded the People,
and obseured the Glory of God, are worthy to be cut away and clean rejected:
Others there be, which although they have been devised by man, yet it is
thought good to reserve them still, as well for a decent order in the Church
(for the which they were first devised) as because they pertain to Edisication,
whereunto all things done in the Church (as the Apostle teaches) ought to be
referred. And although the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony, in it self
considered, [Wherein consists the Guilt of neglecting them.]
is but a small thing; yet the willful and contemptuous Transgression, and
breaking of a common order and Discipline, is no small ofsence before God. Let
all things be done among you, says St. Paul, in a seemly and due order. [Upon
This the Church of England grounds her Imposition of Ceremonies.] The
appointment [ To whom it belongs to Appo^^^ ^^^m.] with the ground of That
Authority.]
of the which order, pertains not to private men; therefore no man ought to
take in hand, or presume to Appoint or Alter any public or common Order in
Christ's Church, except he be lawfully called and authorized thereunto.

And whereas in This our time the minds of men are so diverse, that some men
think it a great matter of [ Two extremes in the Sentiments of men about them.]
Conscience to depart from a piece of the least of their Ceremonies, they be so
addicted to their old Customs; and again, on the other side, some be so
newfangled, that they would innovate all things, and so despise the old, that
nothing can like them, but what is new; it was thought expedient, not so much
to have respect, how [ The (...) care and moderation with respect to both.]
how to please and satisfy either of these Parties, as how to please God, and
profit them both.

And yet, lest any man be offended, whom good Reason might satisfy, here be
certain Causes rendered, [ Her Charit^ in assigning Reason.]
Ceremonies be put away, and some retained and kept still.

Some are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them [1. Why
(...) away.]
has so increased in these latter days, that the burden of them was
intolerable; whereof St. Augustine in his time complained, that they were grown
to such a number, that the Estate of Christian People was in a worse case
concerning that matter, than were the Jews. And He counseled, that such yoke
and burden should be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it. But
what would St. Augustine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late days
used among us; whereunto the multitude used in his time, was not to be
compared? This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of
them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, than declare and set
forth Christ's Benefits unto us. And besides This, Christ's Gospel is not a
Ceremonial Law (as much of Moses Law was) but is a Religion to serve God, not
in bondage of the Figure or Shadow, but in the Freedom of the Spirit; being
content only with Those Ceremonies, which do serve to a decent Order and Godly
Discipline, such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance
of his Duty to God, by some notable and special signification, whereby he might
be edified. Furthermore, the most weighty cause of the Abolishment of certain
Ceremonies was, that they were so far abused, partly by the superstitious
blindness of the Rude and Unlearned, and partly by the insatiable Avarice of
such as sought more their own Lucre, than the Glory of God; that the Abuses
could not well be taken away, the thing remaining still.

And now concerning Those Persons, which peradventure will be [2. Why some be
retained.]
offended, that some of the old Ceremonies are retained still: If they
consider, that without some Ceremonies, it is not possible to keep any order or
quiet Discipline in the Church, they shall easily perceive just cause to reform
their judgments. And if they think much that any of the old do remain, and
would rather have all devised anew; then such men granting some Ceremonies
convenient to be had, surely, where the old may be well used, there they cannot
reasonably reprove the old only for their Age, without bewraying of their own
Folly. For, in such a case, they ought rather to have reverence unto them for
their Antiquity,
if they will declare themselves to be more studious of Unity and Concord, than
of Innovations and new-fangleness; which ( as much as may be with setting forth
of Christ's Religion) is always to be eschewed. Furthermore such shall have no
just cause with the Ceremonies reserved to be offended: For, as Those are taken
away, which were most abused, and did burden men's Consciences without any
cause, so the other that remain, are retained for a Discipline and Order, which
(upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to be
esteemed equal with God's Law. [So before certain Articles of Qu. Elizab. 1554.
These Orders and Rules have been thought meet and convenient to be used and
followed, not yet prescribing These Rules as Laws equivalent with the eternal
Word of God, and as of necessity to ^ind the Consciences of her Subjects in the
Nature of them considered in themselves, etc.]


And moreover they be neither dark nor dumb Ceremonies, but are so set forth,
that every man may understand what they do mean, and to what use they do serve.
So that it is not like, that in time to come they should be abused as the other
have been.

And in These our doings, we condemn no other Nations, nor prescribe [ The
Churches Equity in prescribing to none but her own Members]
any thing, but to our own People only: For we think it convenient, that every
Country should use such Ceremonies as they shall think best to the setting
forth of God's Honor and Glory, and to the reducing of the People to a most
perfect and godly living, without Error or Superstition, and that they should
put away other things, which from time to time they perceive to be most abused,
as in men's Ordinances it often chances diversely in diverse Countries.]

Now here it is plain enough, That the Church of England does judge her self
sufficiently Authorized to prescribe certain Ceremonies; and, That in her
Determinations about them, she has steered an even course between all
Extremes, and carried her self with a due Temper and Moderation, Equity and
Reasonableness; studying to please God, and profit all men, That she has put
away many for the burden of their multitude, for the darkness of their
signification; for their Judacial Servility; and all that did burden men's
Consciences, or which she looked upon so far abused, that the Abuses could not
be well taken away, the things yet remaining -- And, That she has retained
some as requisite and convenient for a decent Order and godly Discipline, and
apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his Duty to God by
some not able and special signification, whereby he might be edified; That she
the rather approved them for being significant, neither dark nor dumb
Ceremonies, but so set forth, that every man may understand both their meaning
and use, and such as she thought not like in time to come to be abused, as
others had been: That she does not Certainly, never any Church laid (...)
weight upon its owa Orders, supposing that it believes them to be just and
reasonable. It places no Holiness, no merit or efficacy in them, as to the
obtaining the Grace and Favor of God. It expects obedience only for Order and
peace^^^^: It has taken great care by Prefaces and Canons, and Rubricks, to
prevent any misinterpretation of its intention and design.] Dr. Still. Sermon. of
Superstition.
equalize These her Prescriptions with God's Law, but pronounce them alterable
upon just Causes by the same Authority which does appoint them: That in This
use of her power she has not exceeded her proper compass, prescribing to none
but her own people: That in her choice of Ceremonies, she has had a special
reverence and respect to Antiquity: That she has offended none, whom good
Reason may satisfy: And, That however the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony
be, in it self considered, but a small thing; yet the wilful and contemptuous
transgressing and breaking of a common Order and Discipline is no small offense
before God.

How easy were it, at the rate of
some men's Arguings, for a profane Wit to blaspheme the severities of divine
Justice upon all the World, for Ab, quam de minimo perivimus! Tantum malam
attulit melus. Em. Tuesaur
but eating an Apple of the forbidden Tree in Paradise? Or on the poor man, for
but gathering a few Sticks on the Sabbath? Or on Uzzah, for but putting forth
his hand to stay the tottering Ark? etc. Which yet I urge not here, to
contradict the Churches plain Declarations, that her Prescriptions are not
equal to the Laws of God; but upon a due consideration, that, wheresoever they
thwart not the immediate Laws of [The lesser the thing, the greater and more
inexcusable the disobedience. -- If the Prophet had bid thee do some great
thing. -- how much rather men? -- 2 Kings v. xiij.]
God, they are Divine too at the second hand, Divine by virtue of the Fifth
Commandment; and we by God obliged to obey them, not only for wrath, but
conscience sake. It Is the great aggravation of the obstinacy and contempt of
wilful Disobedience, that it is in Matters small and little in themselves
considered: And all the Censures of the Church Proceed against This Contumacy
only.

Now then is it not strange, that the Reconciler, professing so much Reverence,
as he does, to the Apostolical Rulers of the Church, and the Church of England
his Dear Mother, should yet load them and her with
the imputation of such horrid Guilts, as he does, on the score of the
Imposition of few Ceremonies? That he should use such like Expostulations and
Expressions, as These, that follow, in the Case?

May it not be wondered, how they can call such Ceremonies, imposed P. 33.
as the condition of Communion to no profit or benefit of any, and to the great
peril, yea hurt and destruction of many, all Circumstances considered, Things
Indifferent?

To call the Ceremonies inoffensive P. 335.
is to affirm, what never can be proved.

Myriads of Souls are cast out of the Church and given up to Satan P. 5.
for Ceremonies and things confessedly indifferent; and can This Doctrine be of
God, the God of Love and Peace, which has these bitter Fruits?

Why do Superiors still continue the imposition of those indifferent things,
which do occasion the schism, P. 30, 31.
and consequently the destruction of so many precious and immortal Souls?

How is the Charity of God, or Love of our Neighbor in our hearts, if, when we
may remove such dangerous stumbling blocks to the P. 31, 32.
weak and simple people, we will not remove them, but lay them still before
their feet, and work the danger of their everlasting destruction, for whom our
Savior shed his precious Blood?

Do they act conformably to These great Duties, who will not, to prevent the
Ruin of many Myriads of immortal Souls, forbear the imposing of unnecessary
things? Do P. 34.
they put such a value on them, as our God and Savior did? Or are they sit to
press these Arguments on others, who do themselves prefer such Trisles before
the Souls, for which Christ died?

This I am persuaded is one of the provoking sins of the Consormists, that they
have been so backward in doing, what they were convinced, they might have done
with a good Conscience, when they P. 37.
were earnestly pressed to it by their Dissenting Brethren, and had Authority
to do it; but they refused it, and seemed rather resolved to break all in
pieces and hazard our Religion, and let these sad effects of our Divisions
still continue, than to abate their Rigor in imposing, what they may lawfully
alter or abolish.

I fear, that the impartial Judge may reckon, them Uncharitable, P. 132, 133
who by imposing of such Ceremonies, do prejudice the Churches Peace and Unity,
and the eternal Interests of their weak Brethren, without any proportionable
advantage to their own, or to the Churches welfare; and are so far from lending
them their hands, and lifting of them up, that they trip up their heels, and
make them fall.

Can they joy in the spiritual proficiency of Souls, or be ready to P. 189.
supply their spiritual necessities, who rather will, that many Myriads should
be excluded from the means of Grace, than that one of their Ceremonies should
be left indifferent, or that a few Expressions in their Liturgy should be
changed? -- do still resolve to lay These Snares Ibid.
and Gall-Traps in their way?

And, Oh! that men would serously consider, whether those Laws, which hinder so
many from coming to the service of God, and 215.
minister not to the Edification but destruction of so many Souls, do well
comply with Charity and Edification! -- [be not the Laws of Tyrants, not of
spiritual Fathers.] These are the words immediately precedent. [Such Laws of
Burden, as make the willing to be Slaves, and tempt the unwilling to rebel]
Ibid.
for so he accomodates Bishop Tailor's words a little after.

With a great many other Reflections, up and down his Book, to a like purpose,
which I shall not transcribe.

When, alas! after all These Impeachments, the Accusation, upon a sober pause,
comes to no more than This, That the forenamed Mischiefs do accidentally arise
from the Churches Impositions, as they may do even from the best of Laws, by
the frowardness and contumacy of disobedient Subjects. See p. 67.]

It is of Concernment, I think, for him, who professes himself most unwilling
to do the least disservice to the Church, of which he is a Member, or to those
Reverend Superiors, whom from his heart he honors and owns, as the true
Apostolic Guides and Rulers of it; once and again to examine, whether in These
Sallies of his Zeal, or Passion, he have not been more than a little
transported beyond the measures of his Station. He should have cooled his
intemperate Heats by considering, that the Arguments are not new, which he
offers, but such as have frequently, time after time, been alleged in the same
Case, and such, as the Governors of the Church sufficiently have declared to
have been before their eyes. He should have been so sensible of his own
weakness and proneness to mistake in judging, as to have communicated These
Papers first to them, before he ventured them abroad among the people, to
expose the Honor and Authority of his Reverend Fathers, and Dear Mother, and
that in open View. He should, at least, have so managed his Arguments, as not
to have misdoubted their ability to judge and conclude from them; or tainted
their Reputation in the Application of them.

And thus much I do represent unto his second Thoughts, with all Candor, being
fully persuaded, that he has not offended of malicious wickedness.

Sect. VIII.
I Will now resume a little the Question of Ceremonies, and the Imposition of
them.

The Church, as we have seen, pleads for her general Warrant, Let all things be
done among you in a seemly and due Order; (...) decently, and according to
order.

And the Apostle St. Paul, whose Canon this was, himself practiced according to
it; He gave out Ordinances of this nature to the Corinthians, Quum genuisset
illam Ecclesiam Domino, certam Politiam tradiderat, qua gubernaretur; Calv. in
loc.
and praises them who kept the same, 1 Cor. 11. 11. And hereunto we must, as I
conceive, refer that First Disorder, which he there undertakes to correct among
them, for the Men to be Covered, and the Women Uncovered in the time of Divine
Service. The Apostle does evidently there preseribe the contrary; and that as a
significant Ceremony too, the Man to be uncovered, to express both his
Subjection to Christ alone, and Authority over the Woman; the Woman to have a
Covering on her Head, to express her Subjection to her Husband, or Inferiority
unto Man. The Covering or Veil was a sign of that Power under which the Woman
was; and thence called by a Metonymy; (...).

Castalio tells us, that he had this Exposition from a certain Italian: Things
that are base and vicious ought to be covered; and on the other side, such as
are comely and perfect, to be uncovered and shown. Now therefore, if the Man
prays with his Head covered, he intimates a defect in his Head worthy to be
hidden. But Christ is the Head of the Man, who is without all fault. The Head
of the Man therefore (says he) ought to be uncovered, hereby to show forth the
perfection of Christ, who is his Head. But the Head of the Woman is the Man,
who, seeing he is defective and vicious, the Woman, in confession of this his
imperfection, is to cover her Head. But this may seem too much strained and
fanciful, since the Apostle recommends the Covering or Veil to the Woman, not
to argue the Defect, but the Authority and Pre-eminence of the Man.

I rather think, with the learned Cappellus, That this Apostolical Prescript or
Canon of good Order was founded upon some civil custom then obtaining among the
Corinthians and elsewhere; from whence he concludes, that, according to the
difference of several Countries, such an Habit and Deportment is to be used in
Divine Service, which is commonly used to express Reverence and Decency in
conversation.

The Reconciler, to evade the conviction of this Instance, says:

This Practice is reproved by the Apostle, as that, whereby they dishonored P.
310.
their Heads, verse. 4, 5. That, which the Man ought not to do, because he was
the Image of God, v. 7. That, which the Woman ought not to do, because of the
Angels, v. 10. (...), the Indecency of this practice was, that, which every one
might judge of, v. 13. and that even Nature taught, says the Apostle. The
practice therefore here reproved was no indifferent thing.] To which I answer,
That there was, undoubtedly, a great Decency in the thing signified, that Men
and Women should respectively own the difference of their Sexes, and demean
themselves agreeably thereunto; but this particular sign expressive thereof, by
the Man's being uncovered and the Woman covered, could only be topical, and
according to the custom of that Country (which (...) here questionless
denotes, the custom of every place being as a second Nature to the Inhabitants)
And therefore the Rite was in it self indifferent, and the peculiar
significancy of it in Divine Service very much depending upon the Apostle's
prescription. [He, that will see the different Customs of Nations in this
matter, both in and out of Sacred Uses, may consult Grotius and Cappellus at
large on the Place.]

But secondly, (says he, as distrusting the force of this first Reply) it P.
310.
well deserves to be observed, that the Apostle, notwithstanding all these
Reasons, lays no Imposition on them in this case: He praises them, who observed
the Traditions he had before taught them. He says, that if any Person would
still argue for this Practice, he would be a Lover of Contentention, and would
act contrary to the customs of the Apostles, and other Christian Churches; but
then he makes no Canen for Uniformity in this matter, imposes no Penalty on
the Refuser to comply, etc.] To this I answer, That the Apostle does here
impose it as a Rite, which they ought to conform unto; he puts a Non debet on
the Man's part, He ought not to cover his Head: and a Debet on the Woman's, For
this cause ought the Woman to have power on her Head. And hereby he calls them
to an Uniformity with other Christian Churches; and denounces them, that will
not acquiesce in his Reasons, nor yield to his Authority, to be contumacious
and stubborn Disputers, Lovers of Contention; and as such to be marked and
censured for opposing the Customs of the Church.

He is contentious, says Mr. Calvin on the place, who is stirred up with the
Lust of Controversy, and does not care to yield unto Truth. Such are all those,
who without necessity carp at good and profitable Rites, who move Disputes of
things that are not doubtful, who acquiesce not in Reasons given for their just
satisfaction, and suffer not themselves to be brought into order. Such are also
(...), an unsociable sort of Men, who are carried out with a foolish
affectation to innovate. Such as these, says he, St. Paul thinks not worthy an
Answer, because Contention is a pernicious thing, and therefore to be driven
from the Churches of God; Q^^ (...) Auth^^ita^e m^^g^^ co^^^scend^^ esse (...)
and hereby, says he, he teaches, that perverse Men, and such as are given to
wrangle, are rather to be repressed with Authority, than to be refuted with
long Disputations; for there will never be an end of Contentions, says he, if
you strive with a quarrelsome Man; though he be overcome an hundred times, he
will not yet be wearied or give over.

And, says the Learned Grotius, The Apostle here cuts off all Disputations,
with these two Axes, as it were, Apostolical Institution, and the Custom of the
Churches. And, to call that into question, which is received through all the
Churches, is the part and character (...) of those that are contentious.

It is a point, says St. Augustine, of This was St. Ambrose his Golden Rule in
matters of Rite and Ceremony, which St. Augustine, as often as he considered of,
(which he did often) looked upon and welcomed as an Heavenly Oracle, Ad quam
sort Ecclesiam veneris, ejus merem serva, si iniquam non vis esse scandalo,
nec quenquam titi. Ep. 118.
most insolent Madness, to think that not to be done well or rightly, which is
done by the Universal Church. And such I esteem to be the Determination
of this matter about Ceremonies.

The Instances are very many, which the Learned Reconciler himself affords us;
I will only here refer to two of of them. The former is about the trine
Immersion or threefold Dipping in P. 282, 283.
Baptism, as a Symbolical Ceremony, to signify the Doctrine of the Trinity, or
the Death and Resurrection of Christ after three days. This thing, says the
Reconciler, was so much the Practice of the Church, that, in the 49th Canon of
the Apostles, he, that does not use this trine Immersion, is sentenced to be
deposed from his Dignity. Here then we have, confessedly, a severe Imposition
of a Symbolical Ceremony.

He tells us indeed afterward, How, P. 284.
the Arrians expounding this Custom to their Advantage, as signifying the
Substantial Difference of the Father from the Son and Holy Ghost, the Bishops
of Spain used a single Immersion, and Pope Gregory commends them for doing it
upon this Occasion; And this was brought into a Law there by the 4th Council of
Toledo. [Here still is a Symbolical Ceremony brought into Law and Practice; a
single Immersion in Baptism to signify the Unity of Essence in the Trinity. And
this only proves the former Ceremony not to be necessary in it self, as the
former does this; and, that either of them may be enjoined, as the Church sees
occasion. -- And whereas he adds, Though the trine Immersion P. 284.
be yet continued in most Churches, yet ours does take the Liberty wholly to
vary from them, and from the Ancients in this matter.]

This only recommends the singular Indulgence of our Church, which has made no
Determination for, or against either of those Ceremonies, misliking neither for
their Significancy, and allowing of both to be used, as to her Sons shall seem
at any time best.

The other Instance is of the Custom in the Primitive Church to pray standing
P. 278.
on the Lord's Day, and from the time of Easter to Whitsunday symbolically to
represent the Resurrection; And such was then the reputed Obligation of this
Ceremony, taken up among them; that Tertullian says, We account it Wickedness
to kneel on the Lord's Day at Ibid.
Prayer. Which I would not censure in him for a superstitious conceit of the
Ceremony in its own nature, as necessary; but the value then set upon it for
its significancy; And, When some began to vary from it, says the Reconciler,
the great Council of Nice took notice of it, Ibid.
and declared their pleasure, that all Churches should uniformly observe it;
but yet, says he, such was their Moderation, they imposed no Penalty on the
Neglecters of this Custom.]

Now their Moderation I blame not in the Sanction, though they might also have
imposed a Penalty too in the case, without the impeachment of it; but, such was
the Reverence in that Age to their Authority, that a superadded Penalty might
possibly be thought needless. That, which I hence remark, is, That Uniformity
in a Symbolical Rite was imposed by no less Authority than the great Council
of Nice. -- And, however this Observance now has ceased by Desuetude, yet we
retain, as I conceive, some prints of its Resemblance, in our standing up at
the Creed and the Gospel.

The substance of what I here argue for, is granted, upon occasion, by the
Reconciler, in the Answer he gives by way of correction in the Words of the
excellent P. 313.
Bishop Tailor, That it is for ever necessary, that things should be done in
the Church decently and in order: And since the Question of Decency
will for ever have Variety and Flux, Succession and a Relative Uncertainty; It
is necessary, that of this there should be perpetual Judges and Dictators, and
these can be no other than the Rulers of the Church, who have the same power
that the Apostles had in this. It cannot therefore (says the Reconciler) be
rationally denied, that the Rulers of the Church have Power to command things
which belong unto the Positive Decency and Order of the Service of God; But
then, says he, it has been proved already, P. 313.
that the Ceremonies, now used in the Church of England, have nothing in them
of this nature, and consequently, that this Command affords no ground for the
imposing of them upon that Account. So that in the Issue, the
Dissenter directly opposes his private Opinion and Judgment to that of the
Rulers of the Church, whom yet he acknowledges to be of all right the perpetual
Judges and Dictators in the case. They say, these things imposed are Decent and
Orderly; He says, they have nothing of Positive Decency and Order in them: And
this, he says, he has already proved. Let us look back here a little to it.

[I call that Positive Order, Decency, P. 38.
or Reverence, says he, which, being done, renders the Service more decent,
reverent, and orderly, than otherwise it would be, and being undone, the
Service becomes irreverent, indecent and disorderly performed; (he should NB.
have said, Less decently, reverently, and orderly performed, than otherwise it
would be.) So that my meaning is, that if our Public Service was by the
Minister performed without a Surplice, if Baptism were administered by him
without the Cross, if the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper were administered to
such, as did not kneel, but stand, (he should have added, or sit, as at an
ordinary Meal; for that is the great scruple in this Controversy) at the
receiving of it; These Actions would not be performed sinfully, or with defect
of any real Goodness, which belongs to them, nor yet indecently, disorderly,
or irreverently.] (He should say, not less decently, disorderly, or
irreverently, NB.
than now they are.) Thus he conceives; but the Church (which is to be Dictator
in the case) pronounces otherwise. Let us hear his Reasons.

1. Says he, if the Omission of Ibid.
these Ceremonies renders those Actions, to which they are annexed, sinful,
indecent, irreverent, or disorderly performed, (he should have said, less
decently, reverently, or orderly) then Christ and his Apostles, in the
performance of them, did worship God in such a manner, as was sinful, indecent,
irreverent and disorderly: For it is certain, they used not the Surplice in
Public Prayer, the Cross in Baptism, or Kneeling in the act of Receiving. To
this I answer, by denying the Consequence: For, 1. it is not de fide certain,
that neither Christ, nor his Apostles used the Surplice, Cross, or Kneeling
spoken of, all, or some one of them. This Negative cannot certainly be proved.
2. What was perhaps decent and orderly then, may cease to be so, or be less so
in after-Ages, and other Countries. For the Question of Decency (as he has
well granted out of Bishop Tailor, had he as
well considered it) will for ever have Variety and Flux, Succession and a
relative Uncertainty. And upon this account we are not confined to follow or
imitate Christ or his Apostles in uncommanded Circumstances of this nature,
which might be in them occasional only.

2. Says he, [Then are not these Ceremonies Ibid.
indifferent, and alterable by the same Power which enjoins them, as is
asserted by the Church of England?] I answer still, by denying the Consequence:
These Ceremonies do yet remain in their own nature indifferent, that is, they
are not particularly and determinatly required or commanded, nor any where
forbidden by God: And the Church of England may alter them, whenever she sees
as just Grounds and Causes so to do, as to enjoin them.

3. Says he, [Then must the Omission Ibid:
of these Ceremonies be a Transgression of those Precepts, which do command us,
to serve the Lord with Reverence, and to let all things be done decently and in
order, which cannot be affirmed by them, who confess these Ceremonies to be
Indifferent?] I answer still, by denying the Consequence. The Omission of these
Ceremonies upon a just occasion, or in themselves considered, may not be a
Transgression of those General Precepts; and yet the observing of these
Ceremonies too may be a Compliance with those General Precepts; because the
Particulars, which they refer unto, are various and indeterminate: And in
things indifferent (that is, which are not particularly commanded or forbidden
by God) there may be yet degrees of more remote or nearer Approaches to Good or
Evil, Decent or Undecent. There are (...), and (...). There may be Reasons,
Aptitudes and Tendencies to some or other good and fitting Purpose, sometimes
to recommend one, and sometimes to recommend another. And in these matters too,
we may be said then to do well, when yet, it may be, we might do better. As the
Apostle plainly asserts in the case of Marriage, 1 Cor. 7. 36. Let him do what
he will, he sins not. -- He that gives her in Marriage, does well; but he,
that gives her not in Marriage, does better.

Nor, after all, do I see any Reason, why the Power of Church Governors
should be confined to matters of Positive In his rebus, de quibus nihil certi
statuit Scriptura Divina, Mos populi Dei, vel Instituta Majorum pro lege
tenenda sunt. St. Aug. Ep. 86. Quod neque contra Fidem, neque contra bonos
mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum, inter quos
vivitur, societate servandum. Id. Ep. 118. ubi plura vide.
Decency, as he explains it. A Latitude, methinks, might here do as well, as
in other cases. A Latitude of Power in the Church, as well as a Latitude in the
Conformity of her Children. Considering especially, how universally the
Commands run. Children obey your Parents in all things. Servants obey your.
Masters in all things. Which we cannot safely bound with any other Restriction,
than this, that it be in the Lord, that is, so far, as may consist with our
Obligations to him as our Absolute Supreme, so far, as is not contradictory to
his Commandments.

Whereas therefore he tells us; [The P. 3^^.
Dissenters not only allow that there are many cases, wherein somewhat is, in
genere, necessary to be determined; but also add, That in all cases truly such,
the Magistrate Civil or Sacred, not only may, but must determine; And indeed no
Man in his wits can doubt, that what is necessary to be determined must be
determined; And, seeing par in parem non habet potestatem, it follows, that
they cannot be determined by any other but Superiors; that is, they cannot
obligingly be determined by others. But then, says he, they universally deny,
that it is necessary to determine any of these scrupled Ceremonies: and they
have perfect demonstration for the Truth of that Denial; for necessarium est,
quod non potest aliter se habere, That only is necessary to be done which
cannot be left undone; That only necessary to be determined in order to the
Performance of an Action, without which the Action cannot be done, or at least
not well done.]

The Result of this Discourse, in my NB.
thoughts, is but this great Absurdity, That Magistrates, Civil and Sacred, may
do that only without Sin, which they must do of necessary Duty. And I shall not
stay to make further Remarks upon it.

Only let the People note, that when
we speak of Ceremonies, as indifferent and unnecessary in themselves
considered, we do not mean, as the Reconciler and the Dissenters commonly
represent them, Trifles and needless Things, but such, as the Divine Law has
not laid any particular Restraint of Necessity upon by its Commands or
Prohibitions, but left to be freely determined by our own Prudence, or the
public Authority. And that, which is not necessary by a Divine Command, may
yet have other Necessities, or high Conveniences, which are next of kin
thereunto to recommend it: It may be necessary to do the Action with greater
Order, and Solemnity, and Uniformity, etc.

It is well noted by a Reverend Person, Dr. Frank. sermon. at St. Paul's Cross.
in the Obedience of the Rechabites to their Fathers Commands, not only
universally to all of them, but omnino prout, according unto all in every
circumstance. You find this Requisite in your several Corporations, says he,
where the omission of a Punctilio draws after it intolerable Defaults. The Hedge
is easily pressed through, where but one Bush is wound aside; And the Breach of
one Circumstance is but the disposition to another. Things that in themselves
seem of no considerable moment, within a while appear considerable by the
neglect; as the Error, that appears not at the first declining Line of the
Workman, a while after manifests an irrecoverable Deformity. [According to
all.] That Is the surest Rule to go by: you know it your selves in your own
Corporations: you know it in your own Families, if you know any thing. Give an
Inch, and they will take an Ell, is your own Proverb; and cannot you judge as
equally for the Church? etc.

There is no end of those Questions, what is Decent? what is Necessary? if we
quit the public Standard and Determinations. One says, Episcopacy is not
necessary. Another, Common Prayer it self, or any Prescribed Form is not
necessary. Another says, It is not necessary that we have any Creed but the
Bible. Another, that a National or Parochial Church it self is not necessary.
Another, that Infant Baptism is not necessary. Another, that Material Churches,
or Temples are not necessary. Another, that Holy Days and Stated Fasts are not
necessary. Another, that Tithes are not necessary, etc. One can be well enough
without this; Another without that; And some without all.

It Is worthily observed elsewhere by the Reconciler, that the Apostle does in
P. 303.
the space of seven Verses thrice repeat the Command, that every Man abide in
that Calling, to which he was called, at least so far, as not to desert it
under pretense of Christianity; quippe quod in co plurimum situm est, as being
an Admonition of great moment to prevent that invidious Accusation which was
laid on the Christian Doctrine, that it did innovate in Civil Matters, and
tended to dissolve the Relation betwixt Man and Wise, Masters and Servants.

The Opposition, which is made against our established Ceremonies, has, I
fear, too great a tendence this way, to innovate in Civil Matters upon the
pretenses of Christianity, and therefore it may be of no small moment, to give
some Admonition against it. For (to say nothing of the Ring in Marriage, which
is now, I perceive, well enough digested) is not the significant Ceremony of a
corporal Oath, to lay the Hand on the Book, and afterward to kiss it,
every way as exceptionable, as the Cross in Baptism? Is not Swearing a
Religious Act? Is not that Ceremony as Symbolical, and in it self as
indifferent? Is it not commanded on a severe Penalty? No Right at Law, no
Justice administered without it, no Privilege of the Subject without so taking
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, etc.

Then, may not the Robes of Judges, and the Liveries of Companies, and the
Habits of Universities, and Inns of Court, the Cornered Cap, and Hoods, etc. be
as reasonably challenged, as the Surplice?

Then, for Kneeling, no Scruple ought to be made of that, when it is remembered,
that we use it toward our Parents, and our Princes, and that as a Gesture
properly expressive of Reverence to Superiors.

SECT. IX.
BUt because Kneeling at the Receiving of the Lord's Supper is the only imposed
Ceremony, that the Laity are concerned in, I will stop a while more
particularly to consider of it.

[Seeing these Ceremonies chiefly debarr P. 330.
the Laity from full Communion with us, by leaving of these things indifferent,
their Mouths must be entirely stopped: And if we gain the Laity, it is not
improbable that many of their Preachers, and the Ringleaders of the Schism
would quickly follow.] These Ceremonies, which he speaks so tragically os, as
debarring the Laity, dwindle at last into this one Ceremony of Kneeling as the
Sacrament.

Now concerning this Gesture it self, there can be no possible Scruple; for it
is particularly expressive of Reverence, and under the Recommendation of a
general Drome Precept, or Exhortation. O come, let us worship, and fall down
and kneel before the Lord our Maker! And of Christ it is foretold, That every
Knee shall bow unto him. And this is a peculiar part of that Honor, whereto
God has highly exalted him, in this sort to be worshipped and acknowledged in
the World, Phil. 2. 10. But that no Divine Honor is hereby given, or intended
to be given to the Sacramental Elements, or any Corporeal Presence of Christ in
them, will be evident from the solemn Declaration of the Church, which we shall
produce afterward.

The only Doubt in the Accommodation of it to the Act of Receiving is, that it
seems to be a Variation from the first Copy of our blessed Savior's
Administering to his Apostles.

Now as to that, it deserves to be considered, that so are the two other
Postures pleaded for in competition with it, Standing or Sitting. -- More
particularly,

1. It Is certain the Jews did vary in After-Ages from the first Gesture
appointed to the Passover, Exodus 12. 11. Thus shall ye eat of it, with your
Loins girded, your Shoes on your Feet, and your Staff in your Hand, and ye
shall eat it in haste: It is the Lord's Passover. -- Whereas afterward it
came, in their Settled State, to a Discumbency, or Lying along upon Beds, which
is still used in the Eastern Countries: And this our blessed Savior and his
Apostles freely complied with.

2. It Is not yet possible to demonstrate, so as Conscience may build upon it,
that he and his Apostles used the same Tricliniary Gesture at the Eucharistical
Supper. It is, at best, but a Probability, that they did not change their
Gestures from what it was before.

3. Though this were de side certain, yet who sees not, that this same Gesture
might be then only occasionally used from the Custom or Practice at the
Passover? Who can tell what Gesture might have been used by them, had this
Sacrament been celebrated by it self, and not in conjunction with that other
Feast?

4. Christ's binding Pleasure cannot possibly be fetched from the Historical
Relation of a variable Gesture, but one time, nay, though often used. He sat
daily teaching, as we read in the Evangelist St. Matthew: yet is there no
Preacher that thinks himself bound to that Gesture now.

5. There is no account to be given, why this Circumstance alone by it self,
were it never so certainly determined, what it was in the first Pattern, should
See Bp. Sanderson de conscient. Plaelect. 3 16, etc.
be more binding than any other in that Example; which are yet everywhere now
freely omitted. For 'Persons, for Actions, for other Circumstances of Time, and
Place, etc. which I shall not here enlarge upon.

If in all these we are at liberty, why is there any Scruple left of a single
Gesture?

6. There is a confessed variation allowed of by all Dissenters in the other
Sacrament of Baptism from the first Copies, I mean from Immersion or Dipping,
into Suffusion, Aspersion or Sprinkling. And this is well observed and urged by
the Reconciler. -- If notwithstanding Baptism by Immersion is suitable P. 289.
to the Institution of our Lord and his
Apostles, and was by them ordained and used to represent our Burial with
Christ, as St. Paul explains the Meaning of that Rite: I say, if,
notwithstanding this, all our Dissenters do agree to Sprinkle the Baptized
Infant, why may they not as well submit to the significant Ceremonies imposed
by our Church? For since it is as lawful to add unto Christ's Institutions a
significant Ceremony, as to diminish a significant Ceremony, which he or his
Apostles instituted, and use another which they did never institute, what
Reason can they have to do the latter, and yet refuse Submission to the former?
Why should not the Peace and Union of the Church be as prevailing with them to
perform the one, as is their Mercy to the Infants Body to neglect the other?

7. It is very remarkable, that other Protestant Churches of great Name do
continue the Gesture of Kneeling as well as we, from whose Communion we must on
this account as well separate; And the Reformed Divines of Polonia, not
only of the Bohemian, but the Augustan and Helvetian Consession, have with one
Consent, in three General Synods, condemned the Ceremony of Sitting at
Receiving the H. Sacrament; as a less decent, and less Religious Rite, and
proper to the Arrians, or Arrian-Baptists, who denied Christ's Divinity, and
accordingly handled his Sacraments irreverently, placing themselves
cheek-by-jowl, as Fellows with their Lord at his Table, and introduced this
Gesture into their Churches contrary to the customary and allowed Practice of
all the Evangelical Churches throughout Europe. (Synod. General. Cracov. An.
Dom. 1573. Act. 6. Synod. Petricov. General. An. Dom. 1578. Syn. Wlodislav.
Genesis An. Dom. 1583. Act. 5. which were again confirmed Syn. Torunens. Genesis
1592.) This is discoursed more at large by the Rev. Mr. Ashwel, in his learned
Books de Gestu Eucharistico, and de Socinianismo.

And he has no less demonstrated the Antiquity of this adoring Gesture,
however the Reconciler is pleased to call it, more than once, our Novel Custom
p. 293, 294.
of receiving in a Kneeling Posture. Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians.
(...), says St. Chrysostom, Fall down and participate. And St. Augustine
notes, that the Apostle St. Paul represents those as unworthy Receivers, Ep.
118.
who did not discern or difference that sacred Food from other Meals
(veneratione singulariter debita) by a Veneration peculiarly due unto it. And
elsewhere he In Ps. 98.
tells us; Nemo Panem istam manducat, nisc prius adoraverit: No Man eats that
Bread, until he have first adored.

8. Let the Declaration of the Church be heard for the preventing, as far as is
possible, all manner of Scruple, or Offense at this Ceremony.

[Whereas it is ordained in this Office for the Administration of the Lord's
Supper, that the Communicants should receive the same Kneeling, (which Order is
well meant for a signification of humble and grateful Acknowledgment of the
Benefits of Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers, and for the avoiding
of such Profanation and Disorder in the H. Communion, as might otherwise ensue)
yet lest the same Kneeling should by any Persons, either out of Ignorance and
Infirmity, or out of Malice and Obstinacy, be misconstrued and depraved, it is
here declared, that thereby no Adoration is intended, or ought to be done,
either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto any
Corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and 'Blood. For the Sacramental
Bread and Wine remain still in their natural Substances, and therefore may not
be adored; (for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians)
and the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not
here, it being against the Truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at one time in
more places than one.] -- And with such an Explication as this, Mr. Calvin
allows of Adoration at the Sacrament. Such Adoration, says he, I Inst. 1. 4..
37.
would call legitimate, which stops not in the Signs, but is directed to Christ
in Heaven.

Now I cannot but observe a want of
Candor in the Reconciler (as in some other matters relating to the Church, so)
particularly with reference to this Declaration.

[The Rubric concerning Kneeling P. 208.
at the Sacrament in the second Book of Edward the sixth, begins thus: Although
no Order can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some, either for their
Ignorance and Infirmity, or else for Malice and Obstinacy, misconstrued,
depraved and interpreted in a wrong part; yet because Brotherly Charity wills
that, so much as conveniently may be, Offenses should be taken away, therefore
We, willing to do the same, etc. declare, that by Kneeling at the Sacrament no
Adoration of the Elements is intended. Now, says the Reconciler, who can tell
why this whole Preface in our present Common Prayer Book is left out?] Had he
with Ingenuity and Truth transcribed that whole Rubric of King Edward's Book,
as it lies, it would more See Mr. Hamon L'Estrange. P. 207, 208.
evidently appear, that there is no material difference between it, and the
present. I do not think it worth the while to take that pains here. For, as he
represents it, it is visible enough, that the full Scope and Importance of that
Preface is sufficiently included in the fore-recited Declaration, wherein the
Church, so far as she thought convenient, has charitably obviaied that
Offense, which might otherwise have been taken by those, who either for
Ignorance and Infirmity, or else for Malice and Obstinacy misconstrued and
depraved her Appointments. And it is not consistent with Truth, to assert, that
this whole Preface was left out, nor ingenuous, to insinuate, that it was done
upon any evil design.

Some mistake the Reconciler could not choose, upon reflection, but be conscious
of here: And therefore when he repeats it again, and calls it the Protestation
concerning this Gesture, he expresses himself a little more warily: Part of
which Words are now omitted p. (...).
in our present Luturgy: viz. that important Truth, that so much, as
conveniently may be, Offenses should be taken away. Where yet I see no reason
for the challenge of this Omission of a Truth everywhere acknowledged, and
which was the Foundation and Purport of the whole declaration. -- But enough of
this.

Lastly, The Appointment of the Church touching Kneeling at the Sacrament is so
much the more reasonable and unexceptionable, because at the very Act of
Receiving she has also ordered a devout Prayer on the Communicant's behalf,
which by a fervent Amen he is concerned himself to ingeminate. The Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul to
everlasting Life. [And here, says the Scotch Liturgy, shall the Receiver say,
Amen.] The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve
thy Body and Soul unto everlasting Life. [Here again, says that Liturgy, the
Party receiving shall say, Amen.] Now therefore, if the Dissenters scruple not
to Kneel at their solemn Prayers, they need not so to do in the Act of
Receiving the Lord's Supper, as it is by the Church of England appointed to be
administered.

Upon the whole I may well say, considering the Plainness of the thing, and the
frequent Apologies made by the Church and her Sons for it, that if any shall
yet oppose his own conceited Opinion against all this Evidence, and Charity,
(as Mr. Calvin says upon a like occasion touching Church-Orders) Viderit ipse
In^^. 1. 4. c. 10.
qua morositatem suam ratione Domino approbat, Let him see what defense he can
make before God for his Sturdiness or Frowardness.

And yet after all I do humbly conceive, the Church of England would be The
Church of England would do^b^les^ (...), could (...) so doing reasonably (...)
(...): which is the (...) ^ecommend^d from (...) in the (...) of ^^ (...)
content even to injure her imposing Power in this most reasonable matter,
could she hope by so doing to reclaim the Dissenting Laity to her Communion.
And I think it might deserve to be propounded, with submission to her Wisdom,
whether, as matters with us stand, the Punishment however for the Omission,
might not be rather commuted by the sanction of the Civil Magistrate into some
Temporal or Pecuniary Mulct for charitable Uses: And one Reason here might be
taken from the common Observation of the great success of the Test of late,
which brought so many to the Church Communion, whom the dread of any spiritual
Censures had but little influence upon.

I will close this Controversy about the Imposition of Ceremonies in the Words
of Bp. Gauden, when His Majesty's Consideratious touching the Liturgy. P. 38.
Condescending Declaration was yet fresh; Certainly Humane Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies, like Shadows, neither fill, nor burden any Conscience of
themselves. That which is considerable in them is, as they are in their nature
and use comely for the Duty, and Instances either of Obedience, or of Charity
and Unity. And it is no less certain, whatever Indulgence as to the Penalty, or
Practice of Ceremonies, His Majesty's Clemency may please to grant to some Men
of weak Minds and scrupulous Consciences in these things; (which Royal Charity
no good Christian will repine at, provided it be used with Meekness and
Humility, not Insolence and Factiousness) yet as to the Principle, which NB.
the Church of England went by in matter of Ceremonies, it is most true, and
undeniably to be maintained even to the Death, that this National Church, as
all others, has from the Word of God Liberty, Power and Authority within its
own Polity and Bounds, to judge of what seems to it most agreeable and decent as
to any Circumstance or Ceremony in the Worship of God, which the Lord has left
unconfined, free and indifferent in its nature, and only to be regulated and
confined by every such Ecclesiastical Polity within it self; where the Consent
of the major Part of Church and State, both in Councils and Parliaments,
includes the whole, and may enjoin its Rules and Orders in these things upon
all under its Jurisdiction, and within its Communion; As well as a Master of a
Family may appoint the Time, Place, Manner, and Measure, Gesture, and Vesture,
wherein he will have all his Family to serve God with him.

And very few, I think, if any, do
scruple our Ceremonies, (which are, as St. Augustine would have them, few in
Number, easy in Practice, apt in Signification) who do not also strike at this
Doctrinal Principle, upon which the Church has proceeded, and which she cannot
discharge without a wrong to her self, and the whole Catholic Church of Christ.

And this is a sufficient Vindication to the Reverence and Respect by the
Church of England born unto Antiquity in this case; that she retains and goes
upon that General Rule, whereby the Customs and Canons of the Churches of God
have been founded from the Beginning. Nor is it any prejudice to her Sincerity
in this Reverence, that she has also showed her Liberty in forbearing some
Ceremonies then in use, as well as her Authority in enjoining others, and above
all her Moderation, in that she has been content with so small a Number; so
small a number, I say, that she is not liable to be charged in any thing so
much, as in this: but that she has also reserved to her self a Power of
Ordaining Act of Uniform. 1 Eliz.
and Publishing such farther Ceremonies, as may be most for the Advancement of
God's Glory, the Edifying of his Church, and the due Reverence of Christ's holy
Mysteries and Sacraments.

And this again is Compurgation enough to her Equity in departing from the
Church of Rome, that (Abuses removed) she continues some indifferent Ceremonies
still in common with her, as a standing Testimony, that she would never have
been divided from her Communion upon the account of things indifferent, no
Holiness or Superstition placed in them. But how monstrously unreasonable is it
for any now to fly in the face of this Church on the score of three Ceremonies
only (but one of which is imposed on the Laity) when the Reconciler can tell
them of twenty more, that she might have vouched Antiquity for?

It may be said, I think, of the three, what Dr. More confesses of one of
them, (which some yet above the rest See Reconc. P. 254.
object against, the Cross in Baptism) If the Church cannot make such
Additionals as these, she can make none at all. -- And she must, I fear, for
ever despair of demonstrating her Id. P. 153.
imposing Power in any, lest subject unto Scruple.

For what may they not scruple here, who are no great Friends to external
Decency, or Order, or Uniformity in the Church?

This is the Answer the Reconciler somewhere gives to certain Texts of
Scripture alleged for Unity and Uniformity, [If all these Places be considered
seriously, says he, they will be found not to exhort so much to P. 320.
Unity of Judgment, but of Affection, not to Uniformity, but to Unanimity,
Peace and Concord.] But is it not evident, that they exhort as much as may be
unto both? to be of the same mind, and to speak the same thing, and to walk by
the same Rule; and as with one Mind, so with one Mouth to glorify God?

Nor is it any more prejudice to NB.
Uniformity, that Unanimity is somewhat preferred before it, than it is to all
external Worship; that the internal is of both of greater Value and Necessity.
As we are to glorify God both in Body and Spirit, which are his, but chiefly
with the Spirit and Inward Man; so we must labor to glorify him also in the
Christian Assemblies both with Faith in the Heart and Confession of the Mouth;
by Unity both of Judgment and Affection in the Heart, and by Uniformity, as
much as we can, of external Expressions of the same, as so many genuine Pledges
and Testimonies of it; by one Mind and Heart, and by one Mouth; though
principally still by the Unity of Faith and Charity within, if we respect the
Judgment of God, who is the Father of Spirits; but if we regard the Judgment
of Men, before whom we are to glorify God, it must be chiefly, as by external
Worship, so by the Witnessing our 1 Cor. 14. 23.
Unanimity of Soul in the same by our visible Order and Uniformity. And this is
not only a natural result of being of one Heart and Mind, but tends very much
to the producing and nourishing of Peace and Concord in the Church. I am not, I
confess, in love with the Reconciler's Notion of Reverence and Order; that as
some sit, some stand, some kneel at Common Prayer, -- and this without
confusion, so may P. 338.
some sit, some kneel, some stand, at the receiving the Sacrament, -- ] The
Church of England is of another Opinion, which calls upon her Children all to
Strange it is to consider; We commend the Beauty of Uniformity everywhere
almost b^^ in the Church.
kneel at the Confession, and stand up at the Greeds, and say Amen at the
Prayers, etc. And this Uniformity is according to the Practice of the Church of
God both under the Old and New Testament.

But should such a Liberty as this be introduced by the Abatement of public
Impositions, we should certainly open a gap to this Inconvenience. Many who new
conform in obedience to the P. 342.
Laws (Cassandrian Conformists, I think, the Reconciler somewhere calls them,
and such he represents himself to be, as Pref. p. 59.
arose from Super-conformity, even in Cathedrals, as from Half-conformity) when
the Laws and Canons requiring this Conformity shall be suspended, will also
vary in their Practices, and be as careful of doing no more than shall be then
exacted of them, to the full, as now they are of doing no less: And from this
Variety and Change must needs ensue Censures and Animosities on either side;
while some will be judged superstitious for their Fondness to old Ceremonies,
P. 341.
the Law which enjoined them being relaxated or abrogated; and others reflected
upon as mutable Weather-cocks, and Apostates from their former Profession, etc.

SECT. X.
ANd after all it is questionable, What one of the Dissenters we should hereby
gain over to our Communion, that will not as readily be reduced some other way?
The Reconciler, I perceive, dare not engage far for them. But then he adds;

[Suppose that we by yielding in P. 327.
these matters should not reduce one of the Tribe of our Dissenting Brethren,
yet should we take off their most plausible Pretenses, and leave them nothing
which could be rationally offered as a ground for Separation, or Accusation of
our Proceedings against them; whereas, while we continue the Imposition of
these things, they cannot want Objections to oppose, though not against their
own Submission to, yet against our imposing of these things as the Conditions
of Communion. -- This Condescension in Superiors would P. 329.
evacuate and fundamentally cut off the ground and the occasion of their Pleas.
-- ] I am not desirous to urge any thing against the gracious Condescensions of
our Superiors, wheresoever, and to whomsoever they judge it reasonable: And it
cannot be denied, but if the Laws were removed, there could be no possible
Pretext to be made against them; but whether as plausible Pretenses may not
still as rationally be offered against what shall be yet left standing, I am
somewhat in doubt. We have to do with a sort of Men, that will never want some
alledgment or other to accuse the Public Proceedings. And it is ingenuously
confessed by the Reconciler, that whatsoever they now clamor against the
Impositions, they have nothing reasonably to object against their own
Submission to them, much less as a ground of Separation, because of them. --
Again, says he,

They who at first dissented from the P. 330.
Constitution of our Church, declared, they did it purely on the account of
these things: If therefore the forbearance to impose them will not prevail upon
them to embrace Communion with us, we shall have the Advantage over them, that
to all reasonable Men it will appear, that they are not the genuine Offspring
of the Old Dissenting Protestant, but a New upstart Faction, which call for
such Conditions of Communion, as their more sober Brethren never dreamed of.]
This, I think, appears unto reasonable Men pretty well already by those
separate Assemblies which the first Dissenters did not dare to plead for. Yet I
esteem it no great Glory for any to be the genuine Offspring of those Old
Dissenters neither, who were but an upstart Faction then, as the worst of these
are now; nor do I think we have any Obligation to a kind Remembrance of them,
who first led the Dance, and broached those Principles, which our (...)
Dissenters do only improve a little, and build upon.

This has been long since urged in Mr. Mason Sermon. p. 67, 68.
the case, [As you rejoice the 'Papists, so you encourage the Brownists, who
build their Conclusions upon your Premises, and put your Speculations See more
to this purpose in (...)
in practice. For have not your Ringleaders proclaimed, that our Government by
Bishops is Popish, our Liturgy Popish, our ministering of Baptism with the Cross
Popish, our Kneeling at the Communion Popish, our Holy Duties Popish, and
almost Every Thing Popish? Wherefore the Brownists having learnt that the Pope
is Antichrist, and the present Church of Rome Babylon; and hearing a Voice from
Heaven, crying, Go out of her, my People, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins,
and that ye taste not of her Plagues, have upon your former Premises gathered a
Practical Conclusion,
and made an actual Separation and Rent from the Church of England. And surely,
my Brethren, as they had their Original from your Positions, so now are they
strengthened by your Practices. For they may well think, that such learned and
virtuous Men, so famous and renowned Preachers, knowing a Woe pronounced against
them, if they preach not the Gospel, would never suffer themselves to be
silenced for matters which they judged indifferent. And therefore they will
take it as granted, that the things you stick at are in your opinion simply
unlawful. And upon this dangerous Position they will build another: For if the
Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is enjoined at this day to be
performed, be such, as a Minister cannot execute his Function with a good
Conscience, then they conclude, that neither may the People hear it with a good
Conscience, because their Presence were an Approbation of it. Thus the unquiet
Will of Man will still be working, even till it run it self upon the Rock of
its own Destruction.]

Here we see the true Occasion and Rise of all those separate Congregations in
the Nation, whom the Reconciler himself (notwithstanding his abundant Charity
to Dissenters) believes to be schismatical. Pref. p. 59.
[And it is agreed on all sides, Book, p. 23.
says he, that Schism is a very great Offense, and by the Writers of the
Church of England, and by the Primitive Fathers it is declared to be a Sin in
its own nature damnable.] How little Encouragement then have we to indulge
unto, or confide in such Men, or their genuine Offspring, or (whatsoever may
be urged for the Men) their schismatical Principles.

With what Reason and Zeal have the most learned and pious Sons of the Church
of England appeared all along, even against those first Dissenters, and leading
Patriarchs of the Nonconforming Brotherhood?

O what a grief ought this to be to their Souls, says one, so to Mr. Mason ep.
ded. to his Sermon.
oppose themselves against such a Learned and Religion Church! and so
irreverently to traduce that holy Book of Common Prayer, a Work of so great and
admirable Excellency! Concerning which I may truly affirm, that it has been
cut up like an Anatomy, every Vein of it has been opened, every Corner
searched, every Rubric ransacked, not a Word, but has been weighed in the
Balance, not a Syllable but has been sifted to the uttermost, and yet for all
this, like to the Bridge of Caesar, the more it is opposed, the stronger it
stands. And again, To come to the Form Id. Sermon. p. 22.
of Common Prayer, as it was established by Queen Elizabeth, O what Blessings
has the Lord vouchsafed the People of this Land by means of that Book! How
many Millions of Souls have received comfort by it! How many thousands of
Learned Men have commended and defended it! You shall hear one for all, even
that Judicious Jewel, in whose opinion it contains nothing, either
disagreeing from Holy Scripture, or misbeseeming sober Men. And yet it has
pleased our Gracious Sovereign, that some things should be explained, that the
Public Form of Prayer might be free not only from Blame, but from Suspicion.]

This excellent Book, we know, has been since deliberately reviewed, and
certain Alterations made in it by the best Advice and Authority in the Kingdom:
And yet some Men raise fresh Objections, even from those Alterations. What can
we suppose will ever satisfy them, unless they may themselves prescribe and
govern all? Let me here recommend to an impartial Consideration the Words of a
very Reverend Person on this occasion.

When God, that here calls us unto Peace, shall one Day call us to account, Dr.
Frank. Sermon. at St. Paul's on Col. 3. 15.
how gracious and thankful we have been for his calling us to it; what we have
done or not done toward it; Consider, I beseech you, whether you think
seriously in your Hearts, that it will there pass for true Endeavors for Peace
to answer thus: Lord, we have been all for 'Peace,
and we petitioned for it, but we could not have it upon our own Conditions. We
would have agreed for a Public Service, but we could not have it of our own
making. We could well enough have condescended to an Uniformity, but they would
not let us, that were the Inferiors, set the Rule. We yet agree in the
Articles of the Faith; only for Indifferences we keep still off. We are all
saved too, we confess, by the Cross of Christ, but the very Sign of it we
thought enough to keep us still asunder. We were zealous for thy Worship, but
we would not be confined to it by any imposed Rule of Reverence and Order. We
could indeed have yet submitted to it our selves, but we, some of us, had
taught the People otherwise, and were ashamed to unteach them. We might perhaps
have easily come in at first, but now we have so long stood out, that it is not
for our Honor to retreat; they will call us Turn-coats and Apostates, and we
shall lose the People quite. Gracious and kind notwithstanding we have been in
our Deportments, but 'twas only to our own Party; Thankful besides to God,
though we kept not indeed any solemn Days of Thanksgivings, or as perfunctorily
as we could; we would go no further. In the Sum, We have done all we could to
have Peace upon our own Terms, but we could not obtain it, unless we would
submit to Decency and Order; And so it stands.

And when our Governors and Superiors, called to the same account, shall be
content to stand to our own Confessions, that they imposed nothing but for
Unity and Order. Think soberly, I beseech you, on which hand lies the true Plea
for the Endeavor of Peace, where lies the Perverseness, where the Compliance?
And if this be the business, as I fear it is too near it, I shall leave the
whole World to judge, whether Peace truly rule in the Hearts of those, who upon
their own Terms only seek it, whether they answer their Callings, or are
thankful.]

Nevertheless if it shall still be thought expedient, for mere pity and
commiseration-sake to some weak and prejudiced Dissenters, to importune the
Church and State for some Condescension farther in scrupled Ceremonies and
certain disputable Clauses of the Liturgy (which is the professed Design of the
Reconciler alone to plead for in certain Passages of his Treatise) it ought
certainly to be done without any affront to the Establishments,
or Reflection upon the Authority of those that are to govern us. We should not
at the same time endeavor to extort that by plain dint of Argument and
Necessity, which we sue for as an Act of special Grace and Favor. And I do
readily enough subscribe to the Words of Bp. Tailor, which he makes use of in
the case. If the Question be, Who P. 224, 225.
shall yield? The Governors certainly have Authority, and others say, they
have Reason. The one ought to be pitied, and the other to be obeyed, but both
ought to yield. Only the Subject must yield outward Obedience, though otherwise
it were not necessary: yet if it be lawful, it accidentally becomes so. And if
it be not lawful, or if he thinks it is not, yet he must be careful he give no
offense, but modestly, humbly, and without reproach offer his Reasons against
the Law. But then the Governors also must yield; (so far as they apprehend
Reason so to do) They must not consider, how much is possible for them, but how
much is fit; they must meditate nothing of Empire, (doing things merely because
they have Power in their Hands) but much of Charity; they must consider, which
will do most good to the Souls to which they relate; they must with Meakness
instruct the Gainsayers, and with Sweetness endeavor to win them, and bear
with the Infirmities of the Weak, if they can perceive the Weakness to be
innocent.]

SECT. XI.
I Have now finished my Animadversions upon the first Proposition of the
Reconciler, which he prosecutes so largely, and with so many reflecting
Passages upon the Church of England in this his Book, against the Imposition of
unnecessary Ceremonies, (as he calls them) and retaining some Disputable
Passages in the Liturgy, which he nowhere reckons up. It only remains, that I
press him to a speedy Dispatch of his promised Endeavors upon the second,
wherein he undertakes to prove, with Words of Truth and Soberness, That
Separation from Communion with us on the account of those few scrupled
Ceremonies and Disputable Expressions is sinful and unreasonable as well as
mischievous.

I will only remember him, that this is one of the best Periods in his Apology
or Preface for a favorable Construction of what he has already done; and that
Disservice as well as Disrespect, which the Application of some Arguments and
Phrases in his Treatise may do the Church of England and her Honored and
Apostolical Governors.

[Since I, who do humbly plead for Condescension, do intend, God willing, to
plead as stiffly, and I hope
with more conviction for Submission to the Constitutions of the Church of
England.] He has given us some taste here and there of his great Abilities
this way; I will only touch upon a few Passages, and so conclude.

These Arguments fall, many of them, with more weight on our Dissenters, P. 58.
provided they can show no Law of God plainly forbidding their Submission to
these things. For let me ask them in the Spirit of Meekness these few
Questions. Do they prefer Mercy before Sacrifice, who will not submit to Rites
or Circumstances, or to the Use of things nowhere forbidden in the Word of God,
to prevent Schism and all the dreadful Consequences of it? but rather will give
cause to their Superiors to judge them scandalous Resisters of Authority, and
pertinacious Disturbers of the Church's Peace? Are they compassionate toward
the Sheep, according ^o our Lord's Example, who rather will refuse to become
Laborers in his Harvest, and Teachers of the Gospel of the Kingdom of God,
than submit to these little Things in order to their regular Performance of
this blessed Work? Do not they scandalize, offend, and contribute to the Ruin
of Christ's little ones, who do involve them in a wretched Schism, on the
account of things, which they may lawfully submit to? Do not they shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men, who forbid them to enter, when they may? Do not
they impose heavy Burdens also, (and that NB.
without Authority) who say to their Disciples, Hear not the Common Prayer;
Receive not the Sacrament Kneeling; Suffer not your Children to be signed with
the Sign of the Cross; Communicate not with that Minister who wears a Surplice,
or with that Church, which imposes any Ceremonies, or Constitutions, but
concerning the Time and Place of performing Public Worship. If the good
Shepherd should lay down his Life for the Sheep, ought not they to lay down
their unnecessary Scruples for their sakes? If nothing does so scandalize
Christ's Followers, as to find their Teachers at discord and divided, can they
act as becomes his Disciples, who are not willing to procure Unity and
Concord, and to avoid this Scandal, by their Submission to things indifferent
in their own Nature, and not forbidden in the Law of God?

Though it could be lawful for the Dissenter to refuse Obedience to the P. 149.
things imposed, yet if it be not absolutely his Duty so to do, he cannot be
excused for neglecting, what is so expedient for the Peace, Unity, and Welfare
of the Church.

Once more, The great Rule of P. 187.
Equity, if duly weighed, would mightily conduce unto the Satisfaction of
Dissenters in many of their Scruples, and let them see, that in those matters,
which are not apparently forbidden by the clear Word of God, they ought to
yield Obedience to the Commands of their Superiors; for do not they expect
Obedience from their Children in like cases?

If, as the Author of the Friendly Debate does put the case, you had Ibid.
commanded your Children and Servants to come at ten of the clock into your
Parlor to Family Devotions, requiring them to come dressed, and to kneel at
their Devotions, would you permit them to refuse to come at the Time, and to
the Place appointed, because all Times and Places are indifferent to God? or in
the Garb appointed, because God regards not Habits? or to refuse to kneel,
because they may pray standing? Would you not esteem them Contemners of your
lawful Authority, and needlessly and sinfully scrupulous in those matters? And
must you not by the same Rule be guilty of contemning the Lawful Authority of
your Civil and Spiritual Fathers, and of the Masters of Christ's Family by your
Refusal to submit unto their Constitutions in Matters of like nature, upon the
like accounts? I have done both the Reconciler and the Church Justice in the
exhibi^ing these excellent Passages again to view. And I must conclude, that I
have not any-where offended him, who has solemnly declared, That there is
nothing Pref. p. 3.
in the World, in which he shall more heartily rejoice, than in a clear
Conviction, that in that Part of his Discourse, which does concern his ever
honored Superiors, he has been (somewhat at least) mistaken. -- However it
prove, I have endeavored and offered at it without Gall and Bitterness, or any
such Transports, which are unbecoming a Loving and Dutiful Son in wiping off
the Reproaches cast upon his Dear Mother, the Church of England, with her true
Apostolic Guides and Rulers, and Supreme Governor.

And in some things, I am sure, I may justly challenge his Promise both of
Thanks and Retractation; or expect however a better Explanation of more
doubtful Passages, than any that are to be found in our Common Liturgy.

Sed Veniam pro Laud peto. --
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHIEF CONTENTS Of these Animadversions.
SECT. I. The Sum of the Reconciler's Apologies in his Preface represented. P.
1. SECT. II. His great Proposition laid down; with a farther Declaration of
what he professes to plead for, here and there, expressed to his fairest
Advantage: with 2 or 3 Queries to be well resolved by all, that will determine
rightly of what he makes the Issue of it. 5. SECT. III. Diverse Passages noted
in the Reconciler, which exceed his former Bounds and Limits; some tending to
prove the utter Unlawfulness of imposing any Ceremonies, especially
significant. Others slandering both our Reformation, and the Defenders of it;
the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet more particularly. 19. SECT. IV. That it ought
to be duly considered by how great and sacred Authority the Things excepted
against by Dissenters stand established, and that, after the mature Examination
of all their Pretenses; Of the Act of Uniformity primo Eliz. Of the excellent
Passage of King James appealed to by the Reconciler. His Judgment of these
Matters more at large from the Conference at Hampton Court and the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastic, with his Ratification of the same.
Particularly of the Subscription required, and the Moderation of our Church
therein compared with that of Geneva. 33 SECT. V. The Words of King Charles the
first, the Royal Martyr, and best of Kings and Men, as he deservedly styles
him. The Arguings from 1641, and 1660 reflected upon. The Martyr's grounded
Value for the Church of England, and her Establishments from his Declaration
presix'd to the 39 Articles; and his Ratification of the Constitutions and
Canons 1640. ( among which the 4th Canon is particularly considered, with the
Dissenters Merry-Andrews sporting about it.) Some other weighty Citations from
the Royal Martyr's (...) 54. SECT. VI. The pretended Suffrage of his present
Majesty. Some Observations about His Royal Declaration from Breda; and the
other of Ecclesiastical Affairs appealed to by the Reconciler, with his
Extatick Loyalty in the Adoration of it. The Act of Uniformity in pursuance of
the same 14 Car. 2. A peaceable Mind, and Willingness to learn, and charitable
Exposition most due from Subjects to so august an Authority. 67 SECT. VII. The
Public Apologies of the Church (...) Concerning Alterations in the Liturgy. 2.
Of Ceremonies, why some abolished, and some retained by her. The Unkindness of
the Reconciler in his Reflections of Unmercifulness in her Impositions, etc. 84
SECT. VIII. The Question of Ceremonies and the Impositions of them resumed.
Apostolic Authority and Practice for it. 1 Cor. 11. accommodated hereunto and
vindicated. The Determinations of the Universal Church agreeable hereunto. A
double Instance enlarged upon from the Reconciler. His Restrictions to Positive
Decency considered, with the Reasons offened in favor of the same. An
Intimation of the Danger of calling Ceremonies unnecessary in the Vulgar
Notion. The Opposition made to them a Step to Innovation in Civil Matters. 109
SECT. IX. Of Kneeling at the Sacrament, the only scrupled Ceremony imposed on
the Laity. The Reasonableness, Fitness, and Antiquity of it vindicated. A
Defect of Candor in the Reconciler noted, with reference to the Church's
Rubric, or Declaration about this Ceremony. A modest Proposal of the Change of
the Penalty to a Pecuniary Mulct for Charitable Uses. A Close of the whole
Dispute of Ceremonies. The Reconciler's too indifferent regard for Uniformity.
128 SECT. X. The small Success hoped for from this Indulgence so passionately
contended for. All other Separatists, whom the Reconciler owneth for
schismatical, do build upon the Principles of the first Dissenters, that is,
the Old Non-Conformists or Puritanes. Some considerable Passages out of Mr.
Mason and Dr. Frank's Sermons. The Matter in Issue closed with the Words of Bp.
Tailer. 146 SECT. XI. The Reconciler urged with his Promise of a Second
Treatise; wherein he engages to plead as stiffly, and, as he (reasonably
enough) hopes, with more Conviction, for Submission to the Constitutions of the
Church of England; which is a most undoubted Expedient for Peace. With a
Specimen of his excellent Abilities this way. 157

