EXEYTHIA; Roman Oracles Silenced: OR, THE Prime Testimonies OF ANTIQUITY
Produced by HENRY TURBERVIL IN HIS Manual of Controversies Examined and
Refuted. By the Right Reverend Dr. WILLIAM THOMAS, late Lord Bishop of
WORCESTER.

Imprimatur, Jan. 20. 1691. Z. Isham. R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. and are to be Sold at the Crown in Cornhil, near the
Stocks-Market. MDC XCI.

To the Reader.
THE Publishing of this small Tract, (opus posthumum and imperfectum) may need
an Apology, as wanting the last Hand of the Accurate Author, and Answering but
to the Six first Leaves of the Manual it attacks: But since it is a Genuine
Copy, compared as near as could be with the obscurely written Original, And it
sufficiently unravels the Testimonies of the First Six Hundred Years, of which
the Romanists mainly Vaunt, and to which the Reformed confidently Appeal; It
may pass for a just Treatise without Disappointment to the Reader, or
Derogation to the Authors Name, whose Memory is Venerable and Precious with
those that knew Him; Being a Person (...), of singular Modesty Greg. Naz.
and Humility to conquer Passion, and win Affection; yet (...), of Conspicuous
Learning and Life to convince Gainsayers, and confound Adversaries: An Instance
both of his Candor and Dexterity Herein we have in his former Apology for our
Church against the Cavils of Separatists, and in this Present Answer to the
Challenge of Romanists. In both which he bath approved Himself a Workman that
need not be ashamed, whose unbyassed Judgment, and steady Hand carry an Equal
Poise, without Prejudioe and Partiality, Who had not learned (...), to fit his
Faith to the Times; But as a faithful Soldier and Martyr stood fast in the
Truth of the Church of England, kept his standing contra Homines and D^mones,
No Temptation could warp or divert Him (...) to the last Gasp. Cl. Al.
May His Sincerity and Constancy be to us a lasting (...) to Encourage and
Establish us in the Present Truth.

A MANUAL OF CONTROVERSIES. ARTICLE 1.
The TENET. THAT the Church now in Communion with the Sea of Rome, is the only
True Church.

The ARGUMENT.
That is the only True Church of God, which has had a continued Succession
from Christ and his Apostles to this time. But the Church now in Communion with
the Sea of Rome, and no other, has had a continued Succession from Christ and
his Apostles to this time. Therefore the Church now in Communion with the Sea
of Rome, and no other, is the True Church of God.
W. T.
The Major is not true, unless there be an Non colligi necessario esse
ecclesiam ubi est successio.
addition of a word only, to wit, which only has had a continued succession
from Christ.

The Major being thus propounded, is not of validity Bellarm. l. 4. de Eccl. c.
8.
in the judgment of Bellarmine, who will not admit succession to be a proof of
the true Church.

The Major is to be denied if understood of a Local, Personal, without a
Doctrinal Succession.

H. T.
The Major proved, Isa. 59. 21. Isa. 60. 1, 3, 11. Isa. 62. 6. Ezekiel. 37. 16.
Dan. 7. 13, 14. St. Matthew. 28. 20. St. John 14. 16. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14.

W. T.
These Texts of Scripture import the Conversion of the Gentiles, the
propagation of the Gospel, the Divine assistance to be continued to the Church
in the most diffusive Capacity, without a particular restriction to any
distinct place or People. A discussion whereof were a digression not pertinent
to the main of our Controversy.

The Minor Proposition exacts a closer Examination.

This Proposition has two Members, the one positive; The Church now in
Communion with the Sea of Rome, has had a continued Succession from Christ and
his Apostles.

The other Member is negative; No other Church has had a continued Succession
from Christ and his Apostles.

The minor Proposition is impotent in both the parts, like Mephiboseth, lame in
both feet.

There is no Confirmation offered as to the later branch that excludes other
Churches from the plea of Succession. Whereas the Local, Personal Succession of
the Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, and others is
flourisht out in specious Catalogues loss liable to exception than that of
Rome, which is yet more transcended in a Doctrinal succession if reduced to the
Sacred Test of Canonical Scripture.

H. T.
The minor Proposition is proved by this ensuing Catalogue of the Roman
Churches chief Pastors, Co^^olls, Nations Converted, and Public Professors of
her Faith.

From the Year of Christ, Thirty.

Chief Pastors. General Councils. 30 Our Blessed Savior, Jesus Christ. 34 St.
Peter the Apostle. The Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem, St. Peter
presiding, Acts 15. 67 Linus. 80 Cletus. 93 Clement.

W. T.
What is asserted of Concoction of Meats is appliable to this point of
succession in the Sea of Rome. An Error in the first degree is not to be
corrected in the rest.

If the first link be loose, all will be shattered. There is no certainty
because there is no harmony in the Testimonies of Antiquity, touching the
first, second, third, and fourth Bishops of Rome.

Rusinus relates that L^nus and Cletus were not distinct Successors Linus and
Clerus suerunt quidem ante Clementem Episcopl in urbe Roma; Sed superstite
Petro: videlicet ut illi Episcopatus curam gererent, ipse vero Apostolatus
officium imp'eret. Rusinus Praefat. ad libros recognitionum.
after the dissolution of St. Peter, but joint Bishops during his Life; that
they discharged the Episcopal Office whilst he did the Apostolical.

Epiphanius gives this account of the Succession in the Epiphanius, Haeres. 27.
See of Rome. Peter and Paul. Linus. Cletus.

Tertullian lays the Foundation A gloriosissimis Apostolis Petro and Paulo
Romae f^ndatur and conslituitur Ecclesia. Tertul. adv. Mani. l. 4.
of the Sea of Rome in both the Apostles recited.

Irenaeus testifies, that both invested Fundantes and instruentes Ecclesiam,
Lino Episcopatum tradiderunt. Iraen. l. 3. c. 8.
Linus in the Bishopric of Rome.

St. Clemens makes himself the immediate Successor of St. Peter. Clem. in
Epist. 1. ad Jacobum.
Tertull. in l. de. prescript. cip. 32.
Tertullian ratifies this Order of Succession.

Irenaeus and Eusebius recite Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. (...). Eccl. l. 3. c. 13.
Anacletus for the immediate Successor of Linus.

St. Ignatius and Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
St. Irenaeus recount Anacletus as Predecessor to Ign. in Epist. ad Mar.
Castobol.
Clemens.

Baronius Bar. ad Ann. inslit. 69. Sect. 39.
vindicates this to be the true Suecession. I shall not hence conclude your
forementioned, no^ consistent with this to be false, being countenanced by the
Authority of St. Optatus Opt. l. 3. contra Parmen.
and others. But I may hence infer how little Weight and Stress there is in
your first Evidence produced for Succession in the Sea of Rome: In opposition
to all these Records Clem. in l. 10. recognitionum. Eusebius. Chron. p. 566.
Clemens in pretended Recognitions in his name avouches St. Barnabas to be the
first Planter of the Church.

Your next Argument is the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem, St. Peter
presiding, Acts 15. The discussion of this Objection may properly be referred
to the next Section, because it is there more dilated, and improved by the
Opponent.

H. T.
From the Year 100.

103 Anacletus. 112 Evaristus. 121 Alexander. 132 Sixtus 1. 142 Telesphorus.
154 Higinus. 158 Pius 1. 163 Anicetus. 175 Soter. 179 Eleutherius. 194 Victor.


W.T.
The great Roman Orator justly set a brand of Infamy on a Common Argument, that
may reciprocally Tullius l. 1. de Inuentione.
be used by both Parties in Controversies. It is yet more liable to exception,
when that proof which is falsely produced is truly retorted.

We willingly submit to the Test of these recited Bishops of Rome, who lived
Saints, and most of them dyed Martyrs, whose Doctrine we own and embrace as
true and orthodox, whose practice (Humane Infirmities excepted) we estimate as
meet patterns to be imitated; whereas both have been notoriously scandalously
receded from by pretended Successors in the Sea of Rome for at least eleven
Centuries last past.

H.T.
In this first Age or Century after Jesus Christ, we find the Primacy in St.
Peter, as is manifest by the said Council in the Acts, where (after a serious
debate, whether the Jewish Ceremonies ought to be imposed on the Gentiles,) St.
Peter defined in the negative. Acts 15. 7, 8, 9, 10.

W.T.
St. Peter declared, (v. 14.) but defined not. He spoke not first
authoritatively, to lead, nor last juridically, to ratify.

Not first, untruly alleged by Bellarmine, there had Cum multa, disceptatio
fuisset inter Judices Gl. Ord. (...). Chrysostom. (...). Theoph.
been much disputing before, (v. 7.) much arguing among the Judges, according
to the ordinary gloss.

Not last, this privilege, this pre-eminence appertained to St. James, as
Bishop of Jerusalem. Therefore he speaks last.

It is the Reason offered by St. Chrysostom and St. Theophilact.

St. Peter had a special occasion of an Historical Narrative touching the
Gentile Conversion, as also St. Paul and St. Barnabas had, but neither did
pronounce Juridical Sentence.

No mean Romanists had so much ingenuity as to acknowledge Abuleus in c. 7.
Matthew. qu. 13. Dionys. Carth. in Act. 19.

Lorin. in Act. 15.


that all the rest of Apostles, even St. Peter not excepted, did vail to the
Jurisdiction of St. James, whilst he presided at Jerusalem.

H. T.
St. James, (who was Bishop of the place) seconding by his Sentence what Peter
had decreed, all the Multitude (says Jerome) held their Peace; and into his
(Peter's) Sentence, James the Apostle and all the Priests did pass together. Ep.
89. to August. c. 2. Peter (says he, in the same place) was Prince and Author
of the Decree.

W.T.
It was St. Peter's preparatory Sentence or Beatus Jacobus cum caeteris
Apostolis tale decretum constituit observandum. Gaudent. in Sermon. de Macchab.
Opinion; but St. James ultimate Decree, final Determination assisted with the
rest of the Apostles: So Gaudentius has exactly expressed it.

The Testimony of St. Jerome recited, consists in two phrases. The one is, St.
James and the rest passing into the Sentence of Peter. Which imports no more,
but that what was asserted by St. Peter was approved by St. James and the rest.

The Nicene Council did assent to the Opinion, acquiesce in the Judgment of the
Famous Paphnutius; yet did he not preside in that Council.

The second quoted expression of St. Jerome, is, that St. Peter was Prince and
Author of the Decree. This denotes a precedence of time in uttering his Opinion
before those recounted afterward, not a pre-eminence of place of office above
them in establishing that Opinion.

This is not inconsistent with the significancy of Prince in Cicero's style:
That it cannot be understood in a notion Princeps rogationis Fabritius. Cicero
in Orat. pro Sextio.
of dignity of Principality, is evident in the Constitution or Decree its self,
pronounced by St. James, which contained some Subjects not mentioned by St.
Peter.

To abstain from pollutions of Idols, and from Fornication, and from things
Strangled, and from Blood.

H.T.
That St. Peter translated his Chair from Antioch to Rome, is proved.

First, Because he remained not always at Antioch, as all that Church
acknowledges; nor did she challenge the first Chair in any General Council, as
appears in the Councils.

Secondly, By the Decrees of Councils, Popes, and other Fathers, giving the
Primacy to the Roman Church.

W.T.
It is a loose Illogical Inference. St. Peter remained not always at Antioch,
therefore he translated his Chair to Rome. He might exercise his Apostolical
Function in both Churches, and yet possibly discharge a distinct Episcopal
Office in neither.

During his absence from Antioch, he was at Jerusalem, at Alexandria, at
Babylon. He spent some years at Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, but it cannot be
thence concluded, nor is it asserted, that he fixed a Pontifical Chair in
either.

As to the succession of St. Peter, Antioch had at least as much right to
challenge the first Chair in a General Council as Rome.

St. Paul was at Rome, at Corinth, at Athens, at Ephesus, at Philippi. He was
an Apostle in each place, (properly) a Bishop in neither.

As to your second allegation of the Decrees of Councils, Popes, Fathers,
giving Primacy to the Roman Church: This is specious, pompous in appearance;
but is not solid, vigorous in force.

Latet dolus in generalibus. A Generality is the fittest Dress and Vail for a
Fallacy.

As for the first Chair in a General Council, (the point of Primacy specified)
no Ancient, General, or National, or Provincial Council has assigned it to the
Pope.

I confess, the Laterane Council, under Leo the 10th, has so established it;
but that was in the year 1516. Constan. Conc. Sess. 4. and 5.

Basil. Sess. 2. and 16.


The Councils of Constance and Basil allow it not.

As for the pretended Decrees of Popes in their own concern of Power and
Grandeur, they are of little validity. By the Canon Law, the Pope cannot be
Judge Papa non debit esse Iudex in propria causa. 16, q. 6. consuetudo.
in his own Cause. It were irrational and presumptuous to exact it.

The first Chair in General Councils has been sometimes arbitrarily granted to
the Pope in the Primitive Church, and sometimes to other Patriarchs.

That there has been no ancient concession, no constant uninterrupted
Prescription for it, appears in the Records of the first Council of Nice, the
Sardian Council, the first and second Constantinopolitan, the first and second
Ephesine.

Whenever the Pope had the prime Chair in any General Council anciently, it was
only Honorary for Session, Turre ^remat. sum. de Errb. l. 3. c. 13.
for Distinction; not Authoritative, for Jurisdiction.

H.T.
The Council of Sardis, Anno Dom. 400, (Western Fathers 300. East. 76.)
decreed, That in cases of Bishops, for the honor of St. Peter's memory, it
should be Lawful to appeal from whatsoever other Bishop to the Bishop of Rome.
Can. 3.

W.T.
I offer several exceptions for the empairing the validity of this Testimony.

First, I deny this to be a General Council. If it were, it ought to be sorted
the second General Council next to the Nicene, before the first
Constantinopolitan.

You allege the consluence of 300 Western, 76 Eastern Fathers. If it had been
so, it had been a great disproportion betwixt the Eastern and Western Prelates,
and a grand advantage to promote the Papal Dignity.

There is a mixture of Truth and Falsehood in the citation of this Authority.
(Omnis fabuld fundatur in Historia.) An Ecumenical Council it was in the
intention, the design of the Emperor, but not in the execution, the management
of the Council. In the one respect it has been anciently called a General, in
the other a Particular Council.

Both the Eastern and Western Fathers were Summoned by Imperial Edict, in
Obedience whereto, both repaired Socra^^s. l. 2. c. 16.
to Sardis: But they consulted nor convened not together, (upon a difference
touching St. Athanasius and Paulus). The Eastern receded from Sardis, and held
a Sozom. l. 3. c. 10.
Council apart at Philippi in Thracia.

The Western Prelates that remained apart at Sardis, could not constitute a
General Council, nor obtrude a Canon to bind any out of the Western Limits.

My second exception is against the Canon its self produced, which has a
suspicious taint of imposture, being not received, not after the utmost
scrutiny to be Nec in aliqua Patrum Synod. Con. Afric. c. 105.
found, by the African Fathers, as not extant in the Nicene Council, so not in
any other.

St. Austin was utterly ignorant of any Ut aliqui tanquam a tuae sanctitatis
latere mitta^tur nulla invenim^s Patrum Synodo constitutum. Aug. in ep. ad
Coeles^in.
such Canon, who was not unverst in a point of Jurisdiction and Pre-eminence,
so much discussed in his time.

St. Austin acknowledged no Sardian Aug. contra Creseen. l. 3. c. 34.
Council but what was Heretical.

The Cardinal Cusanus had so much ingenuity, Satis posse dubitari an Sardiensis
Concilii constitutio existat. Cusan. de Conc. Catho. l. 2. c. 25.
as to acknowledge a sufficient ground of doubt, whether there be extant a
Constitution of the Sardian Council.

The Sardian Canon quoted, is the more obnoxious to the impeachment of fraud,
because it is repugnant to the fifth Canon of the Nicene Council; for which the
Orthodox Fathers of that Age had a most solemn veneration.

The first who inserted this Canon (to give it luster) into the famous
Universal Code, together with the rest of the Sardian Council, was Dionysius
Exiguus, in the year 525. who acted the Advocate and Sophister to advance the
Papal Interest, being an Abbot of Rome, who in his Translation of the Code out
of Greek into Latin, notoriously shuffled; as by addition of the Sardian
pretended Canons, and those called the Canons of the Apostles; so also by
substraction of the eight Canons of the Council of Ephesus, the three last
Canons of the first Constantinopolitan Council, the two last of Chalcedon, and
of a Canon of the Council of Laodicea.

My third exception is, That the Canon recited, being indulged to pass as
genuine and authentic, (Dato non concesso) yet will it not support the weight
of a due, durable, staple appeal to the Bishop of Rome. It is (...).
softly and warily propounded by Hosius: If it please you let us in charity
honor the memory of St. Peter. It is the tenor of a novel singular favor,
bound up with several restrictions; it put the Pope in a capacity, upon
deliberation, for a review referred to him to nominate (...).
Commissioners (not out of Rome) out of the Neighboring Province.

This might be an extraordinary esteem and reverence to Julius, then Bishop of
Rome; not decreed as a constant Prerogative for succeeding Ages. If any such
vigor of it be pretended, it is abrogated, annulled in the Councils of
Constantinople and Antioch.

H.T.
The Council of Chalcedon, (Anno Domini 451. Fathers 600.) We thoroughly
consider truly, that all Primacy and chief Honor, according to the Canons, is
to be kept for the Archbishop of Old Rome. Action. 16.

W.T.
I readily grant all Primacy and chief Honor to the Archbishop of Rome,
according to the genuine unforged Canons in the Primitive Church, which assert
only a priority of Order before other Patriarchs, not a superiority of Power
over them, much less a supremacy over Councils and Princes, vindicated by
Modern Canonists, by the Jesuits, the neat Sophisters of the Church, the smooth
Parasites of the Court of Rome.

If H. T. be an Advocate for the former primary I oppose him not; if for the Si
cum ipsius Provinciae Metropolitan^ Episcopus vel Clericus controversiam
habtat, Diaecesis exarchum ad^at v^l Imperatoriae Urbis Constantinopolis
Thronum, et opud eum litiget. Conc. Chal. c. 9.
latter, either his advertency or ingenuity is defective, in urging the Council
of Chalcedon, the trausactions whereof are abundantly repugnant to this
pretended pre-eminence. It directly clashes with the ninth Canon of that
Council.

The fallacy in citing of the Testimony of the Council of Chalcedon, is
unmasked in the immediate subsequent words, which ascribes the same Primacy and
Honor to the Archbishop of Constantinople.

This equality of Dignity of New Rome with the Old was passionately resented,
vigorously opposed, but ineffectually unsuccessfully by the Legates of the Pope.

Upon whose dissatisfaction there was a Recognition, a new deliberate
discussion of the Canon.

After which it was more solemnly ratified, with an universal, reiterated,
declared consent.

Leo, then Bishop of Rome, attested the reality of this Leo in Ep. ad Anaccl.
and in Ep. ad Pulcher.
Degree, even whilst in several Epistles he expressed his disgust of it.

The Histories of Socrates and Sozomen punctually Socr. l. 5. c. 7.

Soz. l. 7. c. 9.


record it.

This Council of Chalcedon communicates equal privileges (...). Conc. Chaic.
Can. 28.
to the most Holy Throne of New Rome with the Elder; being honored both with
Empire and Senate, no less than she to be extolled and magnified as her second,
or next to her.

Though this be perfidiously omitted in her Roman Edition, yet it is inserted
in all Greek Copies, and retained in the ancient Latin Copies, extant in
Libraries.

The substance of this constitution is established in the Ephesians. Conc. can. 9.

Trull. Conc. can. 36.


Ephesine and Trullan Councils.

H.T.
In the relation of the said Council to Pope Leo. We have confirmed, say they,
the rule of the One Hundred and Fifty Fathers, in the first Constantinopolitan
Council, Anno 381. which has commanded, that after the most Holy and
Apostolic See of Rome, the Constantinopolitan should have Honor.

W.T.
That relation has been taxed for a collusion. E Bibliotheca Coloniensium
Praedi atorum non ita pridem Edita, per Do^. Pr. in praep.
A late figment out of the Colonian Library.

But supposing it were no fiction, what advantage can hence accrue to the Roman
See more than is already granted?

If there be any color for an Argument, it must be from the Epithets, most
Holy and Apostolic, or inserting the Sea of Constantinople in a seeming
inferior rank to that of Rome.

Epithets are no Charters for Prerogatives: The complemental Rhetoric of a
Title is no firm Topic to prove a real pre-eminence.

These Epithets are frequently applied to other Patriarchs, and sometimes to
inferior Prelates in the Primitive Church. The Records of Antiquity abound in
instances, which if required, shall be plentifully produced.

All those Churches that have been planted by the Apostles, or wherein they
have exercised their Function, Ter^ull. in l. de Praeser. Aug. in Ep. 162.
have been styled Apostolical Seats; as the Churches of Rome, Antioch,
Jerusalem, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus.

In a secondary Consideration, Bishops have been anciently termed Apostles, and
Episcopacy Apostleship.

The second hint of an Argument is presumed to be from the ranking of the
Constantinopolitan See after that of Rome. This does not advance the power of
the Jurisdiction of Rome, as not in the Council of Chalcedon, (which has been
already demonstrated) so not in the Rule of the first Constantinopolitan
recited. The express Decree is in the Latin Translation, pari honor frui, to
enjoy a like honor; but it is more pregnant in the Greek; (...) Council.
Constant. 1. Can. 36.
to be equally privileged or dignified, as to apreheminence of power in
Ecclesiastical matters alike, (...), to be exalted or magnified; but for
precedence of place that is distinctly allotted in the same Canon to the Roman
See before the Constantinopolitan, to the Constantinopolitan before the
Alexandrian, and to that of Alexandria before Jerusalem. If Leo the Roman
Patriark had not been convinced, That an equality of Authority and Jurisdiction
had been setl^d by that Council upon the several recited Patriarks in their
several Sees and Provinces, he would not have been so much offended with that
Canon of the Chalcedon Council beforementioned, and bustled against it, but he
was sufficiently apprehensive that it was a check to the Transcendent Honor
his Ambition aspired to. Both Councils of Constantinople and Chalcedon,
checking his desire of superlative Grandeur.

H.T.
Pope Antherus, Anno 238, (being asked by the Bishop of Bettica and Toletum,
Whether it were lawful for a Bishop to be changed from one City to another)
Answered affirmatively, As Peter Prince of the Apostles was changed from
Antioch to Rome. Decret. 7. q. 1.

W.T.
There is little certainly touching the exact time and continuance of the
Papacy of Antherus, Whether One year according to Eusebius, or Three according
to Volateran, or Twelve according to Damasus.) There is less certainty touching
the sincerity of the Decret. Epistle Pot^s^atem habent Ordinare, mutare,
inthronizare.

Praetaxato modo


produced, which many have excepted against as spurious upon several accounts,
among others for the barbarism of the style, the impertinence, incoherence of
the conclusion, Historical Narratives touching Eusebius and Felix long after
his time.

However were the Epistle genuine, the Title Prince of the Apostles is no proof
of the pre-eminence alleged, Tanti Apostolatus Principatum meruit. Aug. Chrysostom.
in 1. Gal.
as has been already manifested. St. Austin applied the same Phrase to St.
Paul, who was acknowledged by St. Chrysostom to be equal in Dignity with St.
Peter ((...).)

HT.
St. Gregory says he knows no Bishop but is subject to the Sea of Rome, Ep. 6.
2.

W.T.
St. Gregory (though his memory be precious) being 600 years after Christ (when
the Church of Rome declined in piety, though improved in power) has the less
Authentic veneration. This great Prelate being a Party, is no competent
Witness to assert and vindicate the Papal prerogative.

As the Witness produced, so the Evidence it self is justly liable to
exception. That he knew none but subject to the Sea of Rome. It must probably
be limited to the bounds of his personal Acquaintance, or his Patriarchical
Jurisdiction.

That it cannot be more diffusively generally understood, appears by his solemn
waveing any Paternal or Magisterial Verbum jussionis volo a meo a^ditu
removere. Scio quis sum, qui estis, loco ^nim fratris esti mor^bus Patres. Non
ergo jussi sed quae utilia visa sunt indicare vol^i, Greg. l. 7. Ep. 30.
power to prescribe to other Patriarks, assuming only a fraternal Candor to
advise.

That St. Gregory was not ignorant of a Grandee who was not subject to the Sea
of Rome, but challenged a higher station Ecclesiastical than himself, is
abundantly manifest by his zealous resentment of the Patriark of Constantinople
his contemporary in espousing the transcendent Title of Universal Bishop, not
in excluding all others (as the Romish Champions would sophistically evade it)
but in subjecting them. It is his paraphrase of this Title, To Nulli subesse,
omnibus praeesse. Ep. 38 l. 7.
be Inferior to no other, to be Superior to all.

St. Gregory amply declared his abhorrence of this Title, branding it to be
novel, profane, superstitious, Greg. l. 4. Ep. 32, 36, 38, 39.
proud, presumptuous, an effect of Infidelity, a tincture of Lucifer's
Apostasy, a badge of Antichrist.

H.T.
Catholic Professors to the year 100, the Blessed Virgin, St. John Baptist,
St. John Evangelist, etc. Martha, Magdalen, St. Paul, St. Stephen, Timothy,
Barnabas, Terla, Dennis, Martial, Ignatius, Clemens.

W.T.
They who are of sober discerning Intellectuals, cannot but disgust and
nauseate this unsavory fallacy in obtruding shells without kernels, Names
without any Allegations. These are as insignificant for proof in Divinity, as
Ciphers without any Figures are for account in Arithmetic; unless you design
to confute as Magicians, to conjure by Names, to produce Spells instead of
Arguments, for Enchantment, not Conviction.

Your Confidence in those venerable Saints, and your Interest also, seems to be
the same with that distracted person at Athens, whose deluded Imaginations
prompted to him, That all the Ships and Commodities in the Haven were his own.

H.T.
The Church was spread in this Age over all those Countries, to which St. Paul
wrote his Epistles; as also France, Spain, England, etc. See Baronius.

W.T.
This is out of the Track of our Controversy; That Church which was spread in
this Age, asserted no other Doctrines but what are owned by the Church of
England.

H.T.
Catholic Professors to the year 200, Eustachius, Hermes, Getulius, Policarp,
Concordius, Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Irenaeus, Vincentius, Potentianus, Sophia,
Fides, Spes, Charitas, St. Felicity, with her Seven Children, Lucius King of
England, etc.

W.T.
The Church of England does not recede from the Religion of these Saints.

If you have any Instances to charge us with, why do you not produce their
Testimonies? If you have none, why do you recite their Names? It is an empty
pageantry of Sophistry: Ad populum phaleras.

H.T.
The Apostles Canons define, That if any Bishop or Priest (the Oblation (Mass)
being made) shall not communicate, he should be excommunicated, as giving
suspicion of him, who has sacrificed, That* he has not rightly offered. Can.
9. approved in the Sixth General Synod.

W.T.
Some of the Canons set out in a specious disguise (the name of the Apostles)
have been boggled at by eminent Baron. in Appar. verbo Cle^en^.

Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 27.


Romanists, among others by the Two Learned Cardinals, the accurate Sticklers
for the Papal Interest (the one in an Historical Sphere, the other in a
Controversal,) Baronius and Bellarmine.

Though they are solemnly cited, peremptorily obtruded upon others by the
Modern Romanists, yet they are not exactly Vix ^^x aut octo Latina Ecclesia
nunc observat.

Medina de sacra hominum Contin. l. 5. c. 105.


observed by themselves: Mich. Medina acknowledges that the present practice
does not retain a tenth part of them in the Church of Rome it self.

The alteration and corruptions of time are the smooth Apologies for the
familiar recesses from these pretended Apostolical Rules.

They are branded for Apocryphal in the worst Nations, as not received in the
Catholic Church, not in the Primitive Roman, as composed by Heretics in the
judgment of Gelasius, Gratianus did. 15. Can. Sancta Romana distinct. 16.
Bishop of Rome (in the latter part of the Fifth Century) who excelled most of
his Successors in Piety and Literature; as also by the famous Isidor Bishop of
Hispalis toward the close of the Sixth Century.

Baronius vainly essayed to evade this latter Testimony, being not extant (as
he alleged) in the Edition in his Library; since Baron. Tom. 2. Anno Christi
102. Sect. 11.
in the Decretal purged and refined by the Order of Pope Gregory XIII. It is
acknowledged to be transmitted from the Toletan Library to Rome; which being a
public Record, having so signal, a Papal Approbation, ought to be more
Venerable, Authentic for credit and estimate, than that private Copy Quod quia
Authoritate careant ab Apostolis isse omnino sancitos Apocryphi dici
^^eruerunt. Bar. 16. Notitia libr. Apocr. qui non recipiuntur.
of a Cardinal, who himself confessed, They may be so far deservedly termed
Apocryphal, as being destitute of Authority to have been entirely established
by the Apostles.

Whereas Gelasius inserted them among Apocryphal Gel. Decr. in 2. Vol. Council.
Edit. Nicol. Phorius in Biblioch. c^p. 113.
Books that are not received.

Photius the Learned Patriark of Constantinople, about the middle of the Ninth
Century, takes the rise of these Canons to be an extraction out of a tumultuous
heap ((...) in his phrase) of Synodical Canons.

The first recital of any such Canons called Apostolical in Genuine Antiquity,
(the Testimony of Zepherine being notoriously spurious) was St. Epiphanius
toward the Epiph. Haeres. 30. Rivet. Cri^. Sacr. l. 1. c. 1.

Rob. Cocus cens. quorundam Script. vet. p. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Eccles. Histor. Magdeb.

Cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 7.


end of the Fourth Century. Many Reformed Divines have by weighty Arguments
unmaskt these Canons (which have passed abroad with a false Passport) not to be
truly Apostolical.

Among others, the Centurists of Magdeburg have offered these proofs.

1. They clash with the uncontrouled, uncontradicted Apostolical Scriptures;
(as the 17th Canon with the 1 Timothy 5. 1 Cor. 7. the 27th Canon with the 1 Timothy
4. 1 Cor. 9. 1 Timothy 4. Canon 68 with 1 Timothy 4.

2. A repugnancy with ^^h other, jarring strings not tuned to a harmony; (as
the 6, 17, 27, 40, 50, 65, 68.)

3. The inconsistency of some Canons (as the 8, 20, 36, 38,) with the
Historical Transactions of the Age of the Apostles.

4. They are not testified by any Authority of any Credit, neither in the Age
of the Apostles, not in the first, the second, very scantily in the third, that
succeed; not in Justin Martyr, St. Irenaeus, St. Clemens of Alexandria, Origin,
or St. Jerome.

I insist upon this Subject the longer, that I may, once for all, discover the
paint and varnish of this adulterate beauty of the Sanctuary, trickt up in the
title, the dress of the Canons of the Apostles. I confess they have the face of
Antiquity (though not entirely unblemisht) but they have not the immediate, not
the true stamp of the Authority of the Apostles, as their Authors. As for the
Ninth Canon alleged, if it be of any validity, why does the Trentine Council,
the Oracle of the present Council. Trident. Sect. 22. Can. 6.
Church of Rome run counter with it, whilst it allows private Masses? If it be
of no validity, why do you object what you abrogate?

The approbation of the Sixth General Council produced, is obnoxious to the
same exception. If any stress may be laid upon it, why is the luster of it so
studiously, zealously eclipsed; Why are the Doctrines decreed so severely
impeacht, confidently doomed for erroneous, by the Grandees of your Church, by
Popes, Cardinals, because that Council has allowed the Marriage of Priests,
Council. Constan. siv^ Trul^. Can. 13. and Can. 55.
has prescribed Laws to the Church of Rome.

If no stress may be laid on it, the objection is a confutation of it self.

It is a fallacy without any grain of ingenuity to offer that for a figure to
be much reckoned to us, which to your selves passes for a Cipher of no value.

To inspect the strength of your Argument for the Second Century.

A single pretended Can^^ of the Apostles not adhered to in the present Church
of Rome, approved by a single Canon in the Sixth General Synod, not
acknowledged to be Ecumenical or Orthodox by the greatest Champions of the
present Church of Rome, has defined that any Bishop or Priest (the Oblation
being made) not communicating shall be Excommunicated.

Therefore the Church now in Communion with the Sea of Rome, and no other, had
a Succession from Christ and the Apostles for the Second Century. A very loose
extravagant Inference. Doway or Rome may invent such Logic, neither Athens nor
Alexandria would.

H. T.
From the Year of Christ, 200.

Chief Pastors.
205 Zepherinus. 221 Calixtus I. 223 Pontianus. 238 Antherus. 239 Fabianus. 255
Cornelius. 255 Lucius. 257 Stephanus I. 260 Sixtus II. 261 Dionysius I. 273
Felix I. 275 Eutychianus 284 Caius. 291 Marcellinus.
The Second and Third Ages (whether by reason of the Churches great
Persecutions, or the not stirring of any famous Heretics) produced no
Councils, yet the Succession of Popes, Martyrs and Confessors, we have, which
is sufficient for our purpose.

W.T.
We assert a more genuine Interest in these Martyrs, Confessors recited than
your selves.

To ratify, or rather to varnish a false claim, you produce counterfeit
Decrees of Popes.

H.T.
The Decrees of Popes in these Ages.

Anacletus decreed, That Priests when they sacrifice to our Lord, must not do
it alone, but have Witnesses that they may be proved to have sacrificed
perfectly to God in Sacred places, and so the Apostles have appointed, and the
Roman Church holds, 1. Epist. de Consecr. d. 1. c. Episcopus. And in the end of
the same Epistle, If more difficult questions shall arise, let them be referred
to the Apostolic See of Rome. For so the Apostles have ordained by the Command
of our Lord, Anno Dom. 101.

Alexander decreed, That Bread only, and Wine mingled with Water, should be
offered in the Sacrifice of the Mass. Epist. Orthod. de Consecr. chapter 2. in
Sacram.

Sixtus decreed, That the Sacred Mysteries (the B. Eucharist and Sacred
Vessels) should not be touched, but by Sacred Ministers; and that the Priests
beginning Mass, the People should sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. In his Epistle
to all the faithful of Christ. Anno Dom. 129.

Telesphorus Commanded the Seven Weeks of Lent to be fasted, Ep. Decr. Anno
Dom. 139.

Pius in his Epistles to the Italians enjoined Penance for him, by whose
negligence any of the Blood of our Lord should be spilt, 9. 1. c. qui
compulsus, An. Dom. 147.

Anicetus tells us, That James was made Bishop of Jerusalem by St. Peter, James
and John in his Decr. Ep. to the Bishop of France, and cites Anacletus for it.
Ep. 2. did. 25. c. prohibe fratres.

Soter decreed, That no Man should say Mass after he had eaten or drunk. De
Consecr. did. 1. c. ut illud.

Zepherinus decreed, That the greater causes of the Church are to be determined
by the Apostolic See, because the Apostles and their Successors had ordained.
Ep. to the Bishop of Sicily. 217.

These were all Popes of Rome, but no true Protestants I hope.

W.T.
We reject all these specious Evidences as disingenuous Forgeries. Una litura
sat est.

The Grounds of our Rejection are these.

1. Because the Style is not varied (whereas commonly Men's Expressions are as
different as their Complexions, their Styles as their Features.)

As the Style is not varied, so it is not adorned, not only void of the
Elegancy of Rhetoric, but of the congruity of the Grammar, directly repugnant
to the terseness, the politeness of the Phrase of those times, both for
Ecclesiastical and profane Authors (Minuius, Felix, St. Cyprian, Pliny,
Suetonius,) the uniform barbarism of Expression manifests these decretals to be
the products of the same rude Pen in a later corrupter Age than is pretended.

2. Because the Matter of these Decretals does not correspond with the Piety
and Exigency of those times of bloody Persecution. They conduce to promote
Ambition, not Martyrdom, to gratify Carnal, not Spiritual Interests,
calculated for the splendor of the Church, not its Umbrage, its Adversity, not
to excite Devotion, but support Pre-eminence. (...).

3. The Scripture Citations are according to St. Jerome's Translation, whereas
the youngest Pope in the present Catalogue (in dispute) were deceased many
years before St. Jerome's Birth, in the year 341.

I might add to this falseh^ (...) point of Chronology, Alex. Ep. prima,
secunda.

Sexti Ep. prima, secunda.

Telesph. Epist. Pii Ep. prima, secunda.

Soteris Ep. secunda.

Victoris Ep. prima.

Fabiani Epist. Cornel^i Ep. secunda.

Lucii Epist. Sixti secundi Epist. Cum multis aliis.


the inadvertency of a fallacy (...) dating several Decretal Epistles by the
account of such Consuls who never were joined together according to the Test.
of Baronius Annals, and some in other Ages separated.

4. These Decrees are not mentioned by Eusebius, the Favorite of Constantine
the Great in the East, nor by St. Jerome who converst with Pope Damasus in the
West, not by Damasus himself, though such had fair occasions of relating them,
had there been any such, they are not recorded, not insisted, not reflected on
by any of the Fathers for 800 years after Christ.

They were first brought upon the Stage by Isidore a Collector of Councils and
(pretended) Decretal Epistles in the beginning of the Ninth Century inserted in
the Roman Code, first countenanced by Pope Leo the Fourth on the midst of that
Century prescribed as Authentic to the British Bishops, and afterward within
Ten years by his next but one immediately Successor, Pope Nicholas the
Eighteenth, Authoritatively recommended to the Gallicane Bishops. The Papal
usurpt Jurisdiction in that Age wanted such adulterate stamps to pass for
current Coin. Not one of these Decretal Epistles was received, recited in the
Universal Code, the Primitive Venerable Rule consisting of the Canons of the
Councils; Four whereof were General as to the Convention; the rest were General
in point of Estimate, and Approbation. That Isidore from whom these Decretal
Epistles take their Rise, their Original for Extraction, was not Isidore
Pelusiot, most illustrious for Piety and Antiquity; not Isidore Hispalensis the
Noted Famous Bishop of Siville in Spain, Scholar to St. Gregory: But a later
notorious, infamous Isidore Mercator, who made Religion his Merchandise,
Antiquity his disguise (to act the Gibeonites) who vented Novel Impostures for
Ancient Decrees. This is not the Impeachment only of Protestants; Baronius
ascribes to him some of the Decretal Epistles.

Turrianus a hasty Zel^^ of the School of Ignatius assayed to vindicate
(ineffe^^^y) the integrity of the Decretal Epistles.

Others of the same Society, but of a higher Rank, of more piercing judgments,
Bellarmine, Baronius, Cusanus, would not adventure to be Advocates for such
egregious frauds.

As for Bellarmine, I shall not insist upon his acknowledgment of this spurious
Off spring, though attested by some credible Witnesses, because not apparent in
the printed Edition of his Lectures at Rome.

I still find extant in the Edition of Sartorius at Ingolst, Aliquos errores in
has Epistolas irrepsisse non negaverim, nec indabitatus esse affirmare audeam.
Bell. de Re Pont. l. 2. c. 14.
that some Errors are crept into these Epistles; neither dare I assert them to
be undoubted.

Baronius did less mince, who professed that he demonstrated, that in many
respects they are suspected.

Cusanus is yet more clear and positive in his Confession, That they betray
themselves.

Thus have I declared the invalidity of the forgery of Ex m^ltis suspect as ^as
r^ddi Epistolas alibi demonstratum. Baron. An. 86 ^. To. 10. Nu 6 7. S^ipsas
produnt. Cus. de. Conc Cath. l. 3. c. 2.
the pretended Ancient Decretal Epistles in general.

As for those distinctly cited by H. T. for the Third Century.

Besides the exceptions common to others, they most of them are of points
Ritual, not Doctrinal, touching the Shadow, the Ceremony, not the Body the
Substance of Religion.

As they are Subjects of little Importance, so of less difference betwixt the
Church of England and the Church of Rome, and therefore are strangely alleged
for the Conviction or Confutation of any intelligent Adversaries.

There are but three Decrees of Popes produced in this Century of any material
controversal moment.

The one is a determination in point of Fact, the other (...) point of Right
and Prerogative.

The matter of Fact is the Testimony of Anicetus, that James was made Bishop of
Jerusalem by Peter, James and John. Whereas more solemn credible Records of
Antiquity without Corruption, testify that Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 1. (...)
Epiph. in Antidicomarianitis.

Bellarm. de Pont. Romans l. 1. c. 23.

Turrecrem. de l. 2. Gum. Eccl. c. 32.


James among all the Apostles, first obtained the Episcopal Throne, and that
from Christ himself.

If this be a true Narrative of Anicetus, why does Bellarmine, Jo. de
Turrecremata and others the Learned Sticklers for the Church of Rome not
adhere to it? Who derive the Episcopal pre-eminence of St. James at Jerusalem
entirely from St. Peter. Were this a true Genuine Epistle of Anicetus, were
this an Authentic Evidence, yet this would but sort and rank Peter with James
and John, which will not cotton with the P^pal singular Exaltment. To palliate,
to cloak rather than to vindicate the Testimony of Anicetus. Anaclotus is cited
(Ep. 2. did. 25.) dignum patella operculum, one Imposture brought for Security
for another. That this Epistle of Anacletus is supposititious among many
Arguments, I shall select two. In point of Chronology Clemens is mentioned in
this Epistle as Predecessor to Anacletus, whereas if Ireneus, Irenaeus. l 3. c.
3.

Tertul. l. 3. comm. adversus Manic. Eusebius. l. 3. Hist. Eccl. c. 54.

Epiphan. Haeres. 27.

Bellarm. l. 4. de Not. Eccles. c. 8.


Tertullian, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and others of the Primitive Worthies of the
Church may be credited, Clemens was his Successor. I shall not need to insist
upon Modern Evidences for this Rank, since it is acknowledged by Bellarmine.

2. In point of Theology. That Epistle relates that the Seventy Disciples were
Elected by the Apostles, whereas Anacletus was a better Divine, a better
Textuary than to be ignorant of the Record of St. Luke 10. 1. that the Lord
appointed those Disciples. They had their Mission, their Commission from him.

The two other Decretal Epistles of material difference, of Anacletus and
Zepherinus alleged of the same importance, are of the same, (of no) credit,
concerning the Decision of grand, of difficult Causes by the Apostolic See.

Neither is Extant in the entire Universal Code forementioned, approved,
ratified by the Great General Council of Chalcedon, (even in the first Canon of
it) in the year 451, nor in the Translation of it out of Greek to Latin, by
Dionysius Exiguus a Roman Abbot (devoted to the Roman Interest) in the year
325, nor yet in the Breviaion of Ferrandus (as he titles it) in the year 530.

There could be no such Decree de jure, in point of Right, there was no such de
facto in point of Fact. Not of Right, because it had been liable to two Brands
in the School Divinity, an Usurpt Judgment not warranted by due Authority,
extended beyond the bounds of the Roman Patriarchal Sphere, the utmost pale of
its Jurisdiction in the Primitive Church.

It had been also destitute of Equity, the bias of Leges semper ad aequitatem
flectendae sunt.

Cicero. Council. Nicen. Can. 5.

Council. Antioch. Can. 6. and 15.

Council. Milevit. c. 22.


Laws to which they are to be bended, says Cicero.) It had been an
unsupportable molestation of Expense and Travel which the Primitive Church did
prudentially prevent in several Councils, even in the first General Council of
Nice.

That there was no such Decree in point of Fact, is more than probably evinced
by the Historical Transactions in the purest Antiquity.

In the Ancient Contests in point of Appeal betwixt the Roman and African
Churches, no such Decree was produced, pretended, which had not been waved, had
there been any testimony to have been tendered. St. John the Evangelist being at
Ephesus, did not suspend the doom of the Ni^olaitans, or Cerinthians, in
expectation of the Dictate or Sentence of the Sea of Rome.

St. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, the Disciple of St. John Hieron. in Catal.
Script. Ecclesiast. Niceph. l. 4. c. 39.
in the Testimony of St. Jerome, contended with Anicetus Bishop of Rome,
touching the observation of Easter, and would not submit to his Judgment. Both
resolutely persisted in their different Opinions, without prescription to, or
condemnation of each other.

Such was the true Candor of that Anicetus, falsely produced in point of
Dominion, or Domination rather of the Roman Prelacy.

Which being violently pursued by Pope Victor (in the track of the same
Controversy) his Sanction was rejected though abetted by a Roman Synod, his
Excommunication disregarded by Polycrates and other Asiatick Bishops.

St. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, the Scholar of St. Polycarp, though he
owned the Tenor of Pope Victor, yet in his own and the concurrent Judgment of
the Gallicane Divines, he reprehended Victor with a Holy Acrimony.

When several points were warmly Controverted in the Africane Church, within
the Compass of the Third Century (the present consideration) St. Cyprian, the
Martyr, Bishop of Carthage did not wait for a decision from Rome, but did refer
the Questions to be discust and determined by Africane Councils.

When St. Cornelius (his Contemporary) Bishop of Cyp. Ep. 55.
Rome did intermeddle in the Ecclesiastical Affairs of his Province (of
Carthage) St. Cyprian did hotly Resent and Expostulate the Encroachment.

In his Epistle he terms the Bishop of Rome, a Colleague, Cypr. Ep. 1, 2-67.
a Brother. I deny not but the Sea of Rome was in the purest Antiquity
consulted with from other Churches, but it was Arbitrary of Choice, not
necessary of Duty; it was prompted by a veneration had not to the power, the
Authority of the Roman See, but to the Piety and Literature of the Roman
Prelates (for the first Three Centuries most of them died Martyrs.)

Upon this account the Patriarlts and Bishops of Episcopi quoque Romanae
Ecclesiae meam adhuc expectant sontentiam quid existimem scrib^re de die
Paschae Amb. Ep. 73.
other Churches were frequently consulted with, out of the verge of their own
Jurisdictions. From the Sea of Rome, the Judgment of St. Ambrose was implored
from Millaine.

Sometimes Convicted, Condemned Delinquents in other Churches repaired to the Sea of Rome, as Fugitives to skulk, as Sophisters to delude. Such were
Fortunatus and Felicissimus doomed in Africa.

Thus when Basilides was justly Excommunicated, Deposed Cyprian. Ep. 55.
in Spain, he fled to Rome, and fraudulently wrought upon the facility of Pope
Stephen (not reputed Infallible, this being not the Divinity of that Age) to
bustle in the behalf of himself and Martialis (alike Criminal, and alike
Sentenced) for their readmission. This precipitate, unjustifiable attempt gave
great offense to the Spanish Bishops, who passionately complained of it to St.
Cyprian and the other Bishops of Carthage, requesting Cyprian. Ep. 68.
their Advice, who unanimously animated them to persist in their Sentence of
Excommunication, not to submit to Stephanus, not to re-admit such Malefactors.

Sabinus being rightly the Successor of Basilides ejected, Nec rescindere
ordinationem jure perfectam potest. Cypr. Epist. eadem.
St. Cyprian confidently determine, That it could not be rescinded by Pope
Stephen.

Sometimes Innocent persecuted Persons in other Churches, made their
applications to the Sea of Rom^ But it was as to a Sanctuary for refuge, not as
to a Tribunal for Judicature, an address to the Pope, not an Appeal.

This was the case of St. Athanasius, his Successor St. Peter, of St.
Chrysostom, St. Flavianus, and others; it was Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.

Sozom. l. 6. c. 19.

Nazianz. in Orat. de laud Her.


a resort as to an Orthodox Prelate (because of the Communion of the same
Faith) not as to a Supreme Judge (upon a Prerogative of Power), it was for
advice, for solace; not in expectation of a final Sentence, of an irrevocable
Decree.

Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope Pius the Second Ante Nicenam Synodum quisq,
sibi vixit, at parvus respectus ad Romanam Ecclesiam habebatur. Aen. Sylv. Ep.
288.
had so much Ingenuity, as to acknowledge that before the Nicene Council, every
Bishop lived to himself; and that there was small regard had to the Church of
Rome.

Even after the Nicene Council, the Primitive Bishops of Rome for a time would
not assume to themselves: Would not usurp that Power of deciding important
difficulties beyond the limits of their own Patriarchal Jurisdiction.

I shall cull out two Instances in the Causes of two Learned, Renowned, but
Persecuted Patriarks (the one of Alexandria, the other of Constantinople) of
St. Athanasius and St. Chrysostom.

In the former, Constantius the Arrian Emperor being exasperated against St.
Athanasius, Liberius Bishop of Rome cajoled him, supplicated him, that a
Council might be assembled at Alexandria, he offered in effect the same reason
for appointing Alexandria in the Cause of St. Athanasius, that St Cyprian did
in excepting against Cypr. Ep. 55. Theodor. Hist. l. 2. c. 16.
Rome in the African concerns. (Where the Party impeacht, the Accusers,
Advocates, and others interested, may most fitly be convened.) This is recited
in the admirable Colloquy (as the Centurist of Magdeburg style it) Magdeb. in
Cent. 4. cap. 3.
betwixt Constantius and Liberius.

Liberius alleged no decisive Jurisdiction in himself, in the Sea of Rome.

The later instance is the cause of St. Chrysostom, Sozom. l. 8. cap. 25.
wherein Pope Innocentius the first declared a necessity of a Synodal
Convention to assuage the Tempest in the Church.

He asserted no Papal Ecumenical Power to determine Controversies.

He approved the Milevitan Council, which prohibited Innocent. in Ep. ad
Milevit. Council. Non provocent nisi ad Africana Concilia, vtl ad Primates
provinciarum suarum: Ad transmarina autem qui putaverint appellandum, a nullo
intra Africam in communionem suscipiantur. Council. Milevit.
Appeals in the African Churches, unless to African Councils or Primates,
Excommunicates Appellants to transmarine Jurisdictions.

About Sixteen years after the Sixth Carthaginian Council which lasted six
years, having regularly chalked out the gradations of Appeals in the African
Church, absolutely debarred any to the Sea of Rome. I have dilated this point,
because the Roman Champions lay so much stress upon it, and that I may not need
to ventilate, to sift it any more in this Tract.

I have not yet examined the Proofs in the supposititious Decretal Epistles of
Anacletus and Zepherinus. The latter derives the Power of the Apostolic See
from the Apostles and their Successors. The former from the Apostles by the
Commandment of our Lord. Fallacies are enwrapped, shrouded in generalities. No
injunction of Christ or any of his Apostles is recited for the Papal final
deciding of difficult Controversies.

De non existentibus and de non apparentibus eadem est ratio. What is not
apparent, may rationally be rejected as not existent.

After these false varnishes of Antiquity, H. T. having marshalled the specious
Pictures of a Gallery, rather than the vigorous Forces of a Camp, or the
Arguments of the School, he insults before he vanquishes, or indeed encounters,
marches in Triumph like the Roman Emperor with his Army, having collected
Cockleshels, not conquered any Enemies. He quits the Field in this quarrel with
a flaunting Trophee of Victory. These were all Popes of Rome, but no true
Protestants I hope. This Sarcasme is more embittered with Gall, than seasoned
with Salt.

The Name of Protestants took its Rise in the year 1529, from the protestation
of Six Princes and 14 Principal ^ist of the Counc. of Trent, by Piet. Soave
Polano. p. 48. l. 1.
Cities of Germany, an appeal from the Decree of the Diet to Caesar, and to a
future General Council, or National of Germany, and to all Judges not suspected.

These Protestants did, and those who are so called, do still own the Tenets in
Religion of the Popes recited in this* Third Century.

H.T.
Catholic Professors to the year 300.

Simplicius, Callepodius, Abdon, Sennen, Pammachius, Tyburtius, Valerianus,
Marcellinus, Dorotheus, Gordianus Pudentiana, Triphon, Elaesius, Maximianus
Clemens, Barbara, Agatha, Apollonia, Cyprianus, Hippolytus, Gregorius
Thaumauturgus, Laurentius Tharsus, Cecilia, Victorius, Nemesius, Olympius,
Adrianus, Georgius, Pantaleon, Agens, Barlain, Jereon, with his Companions,
Cosmas, Damianus, Mauritius, with the Theban Legion, etc.

W.T.
This Muster of Names is no Hostile Battalia, unless against your selves.

We assert a real affinity Doctrinal and Practical with these Saints and
Martyrs, whereas you degenerate from the Purity, the Loyalty of their
Principles.

The Theban Legion that brings up the Rear, was not trained up in the Corrupt,
Modern Romish Divinity, stating it lawful to resist Princes in case of
Infidelity, Heresy, or Tyranny, which Bellarmine did not blush to aver to be
the common sentiment of Divines.

H.T.
Catholic Professors to the year 400.

Domnus with 2000 Martyrs, Lucianus Theodorus, Paulus the first Eremite,
Jacobus Nissibitanus, Spiridion, Macharius, Nicolaus, Helena (the Mother of
Constantine the Great) Constantine (the first Christian Emperor) Marcus,
Arethusius, Nicetus, Theodorus, Antonius, Hilarion, Athanasius, Paulus
Constantinopolitanus, Hilarious, Martianus, Basilius, Hieronimus, Epiphanius,
Patianus, Ambrose, Cyril of Jerusalem etc.

Nations converted. Dacians, Gebes, Bessites, Scythians, Morines, Armenians,
Hunnes, Indians, Aethiopians, etc.

W.T.
This is to bandy with, and to rout your own shadow. We most willingly refer
our differences (next to the Sacred Scripture) to the Test of these and the
precedent Primitive Worthies of the Church.

H.T.
From the year of Christ 300.

Chief Pastors. General Councils. 304 Marcellus The first Nicene Council
(Fathers 328) approved by Pope Sylvester, An. Dom. 325. against Arrius. 309
Eusebius 312 Melchiades 314 Sylvester Authors, Cedrenus, Photius, Socrates,
Eusebius. 336 Malchus 339 Julius The First Constantinopolitane Council (Fathers
150) Pope Damasus presiding, An. Dom. 381. against Macedonius. 352 Liberius 358
Foelix 2. 367 Damasus 385 Siricius Authors, Socrates, Photius, Baronius. 398
Anastasius

W.T.
These Authorities are Impertinencies as to the present dispute. We reject not
any Testimonies of the venerable Popes nominated, that are not spurious: If any
of those be not ours, it is because they are not their own. They may be espoused
by such by whom they are corrupted.

Male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.

We adhere to the first Nicene Council, and the first Constantinopolitan cited,
we explode the Heresy of Arrius condemned in the one, and of Macedonius in the
other.

That the Nicene Council was approved by Pope Sylvester was not singular, it
was allowed, subscribed by all the other Bishops. It was Sylvesters Suffrage,
his Consent, not his Edict, his Bull to ratify it, if Sylvester were then
Living. That it was in the time of his Successor, Pope Julius, Dr. Whitaker,
proves by the Testimonies of Sozomen, l. 1. c. 17. Athanas. Apol. 2. Nicephor.
l. 7. c. 14. Beda in Chron.

However that Council was convened, governed, confirmed, Ruffinus, l. 1. c. 17.

Sozom. ^ 1. c. 11 Theod. l. 3. c. 7.

Socr. l. 1. c. 5.


it was by the Authority of Constantine the Great.

It is alleged by H. T. That Pope Damasus presided in the First
Constantinopolitane Council.

Whereas Damasus was so far from being President of, that he was not present in
that Council, not personally, nor representatively by a Proxy, by any Legate,
but Nectarius, Archbishop of Constantinople, of Noble Extraction presided.

Bellarmines plea is (...), a subterfuge to evade, not a proof to demonstrate.
That if Damasus had not been absent, he had presided.

An Inference of no validity. Vigilius Bishop of Rome sat in the Fifth
Ecumenical, but did not preside in it. This Dignity was not fixed, entailed to
the Papacy of Rome.

The Popes were Presidents in some Ancient Councils, but not in all, Not in the
first Nicene, not in the first or second Constantinopolitane, not in the first
or second Ephesine, not in the Sardique, not in the Carthaginian Council.

Had Damasus been President in the First Constantinopolitane Council. Yet they
would not have vindicated the transcendent Papal Prerogative in and over
Councils, (challenged in later times) not attempted, aspired to in the
Primitive Church.)

Since Sovereigns began to be Christians, Ecclesiastical (...) Socra^. in Pr.
1. 5. Hist. Eccl.
Affairs depended upon them; The greatest Synods have been and are convened by
them.

This is solemnly attested by Socrates about the midst of the Fifth Century.

The Instanced first Constantinopolitane Council was summoned, established,
dismissed by Theodosius the Emperor, the Senior.

H.T.
From the Year 400.

402 Innocentius I. The First Ephesine Council (Fathers 200) Pope Celestine
presiding, Anno Dom. 431. against Nestor. 417 Sozimus 419 Bonifacius I. 424
Calixtus I. 432 Sixtus III. Authors Nicephorus, Baronius. 440 Leo Magnus 461
Hilarious The Chalcedon Council, (Fathers 600) Pope Leo presiding, Anno Dom.
451. against Eutyches. 468 Simplicius 483 Felix 492 Gelasius I. 497 Anastasius
Authors Leo Ep. 50. Baronius, etc. 499 Symmachus

W.T.
I shall not contend, touching the formal Musters of your Popes in point of
Divinity or Chronology.

Pope Celestines presiding in the first Ephesine Council, is easier asserted
than proved Celestine was at that time personally engaged in an Italian Council
(which was not esteemed Ecumenical, but its Contemporary, the Ephesine
consisting of the Eastern Bishops.)

The Romish Champions plead that Pope Celestine did constitute St. Cyril of
Alexandria to be his Proxy.

If I grant, he did delegate his suffrage (there being a singular
Correspondence betwixt these two Orthodox Prelates) yet not a Prerogative of
presiding in the Council, which though arbitrarily, sometimes indulged to the
Pope in person, yet was* not so necessarily annexed to the Papal Dignity, as to
be challenged by his Legates (as not in the Fifth Carthag. Conc.)

It is testified by Sozomen, that Vitus and Vincentius Sozom. l. 1. c. 17.
the Popes Legates in the Council of Nice ^ate in the Fourth place.

St. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria had been active in Evagtius l. 1. c. 3.
confuting Nestorius, in exciting the Emperor to summon the Council. He was
the most Eminent Prelate present, the Patriarch of Constantinople, being in
umbrage under the Eclipse of a charge of Heresy, so that it is most probable
that he did preside not as substitute from Rome, but Niceph. l. 14. c. 34.

Prioris Ephesinae Synodi cui sanctae memoriae Cyrillus Episcopus praesedit.

Leo in Epist. 47.

Ephesina Synodus cui beatae memoriae Cyrillus praesuit.

Cod. l. 1. Tit. 8. Cap. 8.

Rogamus Clementiam tuam ut per literas tuae pietatis ratum esse jubeas,
confirms ad Populi documentum.

In Epist. Orthodox.

Sanctissimo Piissimoque comministro Celestino sancta Synodus quae per D^i
gratiam Ephesi convenit d Domino salutem D. Act. Conc. Ephesi. Tom. 4. cap. 17.


as Patriarch of Alexandria; even before any Declaration Pope Leo recites him
as President of the first Ephesine Council, without the least mention of any
derivation or luster from his Predecessor, Pope Celestine.

This is expressly, solemnly attested in the Code, who ever was in the Nature of
Moderator, he was inferior to the Emperor in the transactions of that Council
to Theod^sius, who not only summoned, established, authothorised it, but had a
singular over ruling influence in regulating it, in composing differences in
it. The Fathers convened in that Synod solemnly implored the Emperors
Ratification.

True it is, the first Ephesine Council in an Epistle to Pope Celestine, gave
him an account of their Proceedings against Nestorius, but it was out of Amity,
not Duty; a Conformity in point of Faith, not a Submission in point of Power.
The Epistle is directed in a style of parity.

As touching the Council of Chalcedon. If I grant the Popes Legates had a
precedence by the favor of the Prince, or the respect of the Fathers convened
to the personal Eminence, or Patriarchal Luster of Leo the First.

Yet the Emperor Martianus did seem to preside, as the grand Moderator in that
Council, at first personally immediately, afterward mediately by his
Commissioners, Evagrius l. 2. c. 4.
who are solemnly recited before the Fathers assembled.

However the Authoritative influence for the Convention, Act. 1. Synod. Chalc.
Ratification of that Ecumenical Synod is clearly ascribed to the Emperor.

How solemn is the submission to the Emperors pleasure. (...) Evag. 16.

Act. 1. Synod. Chalc.

Act. ult. Synod. Chalc.

Act. 1. Synod. Chalc.


He prohibited all disputations against the Doctrine of the Council of Nice, by
his Authority Dioscorus was Condemned, and Proterius Established in his place.

The Legates of the Bishop of Rome in that Synod entreated the Moderators of
the Council, that Dioscorus should be required to recede, which themselves had
enjoined, not requested had they presided.

In the Sixteenth Article of that Synod, the Decree was opposite to the
Sentiments of the Popes Legates.

In that Article Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople 27 Canones editos esse
quorum Authors ut maxim Anatholius Episcopus Constantinopol. Did. 16. c.
Sancta Octo.
first subscribed, whom Pope Gelasius recited, as the chiefest Author of the
Twenty seven Canons set put in that Synod, Anno Domini 500.

H.T.
The first Nicene Council defined against Arrius, That the Son of God is
consubstantial to his Father and true God.

W.T.
This Testimony is impertinently produced. The Church of England does detest
Arrianisme as much as the Church of Rome.

H. T.
2. That he who holds the Sea of Rome, is the Head and Chief of all the
Patriarks, seeing he is the first; as Peter, to whom Power Ecclesiastical is
given over all Christian Princes, and all People, etc. and whosoever shall
contradict this, is Excommunicated by the Synod. Can. 39. Arab.

W.T.
We own a great veneration for the Great, Sequor Tractatum Conci^ji Niceni, a
quo me nec mors, ne^ gladius potest separare Amb. l. ^. de Trinit.

Basil. Ep. 28. Athan. in Ep. ad Spir.


the first General Council, the first Nicene. From which track St. Ambrose
would not recede for the peril of Death, nor for the terror of the Sword.

Which St. Basil propounded for the Test, whereby judgment is to be made of
Heretics.

As with St. Athanasius, we wonder at their audaciousness, who start any
question in points that have past the determination of that Nicene Council; so
we cannot without astonishment resent the disingenuous fraud in counterfeiting
so Venerable a Record in obtruding a Fable for an Oracle.

The more famous the Authority is of the Nicene Council, the more infamous is
the Impiety in falsifying it.

The alleged Thirty Ninth Arabic Canon may be unmaskt, and then appear a
Romish Imposture.

That there were but Twenty Genuine Canons of the Nicene C^uncil, is proved by
the Authority of Rufinus, Isidore, Theodoret, (Testimonies acknowledged by
Baronius) by Pope Stephen, (attested by Gratian) by Two Hundred and Seventeen
Bishops Convened in the Sixth Council of Carthage, by unanimous suffrages of
incorrupt Antiquity.

The Nicene Synod was held the Year 316, the tumor the amplifying of the Canons
to the number of Thirty in the Notion and Style of Arabic Canons, produced
above Twelve Hundred years after.

When they first appeared to the World, they were pretended to be brought by
Baptista Romanus from the Patriark of Alexandria, set out by Alphonsus,
Pizanus, and Franciscus Turrianus, both of the same Society, both zealous
Advocates not only for asserting, but straining the P^pal Pre-eminence (per
fasque nefasque) First inserted in the Edition of the Councils at Venice by
Dominicus. Nicolinus in the Year 1585. not above Five years before printed
apart (the Plantine Impression) by Turrianus.

It appears at the first blush as strange an incongruity in Geography as
Chronology at so great a distance of time and place, to vindicate the Canons of
the Nicene Council in the Fourth Century, by an Arabic remote Evidence in the
Sixteenth Century.

How have they been obscured dormant for so many Ages?

Turrianus the most confident Stickler for these Arabic Canons acknowledged
there is no Record as to any Tota res ad conjecturas and signa quibus veri^as
illustrari solet traducenda est.
Translation of these out of Greek to Arabic, no proof, no evidence but
conjecture.

The wily Jesuit pretending to wave infinite other Testimonies (in the smooth
Rhetoric, the subtle fallacy of his Mention by way of Omission) insists on the
Africane Fathers as sufficient Witnesses, alleging, unless they had certainly
and exactly known this, they would not so have written to Pope Boniface.
Because they could find Canons in no Greek Books, they earnestly desire they
might be sen^^o them out of the Churches of the East, by the endeavors of Pope
Boniface. They speak of the rest of the Canons, for Twenty they had sent by
Cyrill of Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople, and recited in the Sixth
Council of Carthage.

I am amazed that there should be so little integrity in a Person of so much
Literature as Turrianus of the professed Society of the Holy Jesus (the Name of a
Saint being the Guilt, the Impeachment of a Miscreant according to Salvian) so
notoriously to juggle and prevaricate. Nomen Sancti reatus impii. Salvian.


For the clearer discovery of his Collusion, and the more warrantable rejection
of the additional Arabic Canons, I shall offer a true summary Narrative of the
transactions of the Africane Fathers falsely presented by Turrianus.

Apiarius being justly deliberately sentenced in Africa Qui judicat inauaita
alte a part, lic^t aequum fuerit judicium, hand aequus fuerit jadex. Sen.
(Synodically Excommunicated) was unjustly, unconsiderately Countenanced,
Acquitted at Rome, (one Party only being heard.) To promote his Restitution in
the Sixth Carthage Council, Pope Zozymus sent thither Three Legates, who pressed
a Canon of the Nicene Council to justify Appeals to Rome. The African Fathers
were startled at a Novel Claim abetted by an unheard of Canon, wherein they
first examined the Copy brought from Nice by Concilianus (Archbishop of
Carthage) in which they found no such Canon alleged. However they were not
prone to suspect any fraud in the Bishop of Rome, (where there is the greatest
Truth, there being also the greatest Charity) but proceeded with an equal
mixture of Prudence and Candor.

They resolved to transmit Mercuries to Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, to
procure Genuine Transcripts of the Nicene Canons, and whilst the matter was in
suspense, they condescended to admit Appeals to Rome.

They imparted their design to the Legates, implored their joint Assistance,
made several Addresses in this sincere pursuit of Truth to Three Popes in their
Successions (Zozymus, Bonifacius, Celestine.)

After the concurrent Testimonies, the Exact Copies sent from the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Alexandria, after the discussion of 6 Years, there being no
contrary Evidence produced by either of the Popes recited, or their Legates;
the African Bishops unanimously rejected the obtruded Canons as spurious, and
prohibited all Appeals from the African Churches to Rome.

There never was a more calm, accurate, mature ventilation of any Claim. Never
clearer Evidence. Twenty Canons only found in the Archives of Constantinople,
Alexandria; Antioch, being searched with great diligence, as Baronius confesses.

Attious professed in his Rescript that Copy to be unmaimed, (...).

St. Cyrill as confidently avouches the fidelity of his also, (...).

Never a more manifest Conviction of a Notorious Fraud, whereto the Roman
Legates being most probably too conscious, would not close with the African
Fathers in an unbyast, untainted Scrutiny; but reiterated their importunate
Motion, that the Examination and Decision might be referred entirely to the
Bishop of Rome, that the Criminal Party might be the sole Judge.

To palliate the Deformity of this Imposture, other Adulterate Testimonies are
vaunted of the Letter of Athanasius to Pope Marcus, and the Rescript of Marcus
which are not only by the Centurists and other Reformed Divines proved to be
fraudulent upon sifting the Phrase, and the Subject, Calculating the Date; but
the more Learned Romish Champions Posserine, Bellarmine, Baronius have confessed
it.

The last whereof (that famous Analist) Records the decease of Pope Marcus
before the date of his pretended Letter, and brands it together with a
counterfeit submission (...) a succeeding Bishop of Carthage; to be fictions of
the same Forge. I have dilated this detection, the rather because the Romanists
lay so much stress upon so weak, so false a foundation.

H.T.
Thereby a Man is freed from the servitude and corruption of Sin. l. 3. Decret.

4. That the Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World is placed on
the Sacred Table (the Altar) to be sacrificed unbloodily, and that we receiving
his Body and Blood, do believe these things to be signs of our Resurrection. l.
3. Decret. De Divina Mensa.

It Decreed, That a Bishop dying, Notice shall be given of his Death to all
Churches and Monasteries in the Parish, that Prayer be made for him, C. 65.
Arab. And that Deacons (who have no Power to offer Sacrifice) ought not to give
the Body and Blood of Christ to Priests who have full power. Can. 14.

W.T.
Neither the Papal Decrees, nor the Arabic Canons of the Nicene Council are to
be allowed for Orthodox Tests in deciding Controversies. I shall not reiterate
my Exceptions against the Fallacy of both.

As for the Restraint of Deacons in reference to Priests recited, it is a point
of Discipline, not Doctrine; a Regularity not to be contended for, if rightly
understood.

H.T.
The First Constantinopolitane Council defined against Macedonius, who denied
the Holy Ghost to be God, and decreed the Bishop of Constantinople to be chief
next to the Bishop of Rome.

W.T.
This Allegation consists of two branches: The First is Impertinent, the Second
Frandulent.

The Church of England explodes the Macedonian Heresy as much as the Church of
Rome.; as is evident in the Fifth Article of the Church of England.

As to the second branch of the Allegation, it is offered with little Fidelity,
or at least Advertency.

The Patriarch of Constantinople was not mentioned in the Nicene Council,
wherein the privilege of Rome, Alexandria, Antioch are solemnly recited,
Constantinople being then in Eclipse, in Umbrage, in respect of its succeeding
Splendour. After it was augmented, adorned, dignified by the Translation of the
Imperial Seat, Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 12.
it then obtained as signal an Ecclesiastical, as Secular Grandeur.

It was the design of the First Constantinopolitane Synod to match the Sea of
Constantinople with that of Rome; this being allowed a Priority of Place, not a
Superiority of Office, of Authority.

Constantinople is ranked with Rome, not subjected under it, It levels,
truckles not.

The reason of the Equality of Dignity is expressed in the Council it self,
because that Constantinople is New Council. Constant. 1. ca 5.
Rome, enjoying the same Ensigns, Rights, Honors, as Sozomen clearly
testifies. Sozom. l. 7. c. 9.

Theodoret. l. 5. c. 9.




The Epistle of the First Constantinopolitane Council is directed to the
Reverend Brethren and Colleagues, Damasus, Aurelius, etc.

If the Canon debated establish his Parity, it is vainly cited by H. T. If it
does not establish it, it is vainly granted to the Romanists.

H.T.
The first Ephesine Council defined against Nestor, who denied the Blessed
Virgin to be the Mother of God. c. 1, 2, 3, 4.

It defined that Peter was the Head and Prince of the Apostles; and that the
Power of Loosing and binding Sins was given by our Lord to St. Peter, who (in
his Successors) Lives and Exercises Judgment to this very Time, and Always,
Act. 3.

W.T.
Here is produced a double Testimony out of the first Ephesine Council: The one
a Condemnation of the Nestorian Heresy, the other a Certificate of the
Supremacy of St. Peter, and his pretended Successors.

The first is not Controverted between the Romanists and the Reformed.

The second is but a Shadow at the best, but a varnish of a Proof, as it is
destitute of substance and solidity, so of Truth and Candor.

The Ephesine Council decreed no such flaunting Title, no Principality of St.
Peter, nor Entail to his Successors; but it was insolently uttered by one of
the Three Legates of Celestine the Bishop of Rome, by Philip a Candidate for
Promotion, a Parasite of the Court of Rome.

Neither Arcadicus nor Projectus the other Legates more circumspect dignifyed,
offered any such expression. Not any of the Fathers in that Council.

Their Epistle to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, is directed (...), to their fellow
Minister.

Not only the Fathers then assembled in General, but in Special, Juvenalis
Bishop of Jerusalem a part so recites him.

The Decree of the Council against Nestorius by the Prelates Convened (as it is
recorded by Evagrius) mentions Evagr. l. 1. c. 4.
Celestinus a Colleague.

The Epistle of Celestinus himself to Nestorius expresses Conc. Ephesians. 1. Tom. 1.
c. 17.
Cyrill his Brother, and fellow-Bishop.

This was not a Courtesy, a Complement of his Condescension, like the smooth
insinuation of the Roman Generals in the Camp, Commilitones, Fellow Soldiers;
many of the Fathers rank them with equal respect in their distinct suffrages
recounted in that Council.

It was their Universal, Unanimous Acclamation. One Celestine, one Cyrill, one
Faith of the Synod, one Faith of the World.

Nay, Theodosius the Emperor, who Summoned, Authorized, Established that
Council, having occasion to mention both these Prelates, first nominates
Cyrill, afterward Celestinus; the former set out with the flourish of an
Epithet (The Most Holy Bishop of Alexandria,) the Council. Ephesians. 1. To. 5. c. 4.
other without it.

If H. T. has not consulted with the Records of the first Ephesine Council, he
is precipitate in his Allegation: (No Man passes a right judgment upon that
whereof (...) Ar^^t. Ec^. l. 5.
he is ignorant, says Aristotle.) If he has consulted with that Council, he
is disingenuous in misrepresenting it.

Since H. T. produces the first Ephesine Council as an Oracle in a Subject
that will not consist with its Test. I shall recommend it in an instance that
will, In the Case of the Cyprian Bishop oppressed by the Encroachment of the
Patriarch of Antioch.

The Controversy was Exactly Discuss't, Authoritatively Determined in that
Council. The Decision does by infallible consequence vindicate the Immunity of
the British Bishops, does brand and condemn the Usurpations of the Roman.

We have the same plea of Exemption, the purest Primitive Antiquity, before the
first Council of Ephesus before the first of Nice.

As for the claims, the pretenses of any succeeding Ages; the Canon of the
first Ephesine Council is not to be evaded.

That no Bishop occupy another Province, which formerly, and from the beginning
was not under the power of him or his Predecessors.

The same Council prescribes Restitution if there be any such injurious
attempt, enjoynes the preservation of Ancient Rights ((...)) from the beginning
in every Province.; for the prevention of the contempt of the Canons of the
Fathers, and of the Introduction of Arrogance in the Dress, the disguise of
Secular Power.

H.T.
The Council of Chalcedon defined against Eutyches and Dioscorus, who denied
Two Natures in Christ, Affirming, That the Humane Nature was changed into the
Divine.

W.T.
This Arrow is shot at random, it wounds not, Lights not near the Protestants,
who disclaim, detest the Eutychian Heresy.

H.T.
In the third Action in this Council, Pope Leo is called Universal Archbishop,
and Patriarch of old Rome.

W.T.
This was the soothing Address to Leo of particular Persons, such as moved in
the lowest Spheres of the Church; of Athanasius a Presbyter, of Diodorus and
Ischyrion two Deacons (severally) No such Determination, no such Expression of
the Synod it self. If this Style of Universal Archbishop were of any
importance, it might be more vigorously pleaded in behalf of the Patriarch of
Constantinople: To whom it is applied by more Numerous, Illustrious Persons,
not only by the Monks of Antioch, but also by the Syrian Bishops in the Domino
nostr^ Sanctissimo and Beatissimo Patri Patrum Archiepiscopo and Oecumenico
Patriarchae Johanni Synod. in hac Imperial Civitate Congregata.
fifth General Council; nay, by the Synod it self.

This Title paramount was no Novelty, no Rarity in the second Council of Nice,
as to the Application of it, to the Patriarch of Constantinople.

Pope Adrian was not shy to ascribe it to Tharasius: Adrianus dilecto fratri
Tharasio generali Patriarche. Greg. l. 7. Ep. 32.
Pope Gregory the First asserts that all his Predecessors have rejected this
Title.

H.T.
Sentence is pronounced against Dioscorus in the Name of Leo and St. Peter, to
acknowledge Leo to be St. Peter's Successor.

W.T.
This is not Extant, not in the proposition of the Edict, not in the Sentence
of the Condemuation, (the censure of Dioscorus) not in the Synodical
Publication to the Clergy of Alexandria; not in the relation, the account of it
to the Empress Pulcheria.

It was only the arrogant Tumor of the Popes Legates, when they pronounced
their Suffrages: None of the Fathers then assembled, uttered any such Ranting
Preface of Pre-eminence, but they sorted, ranked together the Archbishop of
Old and New Rome, as appears by their Votes distinctly Recounted.

H.T.
The Elibertine Council in Spain subscribed by Hosius and others, who were
present at the first Nicene Council, defined, That Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons should abstain from their Wives, or else be degraded. c. 33. Age the
Fourth.

W.T.
The Romanists themselves have little veneration for the Dictates of this
Council. Some disgust it as imbittered with the Novatian Leaven.

In the Edition of the Councils at Venice by Dominicus Concilium Elibertinum
nunquam ab Ecclesia receptum. ob Can. 36. sort^ etiam ob Can. 34. Tom. 1. Conc.
page 502.
Nicolinus, there is this Remark upon it. It was never received by the Church
for the Thirty Sixth Canon, perhaps also for the Thirty Fourth.

Bellarmine taxes it to be invalid, being not confirmed, Minim^ confirmatum,
and in aliis decretis videtur erroneum esse, praesertim cum in pluribus
casibus, ne in articulo quidem mortis velit absolvi paenitent. Bellarm. cap.
19. de Imag. Sanct. 1. 2.
to be Erroneous, in some cases denying Absolution to Cenitents in the
Extremities of Death.

The most Learned Romish Champions do either absolutely reject this Council, or
at least derogate from the Vigor and Luster of it.

This being a Provincial Council of Nineteen Bishops, its Decrees are no
Decisions of Controversies.

The Inference of H. T. is not convincing in Logic, being deduced from an
Insinuated Error in Chronology. (That this Council was subscribed by Hosius
and others, who were present at the first Nicene Council.) The most exact
Chronologers date the Elibertine Council a considerable time before the Nicene
Council; Twelve years before the Computation of Onuphrius, Twenty years more
Ancient in the Calculation of Baronius.

Though Bellarmine would not nominate the precise years, yet he confidently
asserts the Elibertine to have Reveta Concilium Celebratum fuit ante Nicenum.
Bellar. c. 2. de Imag. Sanct. l. 2.
been celebrated before the first Nicene.

This being granted, the Elibertin had the precedence of Age, it is evident,
That what Hosius did less considerately solemnly ascribe to in a Provincial
Council, he did more maturely Authoritatively correct in a General Council.

Were the Elibertine Council subsequent in time to the first Nicene; yet what
is established in an Ecumenical Council, cannot be repealed in a Provincial,
especially in the instance recited; the General Council being both Ample and
Authentic; the Provincial scanted for Number, not unquestioned, not
unblemisht for Repute.

H.T.
The Second Council of Arles defined. That no Man who was married could be made
a Priest, unless a Conversion be promised. Can. 2.

W.T.
The Decrees of this Council have been frequently, and not unwarrantably taxed
to be adulterated.

This Council mentions the Bonasiaques (c. 17.) not then Extant, not before the
time of Pope Innocent the First, the Eighth in Succession after Sylvester, in
whose Papacy you acknowledge this Council to be held.

This Second Council of Arles recites the Vasense Council, Council. Ar^t. 2. c.
28.
Convened not till above an entire Century of years afterward in the time of
Pope Leo the First.

Were this Council of Arles as managed in the Transactions, and as conveyed
to us in the Records of it uncorrupted, yet it was but a Provincial Council in
France, (as the Elibertine cited was in Spain) which must vail to an
Ecumenical, to the first Nicene; wherein when there was an active assay of
establishing a Sanction for separating the Clergy from their Wives (...), not
to sleep together; Paphnutius that famous Confessor vigorously opposed,
prevailed for the rejecting of that Novel Imposition.

This is attested by Socrates, Sozomen, Ecclesiastical Socrat. l. 1. c. 8.
Historians, whose Testimonies have in former Ages been venerable, though
cavilled at by Baronius, Bellarmine, Sozom. l. 1. c. 22.
and other Romanists of the same strain, whose Artifice it is to evade, to
shift off those pregnant proofs they cannot satisfy, and will not acknowledge.

These Authorities are sufficiently vindicated by Claud. Espencaeus l. 1. de
continentia.
Espencaeus.

In this Illustrious Instance of Paphnutius, to deal heartily as a Son of the
Church of England, and not as a Sophister in the School of Athens.

An Adversary may object, That the same Paphnutius did propound, That they who
were Ordained being unmarried should so persevere.

I Answer,

Paphnutius did divide that Stream, that Torrent which he could not entirely
divert.

He declared his Judgment punctually, That Conjugal Society is not inconsistent
with Sacred Orders, (without any restriction to precedent or subsequent.)

He avouched not only the difficulty but in some the impossibility of the
observance of so rigid an interdict of the Clergies Marriage, and therein
undermined the Socrat. l. 1. c. 8.
foundation of the Romish restraint, he also pressed the impurity of the
consequences of such a prohibition. The Prophecy of Paphnutius became St.
Bernards History. Abstinentes remedio Nuptiali, and in om^e d^inceps flagitium
essluentes. ^ern. de Conv. ad Cler. c. 29. Sozom. l. 1. c. 22. Socrat. l. 1. ^
4.
The result was, that the Manacle was cast off, every Man left to the liberty
of his own Judgment.

It may further be urged by an Opponent, That Paphnutius mentioned the Ancient
Tradition of the Church. For the Clergy that were unmarryed, to abstain from
Wedlock.

I Answer,

That Paphnutius did herein most probably reflect upon the Church of Egypt,
(wherein himself was dignified) or on Thessaly. It might be the particular
custom of one Province, not Universal of all.

There was no such Tradition in Armenia, if the Sixth Quoniam cognovimus in
Arme^niorum Regione eos solum in cleri ordinem referri qui sunt ex genere
Sacerdotali. Conc. Constant. 6. Can. 33.
Constantinopolitane Council may be credited.

No such Tradition in Ephesus (the Metropolis of the lesser Asia.) Before the
end of the 2d. Century, Policrates Bishop of Ephesus in his contest, touching
the Observation of Easter with Victor, Bishop of Rome, in an Epistle Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 24.
to him, asserts Seven of his Progenitors to have been his Predecessors in that
Episcopal Seat. (His Parents in Rufinus 's Interpretation.)

No such Tradition in Corinth or in Creet. When Pinitus would have introduced
it among the Cretians, Dionysius Bishop (...). Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23.
of Corinth reprehended, dissuaded it as a grievous pressure, not to be imposed
as a necessary Duty, but that the Infirmities of many were to be regarded.

No such Tradition in the Eastern Churches, according Aliter se habet traditio
Orientalium Ecclesiarum, aliter hujus S. Romanae Ecclesiae. Nam illarum
Sacerdotes, Diaconi, (...) subdiaconi matrimonio Copulantur. Did. 3.
to the Authentic Record of the Canon Law, the Decretal of Pope Stephen.

No such custom in Cyprus, the Renowned Spiridion, being Bishop, had Wife and
Children; not thereby empaired or eclipsed as to the discharging of the
Exercises of Divinity, the Sacred Offices of his Function.

No such received Tradition in the Africane Churches, wherein Tertullian was a
Married Presbyter, as also among many others, Foelix and Numidicus, both
themselves (...). Sozom. l. 1. c. 11.
and their Consorts, reputably recited by St. Cyprian.

No such custom (as not in the Modern) not in the Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 10. l. 5.
Ep. 15.
Ancient Greek Churches, wherein the Father of St. Basil the Great, the Father
of St. Gregory Nazianzen, his Brother St. Gregory Nyssen, Apollinaris,
Synesius, were Ma^ried Prelates, and co-habited with their Wives.

No stamp of any such Tradition in Germany, not in England, no track of any
such custom for 1000 years Sacerdoles illa Tempestate uxores pu^^ice sicut
caeteri Christiani habebant. Et filios procreabant. De Germ. ait Avent. in
Hist. Boiorum. l. 5. in Anno 1074.
after Christ.

Even in France, where the Scene of the Objection is laid from the Council of
Arles about the midst of the Fourth Century St. Hilary was Bishop of Poiteirs,
St. Prosper Bishop of Aquitane, both Married.

Justinian the Emperor, about the beginning of the De Britannis te^tantur
Fabianus in Chron. p. 263. Floren. ^n Chror. ad Annum 997. Nove^ Constable. 8
6th Century extolled Epiphanius, Bishop of Constantinople for his Extraction
from Priests.

This was the Pedigree of several Popes of Boniface the First, of Foelix the
Third, Gelasius the First, Agapetus the First, Sylverius, Deus dedit,
Theodorus, Hadrian the Second, Agapetus the Second.

This is attested by Platina a Witness beyond exception.

That these were no spurious Progeny is avouched De legitimis Conjugiis Nati
Cap. Cenamensi.

Socr. l. 5. c. 22.


by Gratian.

I confess many of the Clergy, in the best, the purest Ages of the Primitive
Church did wave Marriages, but it was voluntary out of Choice, not necessary
upon prescription; none were debarred Matrimony in Sacred Orders, none were
branded for it.

This is assented to by Learned Romanists, I shall instance Tunc licebat
Sacerdotes habere uxores. Hug. Card. in 1 Timothy 3.

Tunc non suit indicta clericis continentia. Bonav. 4. d. 81. q. 3.


only in the Testimonies of two Cardinals, Hugo and Bonaventure.

The Matrimonial restraint to the Clergy was first attempted by Siricius the
Pope, in the declining of the Fourth Century, afterward earnestly endeavored
to be re-established by several of his Successors in multiplied Decrees, but
not without Regrets, Oppositions, Tumults.

No solemn Universal Sanction obtruded before Gregory Lego and Relego Romanorum
Regum and imperatorum Gesta, at nunquam inveni quenquam eorum ante Hunc. (Hen.
4.) a Romans Pontisice Excommunicatum vel regno Privatum Otto Friz. l. 6. ca. 35.
Ut pace omnium dixerim, Haec sola Noviter non dicam haeretici nec dum in Mundo.
Sigebert in Anno 1088. Conc. Gangr. Can. 4. Greg. Sept. ^xoratos Sacerdotes a
Divino removit officio, and Laicos missam eorum audire interdixit in annum 1075.
the Seventh, (called Hildebrand) in the Eleventh Century. He who first assumed
to himself a power of Excommunicating and deposing Princes, did not stick
peremptorily to prohibit the Marriages of all Priests, and to brand all their
Ministerial Offices, notoriously clashing with the Canon of the Ancient Council
of Gangre, though a Provincial Convention, yet of Ecumenical Approbation,
solemnly approved by Pope Leo the Fourth.

I shall not quit this Persecutor of the Married Clergy without two Remarks of
fame.

The one touching the lasciviousness, licentiousness of Distinct. 20. ca. de
Libellis Lamb. Schaf. Hist. Germ.
his Life, his scandalous Converse with the grand Countess Maud.

The other touching his Stings of Conscience at his Death, which then impeacht
him for exerting his Tyranny Confessus in Extremis suis valde se peccasse in
Pastorali cura and suadente Diabolo contra genus Humanum Odium and iram
irritatum. Florent. Monach. Vego in Chronico ad annam 1 106.
by the Instigation of the Devil.

Not to digress too far, I shall dismiss the Canon of the Council of Arles,
quoted by H. T. with the Observation or descant of St. Salvian a Pious French
Bishop before the period of the Fifth Century in a polite allusion to the
Phrase of the Decree. A new sort of Conversion. They do not things lawful, they
omit things unlawful. They Novum prorsus conversionis Genus, Licita non
saciunt, illicita committunt. Temperare a conjugio, non Temperare a Rapina.
Quid agis stulta persuasio? Peccata interdixit Deus, non Matrimonia. Item non
est Conversio sed Aversio: Qui jampridem ut fama est opus Honesti Matrimonii
re^inquitis, tandem a Sc^lere cessatt. Salv. l. 5. de Provid. Experientia
docente Contrarius Effectus sequitur ex illa Lege continentiae, cum hodie non
vivant spiritualiter, nec sint mundi, sed maculentur illicito coitu cum eorum
gravissimo peccato, ubi cum propria uxore esset castitas. Unde deberet Ecclesia
facere sicut bonus Medicus, si Medicina experientia docente potius officiat
quam prosit eam tollere nemo re^uit citius.
forbear from Wedlock, and forbear not Rapine. What actest thou, O foolish
persuasion? God has forbidden Sins, not Marriages. In like manner it is not a
Conversion, but an Aversion. You that long since as it is famed, relinquish the
work of honest Matrimony, at length desist from Mischief.

The prodigious Enormities of Lusts which have been occasioned by the debarring
the Clergy the Innocent Expedient of Gods Sacred Ordinance, has extorted the
Pathetical Complaints of many Conscientious Romanists, Sacerdotibus magna
ratione sublatas Naptias, majore restituendas videri: Platina in Vita Pii
Secundi.
and excited their ardent desires, That this rigid Imposition were Repealed,
and Primitive Liberty Restored. There being as Pope Pius the Second (when he
was Aeneas Sylvius the Cardinal) professed, greater reason for the Restitution,
the Release, than the Restraint.

The cause of the one being of a Secular Stamp to prevent the Penury of the
Clergy, to be less contemptible in the estimate of Men: The Motive of the other
is to promote purity, not to be vile, execrable in the sight of God.

As there is a Virginal, so there is a Matrimonial Chastity.

Conjugal Society is no repugnancy to Grace, no pollution to Holy Orders; the
Apostle having vindicated the Marriage Bed in all to be undefiled, being not
depraved Hebr. 13. 4.
in it self, it is not sullyed: Where there is no guilt, there is no stain.

Both the Schoolmen and Canonists acknowledged, Gratian. did. 28. c. Diaconi,
and did. 31. c.

Aliter Aquin. q. 80. Art. 11. Cajetan. in Opusc. To. 1. Tract. 27.

Est communis Sententia Theologorum veterum and Recentiorum.

Azor. p. 1. Inst. Mor. l. 13. c. 11.


that the Clergy are debarred from Wedlock, not by any Divine, not by any
Apostolical, but only by a humane positive Ecclesiastical Constitution.

It is the Law of no Church but the Roman, herein not swayed by Sacred,
Spiritual, but by Profane Temporal Interests.

To indulge, to license what God detests; Condemns (Fornication) to make
Stores, Revenues, to raise Treasures out of Impurities (in a more unsavory,
than extracting of Gold out of the Dung of Ennius.) And to prohibit to doom in
the Clergy what God allows, justifies in all, may pass for the Traffic, the
Policy, but not the Virtue, the Innocence of the Church of Rome.

H.T.
Catholic Professors to the Year 500.

Severinus, Tigrius, Exuperius, Eutropius, St. Jo. Chrysostom, Paulinus,
Mauritius, St. Augustine, Maximus, Zozimus, Vinceutius, Lirinensis, Jacobus
Persa, Alexius, St. Cyril of Alexandria, Uriula with 11000 Virgins, Prosper,
Honoratus, Palladius, Bonifacius, Euthymius, Simon Stelites, Chrysologus,
Patricius, Eugenius, Fulgentius, Boethius, Epiphanius, Tirinensis, Severinus,
etc.

The Scots converted by Palladius, the French by S. Remigius and Vedastus, 4979
Martyrs of Africa, and many others.

W.T.
This Catholic band is a specious, but probably a false Muster, wherein Ursula
leads the Van to 11000 Virgins.

This being strictly inspected will appear an imaginary Romance, not a real
Transaction.

There is a double proof offered, the one is Fanatical, the other fabulous.

The first consists in Visions, in the Revelations of St. Elizabeth, (in the
Romish Style and Calendar) and of Richardus Praemonstratensis.

This is the grand support of the Coten Divinity, the Pageantry of its
Sepulchers, so much blazed and gloried in: Ad populum phaleras.

The most circumspect, ingenuous Romanists, blush to own the Originals and the
products of the vain Enthusiasms in this Instance.

The Visions presented being exactly discust, are unmaskt to be Dreams; the
Revelations convicted, to be Collusions.

The second Argument for avouching Ursula and her numerous illustrious Train is
the Allegation of an Historical Evidence, wherein there is no credible, no
rational account given to satisfy a judicious Inquisitor.

The best Author that Baronius upon the most industrious search could light on,
was Geoffry of Monmouth (more reputably called Galsridus Asaphensis) whom all
Historians that mention brand for an Impostor: Baronius himself (in other
subjects) gives him no better character.

Even Galfridus (the prime Oracle for this Fable.) ^icet multa de aliis habeat
Auc^or Fabulosa. Baron. Tom. 4. Annal. in An. 383. Coton. Instit. l. 1. c. 19.
Incidit in Librum quendam Britanicum ab homine cujus adhoc Nomen ignoratur
conscriptum, ac spurcissimis scatentem, quem latinum ille secit. De Galfrido,
Alanus Copus. Dial. 5. c. 19.
could offer no better flourish of a Testimony, than the obscure Authority of
Anonymus, one of no Name, of no Esteem, consequently of no Credit.

No Ancient Historian of the Third, the Fourth or Fifth Century (wherein the
Sience is variously laid) nor in some subsequent Ages, recites the Martyrdom,
or Saintship of Ursula, and her vast Virginal Retinue.

There is no Harmony among the Asserters of it, touching the Age, Whether in
the Fifth Century, where H. T. and others place it (in the year 454) or in the
Fourth Century, where Baronius fixes it (in the year 383) or in the Third
Century, where the Cistertian Breviary disposes it (in the year 237.)

There is no consent touching Ursula's Extraction, her Habitation, whether her
Native Soil were England (being as it is pretended courted to be the Bride of
an English Prince;) or Scotland, (according to Wicelius's Poetry; or Ireland,
according to the Vindication of Combachius.) Thus where there is no Truth,
there is no Stability, no Concord.

Sigebertus (in his incorrupt Edition) Petrus de Natalibus, Miraeus Edition of
Sigebert at Antwerp.

Bonfin. Hungar. rerum Decad. 1. l. 5.


Bonifinius, with other Historians and Chronologers reject the solemn
Narrative, touching Ursula as an Elaborate Fiction.

If the Argument of Baronius be Negatively firm to discard Cyriacus from being
Bishop of Rome, and an Associate Baron. Annal. ad Annum 237.
of Ursula, because no such Passage Extant in any Ancient Record; The Proof is
not invalid upon the same Topic for discountenancing, expunging the whole
Legend of Ursula. Una litura sat est.

Let it be supposed, That Ursula and her Eleven Thousand Virgins were not
Theatrical, but Real Saints and Martyrs; yet British they were, not Romish.

The Britain Church did neither in the First, Second, Third, Fourth, or Fifth
Century submit to the Roman, nor conform to it, not in its Liturgy; not in its
Rituals, its Canons; not in point of Ordination of Priests, of the Prohibition
of their Matrimony, not in the Observation of Easter.

So little a Correspondence there was in matters Ecclesiastical, betwixt them;
That Gregory the First was ignorant and inquisitive (in the Testimony of Paulus
Diaconus) whether the Britains were Christians or Pagans.

The inserting by H. T. of Four Thousand Nine Hundred and Seventy Nine Martyrs
of Africa is as wide an Impertinency of a List of Catholic Professors of the
Roman Stamp. St. Austin who is distinctly nominated in the Catholic Catalogue,
for this Age, did subscribe to the Decrees of the Council of Carthage, which
did exclude the Romish Jurisdiction in Africa.

St. Chrysostom who is expressly cited, was a Catholic Professor of the Greek,
not the Roman Church.

He was not ignorant of the First Constantinopolitane Ecumenical Council,
which ranked him, being Patriarch of Constantinople, with the Patriarch of Rome.

His Epistles First and Second to Pope Innocentius, do not derogate from this
Equality. (As the Romanists object.) They declare a voluntary Respect, not a
due submission.

In his Exigencies he made the Sea of Rome his Sanctuary for Refuge, for
Assistance, not his Tribunal for Sentence.

His Address to Pope Innocentius, was as to an Orthodox Prelate, not as to a
Supreme Judge.

His Devoir, Resort, his Appeal was not to a Papal, but a Synodical
Determination.

To sum up the British, African, Greek Catholic Professors produced, they are
unjustly challenged, appropriated by H. T. They were at a great distance from
the Ancient City of Rome, but at a much greater from the Modern Church of Rome,
as it is Established in the Trentine Council.

H. T.
From the Year of Christ 500.

Chief Pastors. General Councils. 514 Hormisda. The Second Constantinopolitane
Council, Pope Vigilius presiding (Fathers 165, An. Dom. 553) against Anthimius
and Theodorus. 524 Johannes 1. Authors Zonaras, Nicephorus, and Baronius. 526
Foelix 4. 530 Bonifacius 2. 532 Johannes 2. 535 Agapetus. 437 Sylverius. 540
Vigilius. 526 Pelagius 1. 560 Johannes 3. 573 Benedictus 1. 578 Pelagius 2. 590
Gregorius Magnus.

W.T.
As for the Eleven Popes nominated, they were no Asserters of the Tenets
wherein the Reformed differ from the present Church of Rome.

As for Vigilius's Precedence in the Second Constantinopolitane Council, H. T.
is more positive than Bellarmine In Concllio aut: praefuisse aut praeesse
potuisse Vigilium. Bellarm.
would adventure to be, who warily makes the point of Right, a (...), an
Evasion, lest the point of Fact should be disproved (that he did or might
preside in it.)

As for the Papal Interest of Presidency in Councils, Papam tribu^re Concilio
suum esse and Forma^ ait Turrecrem. l. 3. c. 4.

Poudus Conciliis dat summi Pontisicis gravitas and Authoritas. Canus l. 5. c.
5.


which Turrecremata exacts for the Form, the Essence, and Canus for the Weight,
and Validity of such Assemblies: There is no Constitution, no Prescription for
it in the purest Antiquity.

Cardinal Cusanus, being Convinced with so evident Non invenitur instantia in
Octo Conciliis praeterquam in tertia Action Council. Chalced.

Cusan. l 3. c. 16.


a Truth, ingenuously acknowledged, That in the Primitive Ecumenical Councils
there is but a single Instance, and that in the Third Action of the Council of
Chalcedon, which Exception is not warranted by the Genuine Records of that
Council, were it allowed, yet according to the Rational Maxim of the Civil Law.
An Exception ratifies the Rule in what is not Exceptio sirmat Regulam in non
Exceptis Reg. jur.
excepted by this Consequence, the alleged Presidency of Vigilius is
infallibly discarded; for Vindication whereof, H. T. produces Three Witnesses,
Zonaras, Nicephorus, Baronius.

These are defective in point of Antiquity, and thereby less credible.

The Second Constantinopolitane Council was Convened the Year 553, (as H. T.
professes) whereas the Testimonies produced are of a much later Date. Zonaras
wrote in the Twelfth Century, Nicephorus in the Thirteenth, Baronius in the
last; who was no less the Advocate of the Papacy, than the Annalist of the
Church, too frequently Adulterating the Records of Antiquity, and prostituting
them to the Grandeur of the Sea of Rome.

Evagrius a more Ancient Authentic Historian before Vigilias per lic^ras
Consensit Concilio, non tamen interesse vo^^^t.

Evagr. l. 4. c. 37.


the end of the Sixth Century, testifies the Consent of Vigilius by his Letters
(an Orthodox Correspondence of Judgment, no Authoritative Confirmation of
Power) he was so far from presiding in that Council, that he would not be
present at it.

H. T. Produces three Witnesses, not without some grains of a Sophister, he
cites the First Zonaras, as the Tempter did the Psalmist, imperfectly.

Zonaras joins Eutychius of Constantinople, Apollinarius Zonar. in Vita
Justiniani.
of Alexandria, as Princes (or Principal Prelates) in that Council, most
probably so Titled in respect of their Patriarchal Dignity, without any mention
of any distinct peculiar Personal presidency.

The Second Witness Nicephorus does not aver Vigilius Niceph. l. 17. c. 27.
to be President of that Council, but Menas and Eutychius successively the one
in the Beginning, the other in the Progress and Close of the Council.

Vigilius repaired to Constantinople, but not to the Council, though frequently
entreated, importuned, yet ineffectually; he absented himself upon several
pretenses of Indisposition of Body (really of mind) of the small Number of
Western Bishops, of the invalidity of which reason, he was sufficiently
convinced. Whereas the true concealed Reason confessed by Nicephorus, was the
Stomach of Vigilius, that he could not brook to be Eclipsed by the Bright
Luster of the Archbishop of Constantinople, being President.

Claranza the Abbreviator of the Councils Devoted Constantinop. Synodus quinta
Praesidente Menna Patriarcha Caranza in summa Conc. 56.

Conc. Constable. 2. Art. prima. Baron. in Ann. 553.


to the Romish Interest, asserts the Presidency of Menas in the front of the
Second Constantinopolitane Council. This is cleared beyond dispute by the Acts
of the Council it self, wherein is inserted, Menas being President, (...), will
admit no other Construction.

Baronius himself (the Third Witness quoted) produced this Record.

H. T.
The Second Constantinopolitane Council defined, That our Lord Jesus Christ
Crucified in the Flesh, is both the True Lord of Glory, and one of the Holy
Trinity, Can. 10. against Peter the Archbishop of Constantinople, who held
that the whole Trinity was Crucified for us, as appears Art. 1.

It defined One Divine Nature to be in all Three Persons, Can. 1. 2. Nativities
in Christ, c. 2. One only Person to be in Christ, though two distinct Natures,
against Anthimius annd Theodor. Can. 4. 5.

It defined against Theodore, That Christ was not troubled with Passions in the
Mind, or Concupiscences of the Flesh, Can. 12.

W.T.
This is a Digression from the Controversy. No Heresy condemned in the Second
Constantinopolitane Council is Espoused in the Reformed Churches.

H.T.
In this Age the Third Council of Carthage Decreed, That the Sacrament of the
Altar (Mass) but by such only as were fasting, Can. 29. It approved the whole
Catalogue of Canonical Books by name, as they are now published in our Bible,
and approved by the Catholic Church, except only Baruch, which is not named,
because an Appendix to Jeremy, whose Secretary he was, Can. 47. This Council
was subscribed by St. Augustine, and approved in the Sixth General Synod.

W.T.
The Time of the Sacraments Celebration is no poi^ Controverted.

The Romanists dissent touching the Numerical Synod of Carthage, wherein the
latter Canon produced, the Forty Seventh was Established; whether in the Third,
or in the Seventh Council of Carthage.

Most refer it to the Third; yet among them there is a difference touching the
Date of it.

Some fix it in the year 387, others in the year 419, but H. T. degrades it to
a lower Station within the Circuit of the Sixth Century, and thereby renders
its Testimony the less Venerable.

The Romish Doctors set no grand Estimate on the Dictates of this Council.

The Twenty Third Canon, (That Prayer be always directed to God the Father at
the Altar) consists not with the Judgment or Practice of the Church of Rome.

The Missal solemnly directs a Devout Address to the Lamb of God.

The Second Canon, That a Bishop of a prime Seat be not called Prince of
Priests, or Chief Priests, etc.) does derogate from the Supreme Ecclesiastical
Pre-eminence challenged due to the Roman Papacy: In the vindicating whereof,
whilst Gratian Recites this Canon, he prevaricates in a Parenthesis (The Bishop
of Rome excepted.) This Addition being shuffled in without any Warrant from the
Council it self.

Others upon this occasion depretiate the Council as being Provincial only,
that could not transmit any Obligation from Africa to Rome. As not to Rome, so
not to Britain neither.

As it had the force of a Provincial Council only for the Twenty-Third,
Twenty-Sixth Canons, so for the Forty-Seventh also objected by H. T. Not only
to poize, but to down-weigh the Third Council of Carthage: I shall set in the
opposite Scale the Synod of Laodicea, though not entirely Ecumenical, yet not
barely (diminutively) Provincial; being a Convention out of diverse Provinces of
Asia; though not more Ancient than the first Council of Nice, (according to the
computation of Baronius, yet it is confessed of all hands, that it preceded
Baron. An^al. in Append. ad Tom. 4.
in time the Third of Carthage.

As to the Confirmation of the Third of Carthage by the Sixth General Synod
objected, the Council of Laodicea sufficiently matches it, and abundantly
transcends it in the Ratification of the Fourth Ecumenical Council (that of
Chalcedon) and in the Primitive Authentic Code established in the same Council,
that of Carthage being first inserted in the Code by Dionisius Exiguus, the
Abbot in the year 425.

The same Council of Laodicea recounts the same Canonical Laodic. Council. Can.
59.
Books of the Old Testament, (wherein the sole difference consists) which the
hurch of England does.

That it recites not other Books, but that it rejects them not, is the light
Cavil of Melchior Canus, not wanting a Confutation, not corresponding with the
Phrase or Importance of that Canon.

St. Cyril of Constantinople lays a main stress upon it, (...). Cyril. Resp. 3.
believing the Books of Canon-Scripture to be those which the Laodicean Synod
has put down, and which the Orthodox Catholic Church of Christ being
Illuminated by the Holy Ghost, has confessed.

But because of the presence of St. Austin, and the Authority of the Sixth
General Synod produced as Abettors to the Third of Carthage, I shall not
Explode, but Interpret the Canon produced by H. T. offering that Genuine
Construction of it, which best conforms to the Tracts of St. Austin (the best
Evidence of his Judgment) and the best Vindication of the Sixth General Council
from an implicit contradiction of it self in the approbation of Two Synods (the
one of Laodicea, the other the Third of Carthage, whose Canons seem to clash
with each other.

The Books excepted by the Church of England, not listed in the Canonical
Catalogues (as not in the Church of Laodicea.) The Church does read, (as Jerome
says) for Example of Life, and Instruction of Article. 6th.
Manners, but yet does not apply them to Establish any Doctrine.

Cardinal Cajetane, the Most Learned Textuary and Non esse Canonicos, id est,
Regulares ad Con^irmandum ea quae sunt sidei. Posse tamen dici Canonicos; Id
est, Regulares ad aedificationem fidelium utpote in Canaone Bibliorum ad hoc
receptos and Auctoratos. Cum hac distinctione discerni posse dicta Augustini
Exsc^ipta in Provinciali Synodo Carthaginensi. Cajet. in fine Comment. ad Hist.
Vet. Test.
Schoolman, and Casuist in the Church of Rome of his Age, gives the same
account of the Sentiment of St. Austin, and the Decree of the forementioned
Council of Carthage, to wit, That the Books Excluded, may be called Canonical,
not for the Confirmation of Faith, but for the Edification of the Faithful.

Melchior ^^nus reprehended Cajetane, for making St. Jerome Canus in loc.
Theol. l. 2. c. 11. ad 2. Arg.
his Rule, and derogates from St. Jerome, because he did track Josephus (the
Famous Jewish Antiquary) in the Enumeration of the Canonical Books of Scripture.

It is confessed by Driedo, That St. Jerome did herein retain Drido l. 1. c 3.
part prima ad Hier.
the Computation of the Jewish Synagogue, not of the Christian Church, as he
pretends.

Andradius acknowledges that St. Jerome recited the Andrad. l. 3. Det. Trident.
Ep. ad Romans c. 3. v. 2.
Opinion of the Jews. Their Testimony in an Unanimous Consent is no light
fallible Topic for the Canonical Scripture of the Old Testament.

To them were committed the Oracles of God, to Divina Oracula in Sac^is
Scripturis Contenta. Tolet in Ep. ad c. 3. v. 2.
wit, contained in Sacred Scripture. So Cardinal Tolet expounds them.

The Jews, the Faithful Depositories for these Jewels, Ita ut non nisi per
Judaeos ad Gentiles devenerint. Corn. a Lap. in To. 3.
without whom they had not been transmitted to the Gentiles, is the
acknowledgment of Cornelius a Lapide.

Upon this account St. Austin called the Jews, a Scriniary Nation, carrying the
Law and the Prophets, and the Augustine. contra Faustum. Man. l. 12. c. 23.
Augustine. in Psalm. 56.
Library Keeper for Christians: A Trust which they performed with singular
fidelity, which I shall not need assert by the Authority of Philo, (cited by
Eusebius) not of Origin and St. Jerome, both confessed Compurgators Eusebius. de
Praep. Evang. l. 8. c. 2.
of the Jews Integrity by Learned Romanists.

I shall not need to add St Austins clear Evidences, August. de Clvit. Dei. l.
15. c. 13.

Per Religionem noluerunt unquam textum corrumpere Bellarm. de Verbo Dei, l. 2.
c. 2.


nor to muster up other Witnesses, Ancient or Modern; since Bellarmine himself
was their solemn Advocate to acquit them from any aspersion of Corruption in
the preservation of the Records of Sacred Scripture. They would rather die a
Hundred times, says Bellarmine, a Thousand times says Philo.

To add more Force and Luster to the solemn Authentic Suffrages of the Jews,
it is observed, That neither Christ, nor any of his Apostles in the New
Testament did cite any passage out of those Books which are in the Old
Testament, Exploded from being Canonical Scripture, by Reformed Churches,
called Ecclesiastical Books, by St. Cyprian, Apocryphal by others.

The Primitive Church never Exposed them for Canonical in the strictest sense,
viz. as stamped with Divine Inspiration, as embraced with a true, (not
equivocal) Catholic Allowance for a Doctrinal Infallible Test.

The grand proofs of Antiquity (besides the Third Innocent. 1. in Ep. 3. ad
exuperium Conci^ium Roin. sub
distrusted Council of Carthage) are the sentiments of two Popes, Innocentius
the First, and Gelasius. Both which may rationally be suspected for counterfeit
Authorities, there being no such extant, till Three Hundred years after the
dissolution of each.

As for the former, the more clear and Venerable Testimony, Hoc etiam Fratri et
Consacerdoti nostro Bonificio ve^ aliis earum partium Episcopis pro confirmando
isto Canone innotescat. Caranz. in Sum. Carth. Council. Can. 47.
that of Innocentius the First, if there were a reality of his Decree alleged,
there needed no probationary reference of the Forty-Seventh Canon in the Third
Council of Carthage, so much insisted on to the Judgment of Bonifacius,
inferior to Innocentius the First for Age, for Repute, and Luster.

To manifest the Romish Catalogue of Canonical Books of Scripture to be Novel
and Unwarrantable; I shall conclude this point with the summary Recapitulation
of Dr. Cousin, late Bishop of Durham (after a copious distinct examination of
particulars.)

Thus have we hitherto taken an exact and perfect Dr. Cosins S^^olastical Hist.
of the Canon of Script. Parag. 178.
view of what the Catholic Church of God has delivered, concerning the Canon
of Divine Scripture in all times, and in all places: In Judea by the Ancient
Hebrews, by Christ himself, and by his Holy Apostles: In Palestine and Syria,
by Justin Martyr, Eusebius, St. Jerome, and Damascon; In the Apostolical
Churches of Asia, by Melito Polycrates, and Onesims; In Phrygia, Cappadocia,
Lycaonia, and Cyprus; by the Council of Laodicea, St. Basil, Amphilochius,
Epiphanius; In Egypt by Clemens of Alexandria, Origin, and Athanasius, In the
Churches of Africa, by Julius, Tertulian, St. Cyprian, and St. Austin; the
Council of Carthage, Junitius, and Primasius; In all the Five Patriarchates by
St. Cyril, St. John Chrysostom, Anastasius, St. Gregory, Nicephorus, and
Balsamon: In Greece by Dionisius, Antiochus, Adrianus, Lentius, Zonaras,
Philippus and Callistus: In Italy, by Philastrius Rusinus, Cassiodore,
Commestor, Balbus, Antoninus Mirandula, Cajetine and Pagnine; In Spain by
Isidore. Hugo Cardinalis, Paulus Burgensis, Tostatus and Ximenius; In France by
St. Hilary; the Divines of Marseils, Victorinus of Poic^iers, Charle Magnes
Bishops, Agobard, Radulphus, Honorius, Petrus Cluniac. Hugo and Richardus of
St. Victors at Paris, Beleth, Petrus Collegn, Hervaeus Natalis, Faber and
Chlictoveus; In Germany, and the Low Countries by Rabanus, Strabus, Hermanus,
Contract Ado. R^pertus, the Ordinary and Interlineary gloss upon the Bible, the
Gloss upon the Canon Law; Lyranus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Driedo and Ferus:
And in the Church of England by Venerable Bede, Alcuin Giselbent, Joh.
Sarisburiensis, Brito, Ocham, Thomas Anglicus, and Thomas Waldon, besides
diverse others that are not here numbered.

Thus far Doctor Cousin abbreviates his ample accurate History. which (as far as
my Intelligence extends) has not been assayed to be answered by any Romanist.

It may with much more facility be reviled, menaced, than confuted; Invectives,
Anathema's are the proper frequent Apologies for Convicted Errors.

With what Truth or Candor, with what strength of Religion or Reason, with what
warrant of Piety or Antiquity the Canon of Scripture being there solemnly
asserted, universally established in all Climates, in all Ages may in the
Sixteenth Century of Christianity be contradicted, controuled, condemned by an
inconsiderable number of Prelates assembled at Trent; some thereof being
Titular only; all Homagers of the Papacy entirely swayed, irresistibly
influenced from the Conclave at Rome. I refer it to all unbyast Intellectuals,
to all incorrupt Judgments to determine.

H.T.
In this Ag^ the Milevitane Council defined, That whoever denied Children newly
born to be Baptized; or says, They contract nothing of Original Sin from Adam,
which may be cleansed by the lavoer of Regeneration, etc. Anathema.

W.T.
I shall not insist upon the inadvertency in point of Chronology, so precisely
expressed (in this Age.) Whereas it is recorded in the several Editions of the
Councils, and generally by Annalists and Antiquaries, (Baronius not excepted)
that this Milevitan Council was held in the beginning of a former Century in
the time of Pope Innocentius the First, betwixt whom and the Fathers of that
Synod, there was a Mutual Correspondence of Letters. Were the Date exact for
the time, yet was not the Citation apposite for the matter; the Church of
England Articles of Religion, 9. 27.
solemnly declares what the Milevitan Council desines.

H.T.
In this Age the Caesar Augustan Council decreed, That Virgins who had vowed
themselves to God, should not be veiled till after 40 years probation.

W.T.
I acknowledge this to be the last Decree of that Ab universis Episcopis dictum
est, Placet. Constable. 2. vol. Edit. Dominic.
Council, and that it was approved by the suffrages of all the Bishops present,
all which being computed, were but Twelve. The Inscription of it is, The Caesar
Augustan Council of Twelve Bishops. So it is set out in the large Editions of
the Councils, and in the summary Caranza.

If this Decree be of any grand Estimate and Validity why is it receded from,
in effect repealed in the Council of Trent, that allows Virgins to be Votaries
in Vails after Council. Trident. Sess. 9. Can. 17.

Conc. Trident. Sess. 9. can. 7.


Twelve years of Age? Only Abbatisses and Prioresses are limited to the Age of
Forty years.) If this be an uncancelled, unvoided Decree alleged, why is it
not observed by the Romanists? If it be cancelled and voided by them, why is it
objected to the Reformed? This is no probate of a Succession, but a Collusion.

H.T.
In this Age Pope John the First decreed, That Mass ought not to be celebrated
but in places consecrated to our Lord, unless great necessity should enforce
it. In his Epistle to the Bishops of diverse pla^es, giving this reason, because
it is written; See thou offer not thy Holocausts in every place, but in the
place which the Lord thy God has chosen, Deuteronomy. 12. Anno 522. For as no other
but Priests consecrated to our Lord; ought to sing Mass, and to offer
Sacrifices upon our Lerd to our Lord upon the Altar, so in no other but
consecrated places. De consecrat. did. 1. C. Sicut non alii.

W.T.
To wave Exceptions as to the Authority of Pope John the First (not obligatory)
because out of the Verge of his own Jurisdiction) and as to the validity of the
proof by a Mosaical, Ritual, Ceremonial Institution: I shall only observe, That
this is no point contended for. We allow distinct consecrated places and
persons. As to the numerous, specious, Testimonies the Instances and Arguments
of H. T. for this Sixth Century, there is but one, and that ministerpreted (out
of the 3d Council of Carthage) that has any affinity to any Controversy
betwixt the Romish and the Reformed Established Churches; which with the rest,
are of no weight to demonstrate the Succession of the one, or to evince that of
the other. They may conduce to amuze, to delude an ignorant implicitly devoted
Disciple, but cannot convince and satisfy any unprejudiced circumspect Reader.

H. T.
Catholic Professors to the Year 600.

Gerardus, Genovesa, Columbus, Oportuna, Germanus Parisiensis, Maria of Egypt,
Brigitta, Simeon Salus, Leander, St. Benedict, (Institutor of the Holy Order of
the Benedictine Monks) Rupertus, Maurus, Placidus, Arnulphus, Radegundis
Leonard, Columbanus, John Climacus, Isaac, Herminigildus, Fortunatus, Agricola,
Bonifacious, Victor, Eleutherius, Gregorius, Turonensis, etc.

W.T.
Though the purity of Christian Religion somewhat declined in this Century,
which did not shine with such bright Stars of the Church as the two former; yet
neither of the Professors recounted by H. T. nor other more Illustrious
commemorated by the Centurists of Magdeburg, and by Baronius in his Annals did
assert the Religion of the present Church of Rome, according to the Trentine
Standard in those Tenants, in which it is opposite to the Reformed.

Some of the Professors recited were Catholics, not Romanists, as Mary of
Egypt, Brigitta (of Scotland.) Neither the Egyptian, nor Scottish Churches did
in this Age own any Homage to the Papal Jurisdiction.

As for St. Benedict, (who is so distinctly signalized, as being the Institutor
of the Holy Order of the Benedictines,) I shall not question his Sanctity, it
being related by St. Gregory, That it was the obloquy of Satan Greg. Dial. l.
a. c. 8.
to asperse him with the brand of an opposite Title, Maledictus.

I shall grant to St. Benedict the due Elogy the Historian applies to Probus,
Vir sui nominis, he did not recede from his own Name, but the present Romanists
recede from his Doctrine and Practice.

He did impose upon himself and others Religious Austerities; no Superstitious
Cruelties, no Stripes or Manacles.

However Sacred and Refined this Order might be in it^ Primitive Regularity,
whilst it was a Seminary of Monachi moribu^ ut Eura^tione praesici^bantur
eruditissimi qui non solum in Divinis docti essent, verum etiam in Mathematica
Scientia. Trith. in Chron. Hisang. ad An. 840.

Monachi simul cum Abbatibus in praecipitium vitiorum Corruerunt. Trith. in
Chron. His.


Piety, and Literature of Virtues and Sciences, as Trithemius sets it out, who
was himself a Benedictine, who passionately complained of the degenerate
Corruption in later times; for Instance, in the Thirteenth Century. He
acknowledges that there was no track of the Pristine Institution in the
Monasteries of Germany; Monks and Abbots rusht to a precipice of Vices.

The Learned moderate Cassander pathetically resents, deplores the scandalous
Monastical Depravations in his Age, notoriously warping from the Original
Rectitude, Quam long Monachatus hodie a prima sua Origin degeneravit, and
quantis Abusibus contaminatus and deormatus sit satis per se est Manisestum,
manent adhuc vestigia Communis and Canonicae Vitae sed in adisiciis ac
Nominibus tantum. Cassander, Cons. 5. Art. 25.
confessing, that there is no footstep (no impression) of a common Canonical
Life, Extant but in Fabrics and Names.

The profaneness of the Monks did render the dissolution of the Monasteries in
this Nation more practicable and feasible than otherwise it could possibly have
proved.

H.T.
Nations converted, St. Augustine the Monk sent by Pope. Gregory, converted
England. The Northern Picts, Goths, Bavarians, and Burgundians, were also
converted in this Age.

W.T.
I confess the memory of St. Austin the Monk ought to be precious, and
celebrated with a grateful respect; but H. T. amplifies too much the Orb of
this Luminary in ascribing to this Monk the Conversion of England. Britannia
omnium provinciarum prima publicitus Chris^i nomen recepit. Sabel. Ennead. 7. l.

Gildas Epist. Capgravius in Vita Sancti Josephi.

Pitsaeus de Illyr. Script. Covorruvius in Praefat. ad Philipp.

Baron. Annal. Anno 35.

The distinct Instances are produced by Bishop Jewel against Harding. p. 11.


Christian Religion being publicly professed in this Island before any other
Climate or Country in the World; the Gospel being planted here by Joseph of
Arimathea in the Reign of Tiberius, as it is recorded by famous Antiquaries, and
even by Baronius. How it fructified in succeeding Centuries before the Birth of
Austin the Monk is evidenced by the solemn Recitals of Tertullian, Origin,
Hilary, and Chrysostom in their several Generations, by the Episcopal,
Archi-Episcopal Dignities erected continued, by the Repute and Luster of those
Prelates in Foreign Councils at Arles, at Sardis, at Arimine, nay at Nice it
self, the British Bishops being Zealous Orthodox Sticklers at home and abroad
in the Confutation, the Extirpation of Arrianisme.

When St. Austin the Monk repaired to England, his Pious, heroique design was
prepared and facilitated by the British Christians intermingled with Pagan
Saxons, though the most eminent Britains took Wales for their refuge together
with their retinues; yet multitudes of the Conquered remained in England
dispersed among the Conquerors.

The Influence of St. Austin the Monk was in a manner confined to Kent, it
extended little farther.

Even in Kent, Austines Task wasless difficult, being promoted by Queen Berta,
who made profession of Christian Religion before the Arrival of Austine, had a
Church in Canterbury for the Solemnity of Divine Service, had a Bishop Luidhard
to preside in it, a Praecursor, Luidhardus Paecursor and Janitor venturi.
Augustini.

Capgr. in Vita. August.

Beda l. 4. c. 37.


a Porter to St. Austin in Capgraves Expression.

Even Aidan and Finan, whose Names are observed in Histories, not flourisht in
the Romish Calendars, had more numerous Converts in England than Austin
himself, the Province of their successful Doctrines more enlarged.

As for the specious Relation of the Northern Picts, Goths, Bavarians,
Burgundians rallied as converted in this Age, they were Disciples of Antioch,
not of Rome; they embraced the Evangelical unblemisht Doctrine; they
acknowledged no Papal unlimited Jurisdiction, not challenged in this Age not by
Austin the Monk in his Conference with the British Bishops and Monks, he
cajoled, entreated a Conformity to the Rituals of the Roman Church in the
Celebration of Baptism in the Observation of Easter, he exacted no submission
to the Authority, Universal Supremacy of that Church. This was reprehended,
branded by Pope Gregory, whose Emissary he was, by Pelagius, before him in the
same Gregor. l. 4. Ep. 36. Distinct. 99.

Nullus unquam Praedecessorum meorum hujusmodi tam profano vocabulo (scilicet
universalis Episcopus) uti Consuevit. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 36.


See of Rome, nay by all Predecessors, as Gregory himself attests.

Caetera desiderantur.

