A VINDICATION OF THE True Christian RELIGION, In Opposition to the
Abominations of POPERY; IN A SERMON Upon Ezekiel. 21. 24, 25, 26, 27. Being the
Text appointed by the Pope for Master Whitebread, one of the Popish
Conspirators, to preach upon the accomplishing of their Wicked Design, for
taking away the Life of his Most Sacred Majesty: Wherein the King, the Church,
together with his Majesty's Laws, Constitutions, and true Protestant Subjects
of England, are clearly Justified; and the Pope, the Church, and Popish Faction
of Rome, are justly charged to be guilty of the like Dreadful Curse in the New,
as has been denounced against Revolted Israel in the Old Testament. By J.
Thomas Rect. of S. Nicholas; Preached at Cardiffe, Before the Bailiffs and
Aldermen there. Feb. 2. 1678/9.

London, Printed for Isaac Cleave, at the Star next to Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane. 1679.

Imprimatur,

W. JANE.

EZEKIEL. XXI. 24, 25, 26, 27. 24. Therefore thus says the Lord, because you have
made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions be discovered,
so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because I say that ye are come
to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.

25. And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come when iniquity
shall have an end.

26. Thus says the Lord God, remove the Diadem, and take away the Crown; this
shall not be the same; exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.

27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until he
comes whose right it is, and I will give it him.


I Thought it not unseasonable (being desired) to explain this Text, which (as
it is credibly reported) was intended by the Popish Faction to Consummate and
Cloak the horrible malice of their Bloody Conspiracy against the Life of his
most Sacred Majesty; but conceived it useful and necessary, to apply it to whom
most properly it appertains, as well for the justifying of his Royal Person,
and Satisfaction of all honest Protestants, as also for the Reproof and
Conviction of our Adversaries.

I shall proceed to handle this Text with all humility of mind, faithful love
to Truth, and due regard to the Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, with the
sense of the first General Councils, and the Doctrine of the Fathers in the
first five or six hundred years after Christ; whereby you may evidently
perceive, and be fully satisfied, that the King, and Church of England, who
hold the true Apostolic Faith, and bind themselves by Mutual Oaths to uphold
and maintain the same, are not sentenced with the dreadful Curse of God, as was
denounced against Judah and Jerusalem, but that the Antichristian Pope of Rome,
that Man of Sin, now of a long time revealed, with all his bloody and
Idolatrous Train; the Ignatian Tribe have their Judgment denounced in the New
Testament, which lingreth not, and their Damnation slumbereth not.

I observe with S. Augustine, not the Monk; that all Holy Writ is so tempered
by the Holy Ghost, that quod alibi obscurius, alibi clarius explicitur, one
portion of Scripture explains another; and that is acknowledged by all the
Orthodox to be the most certain and undoubted Exposition. Wherefore that this
Text may be rightly understood, the Matter therein contained must, for it
requires it, be consulted of in our Bibles in the following particulars.

I. The Time when this Prophecy was declared. II. The Causes wherefore this
Prophecy was declared. III. The Event, being a dreadful Curse denounced.
Wherein observe,
1. The Authority, Thus says the Lord. 2. The Charge, Thou wicked and
profane. 3. The Parties, Prince and People. 4. The Confusion, I Will overturn,
etc. 5. The Duration, Until he comes.
IV. The Promise annexed. Wherein observe,
1. The Kingdom of Christ promised, He comes. 2. His Claim, Whose right it is.
3. Divine Institution, I will give it him.

Of all these in order, by Gods assistance, with Inferences from, and
Application to the whole matter, I shall conclude with the uses proper for our
selves to make of it.

And first, of the Time when.

1. The Time when this Prophecy was made, is easily known, when we look upon
Ezekiel. 1. 1, 2, 3. where the Prophet gives the World to understand expressly the
Year, the Month, and the Day, the Word of the Lord came unto him; Now, says
he, it came to pass, etc. in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month,
which was the fifth year of King Jehoiakin's Captivity, the Word of the Lord
came unto Ezekiel the Priest, in the Land of the Caldeans, etc. Compare this
with 2 Kin. 24. 15, 16, and 17. verses, and there you shall find that this King
Jehoiakin, the King of Judah, was carried away to Babylon in the eighth year of
his Reign, and the King of Babylon made Mattaniah his Fathers Brother King in
his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah: insomuch that by these places of
Scripture it evidently appears, that Ezekiel began to prophecy much upon the
midst of King Zedekiah's Reign, for he reigned eleven years. For by that you
see, that the fifth of Jehoiakin's Captivity must be the fifth of Zedekiah's
Reign. The Text calls this time, Iniquitas Termini, by an Enallage, for
Terminus Iniquitatis, when Iniquity shall have an end; that is, now is the time
come that all the revolt, and backslidings of Judah and Jerusalem by Idolatry,
Bloodshed, and Profaneness, is come to remembrance, and it shall now end in
Zedekiah's days, who shall with the people be carried Captive unto Babylon.

2. The Causes wherefore this Sentence was denounced are twofold; the first, is
the provocations of the people moving and incensing Gods wrath against them;
and to this relates the first verse of the Text, which says, you have made
your iniquity to be remembered: and in the 23. verse next before the Text, it is
said, But he will call to remembrance the iniquity; which according to the
Original may be well translated, Hereby you call to remembrance, that is, by
this contempt and disdain which you cast upon my Word in the mouth of my
Prophet, which seems to you as a false divination, ver. 23. you do provoke me
to call to remembrance all your wickedness, and the iniquity of your
forefathers, for this obduration of heart against my Messenger, and breach of
Allegiance to the King of Babylon, shows what you are: ver. 24. So that in all
your doings your sins do appear, because, I say, that you are come to
remembrance; that is, by this your hardness of heart, and contempt of the
Prophets Doctrine, you force me, says the Lord, to remember your Idolatry,
Bloodshed, Profaneness, and Apostasies in all kinds; all which the Prophet
sets down in the next Chapter, Ezekiel. 22.

2. The second Cause here mentioned is God provoked, and expressed in these
words, Ye shall be taken with the hand; which seems, as if it were, the
Instrumental Cause, but indeed the King of Babylon was the Instrumental Cause
of their Captivity, to whose hands God delivered them up: In the 23. ver. it
is, Ye shall be taken with the hand; and in the 11th ver. before the Text, it
is called, The Hand of the Slayer; and in the 9th and 10th verses it is set
forth with much fierceness, A Sword, a Sword is sharpened, and also furbished,
it is furbished to make a sore slaughter: by this Sword sharpened and furbished,
being an evident sign of Gods Wrath, is signified, that he was incensed to a
very great height of fierceness against them; and that appears by the effects
and influence it had upon them, in the 7th ver. Every heart shall melt, and all
hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall be faint, and all knees shall be
weak as water. Alas! alas! when the point of Gods Sword is set against the
Gates, what hearts can endure, or hands be strong to deal with it, or in any
way be able to resist it? Thus we see what is the sad and dreadful cause of men's
Confusions, even Gods severe anger, so highly provoked with repeated contempts,
and hardness of heart against his Messengers and Messages, sent so sedulously
to instruct them; and by the Instrumental Cause of this peoples calamity, the
King of Babylon, we also see, that it often comes to pass, through the anger of
the Lord against his own chosen people, he makes use of, and stirs up
against them the hands and hearts of Heathen and profane people.

3. The third thing to be considered in the Text is the Event; i. e. the
Sentence of Destruction denounced, wherein we must observe these particulars.

1. The Authority of it in ver. 20. Thus says the Lord. What I say and
denounce against this Prince, I have Gods Warrant for it, says the Prophet,
and that is the reason why he omits all terms of honor to this Prince; and I
think he might have enlarged thus, and say, I know the Commandment of God in
the Law concerning Princes, Ex. 22. 8. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
curse the Rulers of thy people, for by God Kings do reign, and Princes do
decree Justice: And that Solomon had taught, saying, Curse not the King, no not
in thy thought, for his unsearchable heart is in the hand of the Lord. And
Kings are the Lords Anointed, ordained for our Nursing Fathers, and therefore
not to be touched with any violence: But I am commanded by the Hand of God upon
me, and the Inspiration of his Spirit within me, Thus says the Lord: as Saul
told Samuel, and Elijah told Ahab before this time Kings of Israel, so I by the
Word of the Lord, or the Lord by me, and my mouth prophesies, and says thus
against this Prince and People.

2. The Charge in this Sentence is observable, Thou profane, wicked. You shall
see these words explained in Jer. 52. 1, 2, 3. where Zedekiah is said to do
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that Jehoiakin
had done: and Jehoiakin's Charge you will find in Jer. 22. 17. he was taxed for
Idolatry, and shedding of Innocent blood, by offering up Children unto Moloch,
for oppression and violence, covetousness, and profaning holy things. And this
was not spoken of him alone, but of all the people, and of the former Ages,
since the revolt of Rehoboam, and Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin, in the 4th
Chap. of Ezekiel. 4, 5. ver. the Prophet was to bear the iniquity of the people
for 390 days, representing all the years, a day for a year, down from Jeroboam;
which time is computed by the Learned to be 390 years to the Captivity under
Zedekiah.

3. The Parties charged, Prince and People; the Prince was Zedekiah, whose name
had been Mattaniah, as is showed before, who now rebels against the King of
Babylon, that had showed kindness, and made him King instead of Jehoiakin: the
People are also concerned here; for when it is said, Remove the Diadem, and
take away the Crown; by the Diadem and Crown is meant the Government and
Kingdom, the whole Nation; the Cidarin and Corona are Royal Ornaments; and by
the signs Synechdochically, is meant the things signified, amove, toll, i. e.
Prophecy that the King and People shall be removed, and carried captive into
Babylon; Haec non haec, this shall not be the same; i. e. this shall remain no
more such a glorious Nation.

4. The Confusion or Destruction denounced is to be considered, which is set
forth in several expressions in the Text; as first, Exalt him that is low, that
is, Jehoiakin who is now low in Captivity at Babylon, he shall be exalted;
which came to pass in the 37th year of his Captivity; 2 King. 25. 27, 28. etc.
you may read how Evilmerodach, King of Babylon, lifted up his head, and spoke
kindly unto him, and gave him an allowance a daily rate, for every day all the
days of his life.

Abase him that is high; that is, Zedekiah that is high-minded, and through the
pride of his heart, and Gods anger, rebelleth against the King of Babylon,
shall be abased: this ungrateful, undutiful, and disloyal Prince, requites the
kindness, favors, and great honors conferred upon him by the King of Babylon,
with Conspiracies, Plots, and Rebellion, 2 Kin. 24. ult. therefore abase him,
cast him off: I have rejected him, says the Lord; which came to pass you see
in 2 Kin. 25. The City was besieged to the eleventh year of King Zedekiah, and
the City was broken up, and all the Men of War fled by night, etc. and Zedekiah
was taken, and brought to the King of Babylon to Riblah, and he gave Judgment
upon him, and bound him in Fetters of Brass, and slew his Sons before his eyes,
and put out his own eyes, and brought him to Babylon. The next words declaring
this great Confusion, are,

I will overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more; that is, with repeated
Calamities and Judgments will I destroy it, with Sword, Famine, and Pestilence;
my accustomed and usually sent Judgments, I will bring it once, twice, and the
third time, to make a full end of it, and it shall be no more; that is, not
such a great, terrible, and glorious people any more. This was fulfilled, you
shall see that Nebuzaradan, Captain of the Guard, a Servant of the King of
Babylon, came to Jerusalem, and burnt the House of the Lord, and the House of
the King, and all the Houses of Jerusalem, and every Great Man's House burnt he
with fire, and broke the Walls of Jerusalem round about, and carried the rest
of the people away. And although by the Edict of Cyrus they had Laws after the
City and the Temple was rebuilt, yet all was but slender and unstable, as by
the History of Nehemiah and Esrah does appear; and since Christ came, whom they
crucified at Jerusalem, by the just Judgment of God upon them, they were
utterly abolished by Titus Vespasianus, and now are become the most distressed
and despicable people, and Nation in the World.

5. The Duration of this Judgment and Confusion, until he comes: Here is a
comfort promised them by the coming of Christ, which although that blindness,
as S. Paul calls it, has happened unto them for a time that they could not
receive the Messiah when he came, yet there is a time and a promise for their
Restoration; upon this Promise, and other-like Prophecies of Scripture, do they
to this day depend, and look for the coming of the Messiah to deliver them: and
herein they are more happy than Antichrist under the Gospel, for there is not
one syllable of promise made for his restoring to the Truth which he has
forsaken, but he is to be consumed for ever by the Spirit of Gods Mouth, and
utterly destroyed by the brightness of his coming.

4. The fourth particular, observable in the Text, is the promise of Christ's
coming; He comes, whose right it is, and I will give it him: Here Is meant no
Temporal Prince, but the coming of the same that was a long time before spoken
of by the Kingly Prophet, Thou have made him little lower than the Angels, and
have crowned him with Glory and Honor, thou have made him have Dominion over
the works of thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet; and to the
same Prince and persons coming does Malachy speak: He comes suddenly to his
Temple; Behold he shall come, says the Lord, and who may abide his coming?
therefore it is said by S. Paul, he was appointed Heir of all things: He comes,
says the Text, whose right it is Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. This
right of Ruling and Power, the Lord Jesus says of himself in Mat. 28. 18. All
power is given me of my Father in Heaven, and in Earth; therefore it is said in
the Text I will give it him.

The whole Text thus opened, and the circumstances thereof considered, there do
arise these several Inferences.

The first Inference is from the Time, etc.
When the Wicked plot against the Just, and combine in rebellious Conspiracies,
then does approach the appointed ruin of the Plotters. This Sin of Witchcraft
carries men blind-folded to destruction, and that is the reason, I think, why
it is so called; men are bewitched to lay Snares that their own feet may be
taken. Non est Lex aequior ulla, quam necit artifices art perire suae.

A juster Law can no man make, nor wish,
Than Plotters of Death should for Plotting perish.
Therefore did the Psalmist sing, The Heathen are sunk in the Pit that they
have made, in the Net which they have hid, are their own feet taken: And from
this time of Zedekiah's Rebellion, when he conspired against the King of
Babylon, and brought upon himself by his Plotting a total Ruin, we may very
well observe, that Conspiring and Plotting Times are but the Fore-noons to the
Evenings of executing Rebels: I have a very sure word of testimony for it,
Psalm. 37. 12, 13. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth against
him with his teeth, but the Lord laugheth at him to scorn, for he knows that
his day is coming. The Lord laugheth to scorn at the wicked Plots and
Conspiracies of bewitched minds, and though men do not perceive their
approaching Ruin, God knows that his day is coming: In the Net which every
bloody Traitor has made, may his own foot be first taken. And do not we now
see whose days are come, and whose iniquity will have an end? is it not the
days of such as devise Rebellion? and who has not a full sense of these
unquiet and restless Spirits, who never cease to plot against the just, yea a
most just, tender, and gracious Sovereign; and who are those, and how many of
all hands do we daily see, that gnash their teeth against him, and against his
Protestant Church and Kingdom of England. The Ignatian Tribe, the Brood of lame
Loyolah, falsely called Jesuits; for indeed they are aes avitae, says one,
spend all their time and wits to bring the Kings of the Earth to the Battle of
the great day of the Lord, that is, to sow Sedition and Rebellion in the whole
World; witness their late Dismal Plot of Gunpowder, and this now discovered of
no less danger, as it is credibly reported: Dr. Hall in his Epistle to the
Bishop of Bath and Wells, observes the time of this plotting Confederacy, with
their adored Idol the Pope, to be approaching, saying, All the World knows how
that pretended Chair of Peter tottered and cracked, threatens a speedy ruin to
her Usurper: how is it that it still stands? This rebellious Zedekiah (Jer. 52.
1, 2, 3. and 2 King. 24. 18, 19, 20. which two places of Scripture, are the
same word by word) felt the revengeful stroke of Gods hand of Justice, in a
short time, after his ungrateful and undutiful opposing of the King of Babylon.
And the Holy Ghost speaking of Antichrist (who indeed is a Rebel against
Christ, professing the name of a Christian, but opposing him in Doctrine and
Practice) tells us, his destruction is swift, and his judgment lingereth not.
And to conclude this point, see how free from this witchcraft of Rebellion all
the true Sons of the Church of England, Princes and People are, and ever have
been accounted, insomuch that their perfect Loyalty, and true observance of
their Kings, is born as a mark in their Forehead, and is become a Proverb, No
Bishop, no King; no King, no Bishop.

2. Inference from the Provocation.
When obdurate hearts contemn the words of God, admonishing and threatening by
his Messengers, they aggravate their former sins, and exasperate Divine
Indignation against them. In the verse before the Text, Hoc revocatis, i. e.
hereby ye call to remembrance, that is, by disdaining my Prophets and
Prophecies, which in your sight is as a false Divination, through the hardness
of your hearts against me, says the Lord, you provoke me to call to mind the
wickedness, profaneness, idolatries, bloodshed, oppression, and blasphemies
that is amongst you, and all the Apostasy of your Forefathers this 380 years
and upwards. You have transgressed very much, 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15. after all
the abomination of the Heathen, and polluted the House of the Lord; and I sent
unto you my Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending, because I had
compassion on you, says the Lord. But this is it that imbittered me against
you more than any thing, you have mocked my Messengers, and despised my words,
till my wruth rose against you, till there was no remedy. Pro. 29. 1. He that
being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall be suddenly destroyed, and that
without remedy. This was the case of Ely's Children, who disdaining the voice
of their Father, persisted in their pollutions, till God in his wrath slew
them: This hardening of the heart, is nothing else but the contempt of Gods
Word; and the contempt of Gods Word, is the provoking of God to his face. When
the people invited to the Wedding, in the Parable of the Marriage-Supper, made
light of their call, etc. and the King heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent
forth his Armies, and destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City. It
is strange to see with what a scornful state the proud ambitious Usurper of the
Chair of Peter would trample upon the Necks of all his Brethren, and how he
looks from aloft upon the honest Protestants reproving him, he looks upon them
far below him, and with supercilious looks despises them; for so the word
(...) signifies. Thus he, and all his Train of the Scarlet Conclave, the
Cardinals, with the sly Jesuit (thinking themselves righteous, despising
others, as the Spirit of God rebukes them, Luc. 18. 9.) do aggravate their
former Revolt and Apostasy this thousand years standing, and call all to
remembrance, that at last they shall, through the fire of Gods wrath, hereby
incensed, be taken with the hand, as the Text speaks. But as for the meekness
and humility of the Church of England, and our readiness to condescend and
submit to the Truth, let the World be our Witness, as learned Bishop Jewel
declares it; If any learned man of our Adversaries, or of all the learned that
be alive, be able to bring any one sufficient Sentence, or Testimony, out of
any old Doctor, or Father, or out of any old General Council, or out of the
holy Scriptures of God, or any one Example of the Primitive Church, whereby it
may be clearly and plainly proved, that there was any private Mass, or that the
Bishop of Rome was delegated for Universal and Supreme Head of the Catholic
Church, with Invocation upon Saints, worshipping of Images, and buying of
Indulgences and Pardons; or that the Roman Church was accounted and called the
Universal and Catholic Church, or any thing owned as Transubstantiation, at
that time, for the space of six hundred years after Christ, we are content to
yield, and to subscribe, otherwise we hold our selves strictly obliged to
retain the Religion and Faith of Christ which we do now profess, and as it is
now by our Laws established.

Inference the third, from God provoked, Ye shall be taken with the hand.
Idolatry, Bloodshed, Oppression, Profaneness and Blasphemy, are the crying
sins that provoke God safest, and hasten his unavoidable Judgments soonest. In
Ezekiel. 22. 3. The City makes Idols against her self, to defile her self.
Idolatry is an open defiance to the Deity, therefore abhorred of God above
other sins, and called by Gods Spirit, the Abomination; and therefore it is
said in the Text, v. 24. Because you have made your iniquity to be remembered;
this was so odious, that it was the cause that made other sins to be remembered;
and for Bloodshed and Idolatry, being put together, it is expressly declared by
the Prophet, Chap. 22. 4. that they have hastened their destruction: And thou
have become, says he, guilty in thy blood which thou have shed, and have
defiled thy self with thine Idols which thou have made, and thou have caused
thy days to draw near. And as to their oppression, profaneness and blasphemy,
it is declared in Ezekiel. 22. to be so notorious and palpable, that God blew the
fire of his wrath to consume them: Their sins did testify against them, the
way of peace they knew not, truth was fallen in their streets, and equity could
not enter; and Esaias cries out, that he wondered there was no Intercessor, Es. 59.
16. Esaias, Jeremy, and Ezekiel, spend their breath and their books in declaring
the falling away of these people from God, and his worship; insomuch that at
last you see the fierce anger, wrath and indignation of God fell upon them, in
this King Zedekiah's time.

4. Inference from the Charge, Thou wicked and profane Prince, is this:
It is such as revolt from the Faith, despising holy things, and fall to the
practices of the Heathen World, that the Scriptures call wicked and profane,
and never charge any so that keep the true Faith and Worship of God.

These people were justly charged, and their Prince also, as wicked and
profane, and that for these Reasons: (1.) They had forsaken the Lord and his
Law, which is declared by good King Josiah in 2 King. 22. 13. Our Fathers
hearkened not unto the words of this Book, (meaning the Book of the Law found
by Hilkiah in the House of the Lord) to do according to all that is written
concerning us. And this falling away from Gods Law, the Scripture calls
Fornication, comparing these people of Israel to sordid men, Ezekiel. 16. 15. Thou
playedst the Harlot, and pourest out thy fornications on every one that passed
by. (2.) They despised the holy things of the Lord: Manasseh built Altars for
Baal in the House of the Lord, and set a graven Image, of the Grove which he
had made, in the House, of which the Lord had said, In this House will I put my
Name for ever: Therefore does Ezekiel. Chap. 22. 8. cry out against them, Thou
have despised my holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths. And ver. 26. Her
Priests have violated my Law, and profaned my holy things: I am profaned
among them. (3.) These people were justly called wicked and profane, for they
followed the Idolatrous practices of the Heathen World; Zedekiah did as
Jehoiakin had done, and Jehoiakin as Jehoiakin his Predecessor, and he did as
Jehoahaz, and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to
all that his Fathers Manasseh and Ahab had done. Now Manasseh built up the
High Places, reared up Altars for Baal, made a Grove, and worshipped the Sun,
and the Moon, and the Planets, and all the Host of Heaven. (4.) They delivered
their Children to pass through the fire to Moloch at Topheth, and shed Innocent
blood: And behold, says the Prophet, the Princes of Israel every one were in
thee to their power to shed innocent blood, like ravening Wolves to destroy
Souls for dishonest gain, Ezekiel. 22. 27. These Abominations were grounds enough
to charge them, as the Prophet does here, Thou wicked and profane: And besides
all these, there did Oppression and Usury, Lewdness and Uncleanness, reign in
the highest degree amongst them.

Now having seen who the Scriptures call wicked, etc. in the Old Testament, it
lies upon us to know who are so charged also in the New Testament, and for
what; and that appears plainly, 2 These. 2. 7, 8, 10. S. Paul tells you, He who
now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way, and then shall that
wicked be revealed, i. e. He that lets and opposes Christ's Doctrine and
Kingdom, is that wicked one, which in his appointed time shall be revealed, and
in the 10th verse he gives the reason why he calls him wicked, Because they
received not the love of the Truth. This is much like that of Queen Esther
spoken concerning Haman, who had conspired to destroy all the Inheritance of
God, the Generation of the Jews. This Adversary and Enemy is that wicked Haman:
So in Ephesians. 6. 12. we find that the Church of Christ under the New Testament,
wrestless against Powers and Principalities, that is, men exercising Authority,
which he calls spiritual wickedness in high places.

Again, in the 16th verse he tells you, that you are to take the Shield of
Faith, which is able to quench all the fiery darts of the Wicked; whereby you
must understand; that that wicked one has fiery Darts with him to throw at the
faithful, and by fiery Darts you can think of nothing else but bloody
Persecutions. And lastly, you may know that wicked party by his blasphemy,
profaneness, and coming after the working of Satan, with all Powers, and
Signs, and lying Wonders, who opposing and exalting himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. So that in every particular, when these
are compared with the former Prince and People, they are guilty of the same
wickedness and profaneness: As thus.

Under the Old Testament.
1. Those forsook the Law of the Lord. 2. Those despised holy things. 3. Those
followed the Idolatrous Practices of the Heathen World. 4. Those delivered
their Children to Maloch, and shed Innocent Blood. To Zedekiah and Israel, in
the Text it is said, Thou profane, wicked.
Under the New Testament
1. These received not the love of the Truth. 2. These sitting in the Temple of
God, show himself that he is God. 3. These exalt above God, with signs and
lying wonders, after the working of Satan. 4. These shoot Fiery Darts of
Persecution. To Antichrist and his Kingdom in the New Testament, Thou man of
sin, and wicked, 2 These. 2. 3. 8.


Now I will show you how the Pope of Rome, and the Roman Church resemble
revolted Israel, in their Apostasy and wickedness; and will also declare how
clear and free the King and Church of England are from this Charge.

Polanus says, That the Popish Canons and Decretals, with the Lives and
Practices of the Popes, do expressly declare them to be Antichrist; and
Antichrist is defined to be a Man exercising Authority, Head of the Universal
Apostasy, and Desertion of the Faith, professing the Name of Christ, yet
opposing himself to Christ and his Doctrine. That he is a Man exercising
Authority no Man denis, that he is Head of Universal Apostasy, and opposes
Christ and his Doctrine, I will plainly show in my Application. We are obliged
to regard his Person as a Prince and a Prelate by the Laws of God and Nature,
i. e. to give honor to whom honor is due; but it is his Vices and Corruption
we cry out against, and what the Scripture and judicious Divines, ancient and
modern, of reformed Protestants have declared concerning him, we may without
malice, or hatred speak of him; and omitting all terms of honor, he is an
Idolater, a Hypocrise, a Blasphemer, ambitious, proud, lawless, and forbidding
to marry, covetous, vain, a Liar, a cruel Tyrant, a Persecutor, and Murderer of
the Saints, despising holy things, and sitting in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God.

The Idolatry of the Church of Rome, in worshipping the Pope as Supreme Head of
the Universal Church, and Images, with the Relics of Saints, and their
Invocations upon the Virgin Mary, with the lifting up of the Host are as
directly against the I. and II. Commandment, as Blood shed is against the VI.
and as palpable as it was with Israel who worshipped the Sun, Moon, and
Planets; He must have a good Hide, says Dr. Hall, that can worship Martin' s
Boots, George' s Scabbard, Crispin' s Pareing-Knife, Thomases her Shoo, and
Joseph's Breeches; to equalize these Fopperies with the Son of God in point of
worship, as those do who fall before them, and call upon them, as Eraesmus
complains, is abominable Idolatry, and horrible Impiety.

The Bloodshed of Rome is so sensibly known through all the Christian World
that every Country can bear witness to it, and no marvel the Holy Ghost compare
her to a Woman clothed in Scarlet, and drunk with the Blood of Saints.

The fiery Darts of this wicked-one have been so prevalent in Italy, that at
one time was condemned 16000 Protestants, where 18 had their Throats and
jugular Veins cut with a Butchers-Knife, the Butcher putting it between his
Teeth whilst he did rid his Hand of one and take the other. In Queen Mary's
days were several hundreds, here in England, burnt, in the space of the two
last years of her Reign, 13 sometimes together, 12. 10. 6. 5. and other
numbers, Bishops, Preachers, Gentlemen, Tradesmen, old and blind Men, Cripples,
and poor Maids; no sort of Christians could escape the fury of these bloody
Persecutions.

And to speak of their Covetousness, Oppression, Profaneness, and Blasphemies
which are so common, will be too tedious for me to hint here in the corner of a
Sermon; therefore, in a word, I leave this point concerning the charge, and say
it may be well said, Thou wicked and profane Pope of Rome, whose Day is come,
and thy Iniquity shall have an end; remove the Diadem, take away the Crown; I
will exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high; I will overturn,
overturn, overturn it, until he comes, etc.

Inference the fifth, from the Confusion of Judah and Jerusalem.
Crowns and Kingdoms cannot stand, when God Almighty has denounced their fall:
Witness the fall of all the mighty Monarchs of the World, and therefore this
Prophet expostulateth pathetically, Can thy Heart endure, or will thy Hands be
strong, in the day that I shall deal with thee; I will overturn, overturn,
overturn it, and it shall be no more; and who can say to God, What do thou:
The Beast with seven Heads and ten Crowns must fall and tumble down, when God
is pleased to toss them. Whom the Lord shall destroy with the Spirit of his
Mouth, and consume with the brightness of his coming.

But as for the King and Church of England, being free from the Charge, they
may be also concluded to be free from the Judgment, in the sense of all
charitable minds.

And that they are free from the Charge, let every sober-minded Man weigh these
Particulars.

1. The King and the Church of England protest to maintain, nor suffer for no
other Faith, but that which was once by Apostolical Tradition delivered to the
Saints: This Profession do both Prince and People, by a mutual Oath and
Covenant, bind themselves to assert, keep, and uphold, to the honor and glory
of God; as good King Josiah and his People, in their days. His Majesty, (as
other Kings his Predecessors, of blessed memory, at their Coronation) first
promises (being asked by the Archbishops) to keep, and afterward by Oath
confirms, the Laws and Customs of England; namely, the Laws, Customs, and
Franchises, granted to the Clergy by the glorious King St. Edward his
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel,
and according to the Prerogatives of the Kings thereof, and defend and uphold
the same to the honor of God, as much as in him lies.

The Oath. The things that I have here promised, I shall perform and keep, so
help me God, and the Contents of this Book. This Oath is published in King
Charles the Martyr's Answer to a Remonstrance, etc. of the 26th of May 1642.

The same Oath, for matter, you may find in an old Manuscript, containing the
Form of Coronation, etc. in the public Library at Oxon.

Is not this as firm, and as great a Covenant as blessed King Josiah made, who
stood by a Pillar, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord,
and to keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all
their hearts, etc. and all the People stood to the Covenant, 2 King. 23. 3.

So all the People of England, and all his Majesty's Subjects, bind themselves
strictly by two Oaths, called the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to obey
the King's Laws in all true Faith and Allegiance, renouncing all Foreign
Powers, and declaring the King's Majesty Supreme Head and Governor in all
matters, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, next under Christ, in all these
His Majesty's Dominions: Thus do both Prince and People most unanimously, and
faithfully, protest to stick to the Profession of the Protestant Religion as it
is by Law established, being no other than the same as christ and his Apostles
taught, and the pure Times of the Primitive Church maintained in the first
Centuries after Christ.

2. For the purity, justness, and reasonableness of His Majesty's Laws whereby
we are Governed, the Common, Civil, and Ecclesiastical; all the malice of our
Adversaries cannot impeach them of the least savor of Idolatry, or Impiety,
Profaneness, or Blasphemies, as those of rebellious Israel under the Old did,
and of the Roman Papists under the New Testament do: The Common Law being
certain reasonable Customs refined by succeeding Ages, and gathered out of
Divine, Natural, and Moral Principles; our Civil and Canon-Laws, being all
grounded upon the Word of God, and the Decrees of General Councils, and the
Sense of the Fathers in the first six-hundred years after Christ; and in this
it is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that neither His Majesty, nor his People
can be charged for wickedness, nor profaneness, in their Profession, nor Laws.

3. For the Doctrine which we reach it is briefly contained in the Creed,
called the Apostles Creed, the Lords-Prayer, and Ten Commandments, and
explained throughout the whole Bible: we believe nothing, we pray for nothing,
and we practice nothing as necessary to Salvation, but what is plainly proved
by evident Scriptures. And as for the Government, Discipline, and Worship of
our Church, it is acknowledged by all Judicious Protestants to be the best
constituted Church this day in the whole World, and that in the main, the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, being so decently and excellently framed for
edification, that it makes all Men that duly observe it, truly and soberly
religious, securing them (as a Reverend Divine says) on the one side from the
wild Freaks of Enthusiasm, and on the other from the gross Follies of
Superstition.

4. As for any violence and cruelty, we thank God, the World is our Witness, we
can wash our Hands in Innocence; none condemned to death for bare persuasions
in point of Conscience, or different Opinions in matters of Religion. It is
Fellons and Traitors, because they have not the fear of God before their Eyes,
by the King's Law do dye. His most Sacred Majesty being of that gracious and
Lamb-like Disposition, that he labors rather through tenderness to regain,
than through severity to compel Dissenters, to Unity of Spirit and Uniformity
in Religion.

5. And lastly, weigh our Practices, I mean the Lives and Conversations of
those that are true Sons, and Observers of the Church: we ingenuously confess,
that through our carelessness, and want of more strictness, in many things we do
offend all; but withal, at our daily and public, as well as private Devotion,
we pray for true repentance, and forgiveness; and there is not a Christian Man
that has a little Grain of Charity in him, that will deny, but that we through
a certain (though not so Universal as wished) Obedience, receive, and submit to
the Truth, Will, Law, and Gospel of Jesus Christ.

To these things, if I had time to amplify, I would, nor do, desire no more
Credit than shall be due to the fair Evidence of clear Scripture, and sound
Reason, the two Master Pillars of a good Cause.

Now upon these and other like grounds, is founded the unmovable settled ends
of our fixed hopes through Faith in our dear Savior, that we are not Sentenced
with Idolatrous Israel under the Law, are not, nor shall be condemned with
Antichristian Popery under the Gospel: And I conclude this Point with that of
our Savior, in Joh. 14. 27. Confiding that it is appertaining to us, as much
as to any other particular Church in the World; for some have called the
English Church, the Primogenita of the Catholic, and for certain it is a
Member of the true Catholic, and therefore may expect her Share in the Legacy
of Christ; Peace I leave with you, Peace I give unto you, not as the World
gives give I unto you, therefore let not your Heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid. And this leads me to the next Inference.

Sixthly, The sixth Inference is from Christ's coming.
The Lord's goodness is so far extended to his beloved Spouse, the true Church
Catholic, and to every Member thereof, that in the greatest distress and
confusions in the World, Christ and his comforts will attend the faithful; Job
5. 19, 20, 21, etc. He will deliver thee in six troubles, and in seven there
shall no evil touch thee; in Famine he shall redeem thee from Death, and in War
from the power of the Sword; thou shall be hid from the Scourge of the Tongue,
neither shall thou be afraid of Destruction when it comes. What unspeakable
comforts, satisfaction, and rejoicing all the holy Martyrs of Jesus have ever
had in their sufferings, will be too long to relate here: He comes whose right
it is, and I will give it him.

I think you do evidently perceive, and are fully satisfied, by these things
already said, concerning this Text, that there needs no further discourse to
make all Men apprehend, how free, and plainly unspotted, with the Charge and
Curse here denounced against Jerusalem, the present State of England stands.
The City of Jerusalem and Israel were cursed, mark, as you have heard, for
breach of their Oath and Allegiance, and further Rebellion (to the King of
Babylon, though a Pagan King) together with their Contempt of God's Word,
Idolatrous, and Profane Practices; but the English Protestants are hated,
censured, accused, and persecuted by the Popish Faction, for no other cause,
more than for bearing true Allegiance to the rightful and lawful King of their
Realm, and maintaining, as by Oath they are bound, that the Pope has no power
to depose the King, or to dispose of his Kingdoms; his present Majesty, Charles
the II. being the 26th that successively in the right Line from the Conqueror
have reigned absolute Kings of England, etc. Now I will show you, by way of
Application, who have fallen off from the Faith under the New Testament, and
that plainly and particularly in what points, and then you may judge whether
the like Curse, as was so dreadfully denounced against Israel, may not be also
hanging over their heads, and pointing at their doors, being palpably guilty of
the lille Charge.

The Church of Rome, Canonizing, as de fide, a new Doctrine, contrary to the
Catholic Faith, for the first five or six hundred years after Christ, is
become a false Church (or the Church of Antichrist, which is no part of the
true Church of Christ) but an Imposthume, or a bad humor in the body, and no
part of the body, I mean the true Spiritual and Mystical Body of Christ: And as
the ten Tribes of Israel fell off from the Worship of God, and adored the
Golden Calves made by Jeroboam, and turned Bethel, the House of God, into
Bethaven, a House of Iniquity, so have Papists turned the Roman Church, which
was once a pure flourishing Church, to a corrupt Den of Thieves. And yet it is
granted by judicious Protestants, that some may possibly be saved, though with
great hazard, that are in Communion with her, and groan under the lewd and
Antichristian Doctrines and Practices (imposed by her as necessary to
Salvation) which overthrow the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith,
(although held by themselves) and are contrary point blank to the Catholic
Faith once delivered to the Saints; particularly these following.

1. The Church of Rome hold and affirm the Pope to be Universal and Supreme
Head of the Catholic Church, Caput totius Ecclesiae Militantis; Universal
Father of the Church, the only Dispenser of Apostolic Benedictions; thus
dignified, he Lords it over all the Clergy upon Earth. Our Creed, composed by
the Apostles, teaches us to believe first in God the Father, etc. and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord: and the Nicene Creed explains it, I believe in
one God, etc. and in one Lord Jesus Christ. The Scripture explains this
plainly, in the 4th of Ephesians. 15. Speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in
all things, which is the Head, even Christ: By which it appears we have no
Universal Head for the Church Militant, but our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The Church of Rome is held by them to be the Catholic Church, contrary to
our Belief in our Creed, which says, I believe in the holy Catholic Church;
and explained in the Nicene Creed, I believe in one Catholic and Apostolic
Church: All the Elect of God that ever have been, now are, or ever shall be in
the world, comprehending all particular Churches which were before the Roman
Church, and were in the same time that she flourished, in other Provinces in
Asia and Europe, and now are separated from her, making up one Catholic
Church, the Mystical Body of Christ.

3. The Doctrine of the Popes Infallibility, that he cannot Err, and that his
Authority confirmed by Councils, is greater and more certain than the
Scriptures, does fly in the face of all the Foundation of our Faith; for we
take, as the holy Catholic Church has ever done, the holy Scriptures for the
only certain Rule of our Faith and Practice, from which we own no higher
Authority to appeal unto, no, though an Angel did preach things contrary to the
Scriptures, they are to us an Anathema; he, the Pope, can dispense, they say,
against Paul and Peter; that is, control and wrest the sense of the Scriptures
written by Paul and Peter, yea against the Old and New Testament he can,
plenitudine potestatis, as much as God. This Doctrine you will find often
boasted of in their Canons and Decretals.

4. The Church of Rome does plainly and pointblank oppose and overthrow the
Catholic Faith, concerning the Remission of sins: The Apostles in the Creed,
as all the New Testament most amply and largely explaineth, teach us to believe
the forgiveness of sins; and the Roman Church does set it up on quite other
terms, by proposing that gift, I mean, the forgiveness of sins, to be sold by
the Pope, and his Priests, if any will be so fondly blind as to buy in the vile
Market of Indulgences; so, in a word, the Catholic Faith is to believe the
forgiveness of sins, and the Doctrine of Popery is to sell and buy it.

5. The Popish Faction overthrow and utterly confound by their new Doctrine and
Practice, the Faith and Practice of the Catholic Church in Prayer: Our Savior
Christ himself taught us to pray after this manner, etc. directing our
Petitions to God the Father, by the help of the Holy Ghost, in the Name and by
the Mediation of God the Son; so are all Prayers made in the Old and New
Testament: But the Papists call upon Saints and Angels, and because they
believe it, for it is a prevailing Argument with them, that the Kingdom of
Heaven is divided into two parts, the Kingdom of Mercy to the blessed Virgin,
etc. but the Kingdom of Justice to Christ; they pray more for mercy unto Mary,
than unto God through Christ.

6. They contradict and oppose the Christian Faith in the first six hundred
years, by the most unreasonable Point to be imposed for matter of belief as
ever any man can hear of, Transubstantiation, come out of the Council of
Lateran under Pope Innocentius the III. He who contended with John King of
England: They believe that the Bread and the Wine in the Lords Supper, after
Consecration, is substantially and materially changed, contrary to our Natural
Sense, Seeing, Tasting, and Feeling; and we believe it, that they are Signs and
Symbols of a Spiritual Food, and refection which our Souls receive from Christ's
Body and Blood which was given for us.

These things being considered, every Christian man will say, that it was
piously done of all the Reformers, Luther in Germany, Jerome in Prague, Valdus
in France, Wickliffe, Bilney and Tindal in England, to separate from this
Apostate Church, lest they should be partakers of her sins, and afterward
receive of her Plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Hos. 4. 15. 1 Cor. 10. 14. whose judgment
now of a long time lingreth not, and her damnation slumbereth not. Rev. 13. Let
him that understands count the number of the Beast. There Is a set time
appointed for his Judgment, mentioned in 2 These. 2. 7. until he be taken out of
the way; as it is in the Text, until he comes. Let any serious, unbiased
spirited man weigh these Points and Scriptures before-recited, and he will soon
resolve himself how tottering the Sea of Rome is, and how miserable the honor
of the Ignatian Tribe is, who brag if they had not been, Rome had not been; the
Angel had long since said, It is fallen, it is fallen.

Use 1.
Now the Use that every true Protestant is to make of this, is to render unto
God his unfeigned thanks for our most Religious King, and Church of England,
who vow and assert, and protest to stick to the true Christian Faith once
delivered to the Saints, which Faith has been received in this Island of
Britain 1640. and upwards; i. e. ever since the latter years of Tiberius his
Reign, who died in the 27th year of Christ, as Baronius reckons it. Joseph of
Arimathea, and Simon Zelotes were the first Planters here; and some say that
Paul preached here also: King Lucius in the year of Christ, 169. was baptized,
and settled three Primates and Metropolitans: one in London, another in York,
and the third in Caerlion in Monmouthshire, and ever since we have had
successively Archbishops, and Bishops in our Church of England; whereupon this
Church became to be called of some Anglicana, filia Primogenita, Ecclesie
Catholica. The Reformed Christian Professors of Christ's Faith were called
Protestants first in Germany, when the Doctrine of Christ, by the industry of
Melancthon, Luther, and Zuinglius prevailed so with the Princes, and Dukes
there, that they have unanimously agreed and protested to stick to the
Reformation against superstitious Popery, to their Lives and Fortunes: And this
Protestant Religion, much upon the same time, or shortly after, was professed
and established in England by King Edward the Sixth of blessed memory, revived
by Queen Elizabeth, continued by King James and King Charles the First, all of
blessed memory, and now maintained and defended by our most gracious Sovereign
Charles the Second, whom we heartily are bound to pray for, may he go on and
prosper, and may his Royal Heart be still in Gods good hand for it, to dispose
it his own good way: May his Royal Person, both at his going out, and at his
coming in, be now and evermore, as safe, Body and Soul, as all the holy Angels
can make him safe, from all pernicious Counsels, and from Counsels of falsehood
and wrong.

Use 2.
To strengthen and establish us in this Religion, yea though it be to the
hazard and loss of Properties, and Liberties, Fortunes, and Life it self; Mat.
Fear not him that kills the body, but rather fear him that can destroy both
body and soul in hell; put on your Spiritual Armor, fight the good fight of
Faith, and finish the good Religious course that ye have begun: Consider your
Case and Quarrel you contend for, the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12. 17.
Run, I say, therefore the Race with patience, looking unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of your Faith. Did Scipio suffer Death for vindicating the City, and
Aristides Banishment for his love to Equity, and was Demosthenes destroyed for
his care of his Country? and shall we sink under the weight of some light
afflictions, which can endure but a moment, for so great a Case?

3. And lastly, because our Enemies are watchful to take advantage, and rejoice
at our miscarriages, they are like Ravens and Vultures, gathering to, and
picking at our infirmities and failings,

Laetetur, certe priamus, priamoque Creati. Therefore ought we to be very
cautious in all our ways, and circumspect in all our actions; Be wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves.

It is excellently observed of Plutarch, that such living Creatures as have
strong and firm Bodies and Stomachs, can devour and digest Serpents and Frogs;
let us then, quitting our selves like men of wholesome Minds, strong Faith,
sound Principles, and blameless Practices, slight and digest with patience the
Scandals and false Accusations of the Serpents Seed, the Evil Spirits
proceeding out of the Mouth of the Dragon; Let us bless them that curse us, and
pray for them that spightfully use us.

And to conclude the whole matter of what has been said, as you would escape
the imminent danger of the dreadful Curse of God, with pernicious Confusions in
this and the World to come, be watchful and active against the prevailing of
Popery, which with the utmost rage of Persecution is unavoidably destructive to
Prince and Properties, Religion and Laws, Liberties and Countries, Families and
Lives, yea Souls too, if we subscribe to it: And as we tender the love and
peace of God, the integrity of the true Christian Faith, professed publicly,
as once delivered to the Saints, and the continuance of Pious Government by
just Laws, and have a due regard for the safety of his Majesty, and for the
strength and preservation of the Kingdom from Foreign Innovations, let us
without wavering stick to the Protestant Religion, in which we have been bred
and born; and God out of his abundant Grace grant we may be able (with courage
and comfort in the Holy Ghost) to die in the same, in which (if we continue,
through Faith in Christ) we shall assuredly find Salvation.

FINIS.
Page 15. Line 23. for provoke God safest, read provoke God fastest.

BOOKS Printed and Sold by Isaac Cleave, at the Star next to Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane.
THe Church of Rome unmasked, or her false Principles briefly detected, with
some Reasons of so many retaining or returning to Communion with her, and the
great danger of everlasting destruction that such do run themselves upon:
Written by a Learned Divine, by way of Letter to a Friend in the Country.

The Book of Rates, now used in the Sin-Custom-House of the Church and Court of
Rome, containing Bulls, Dispensations, and Pardons for all manner of Villainies
and Wickednesses, with the several sums of Money to be paid for them: To which
is added the new Creed of the Church of Rome, containing the Articles of their
Faith; by Anthony Egane, B. D. late Confessor of the Kingdom of Ireland, but
now of the Reformed Religion.

England's Improvement Revived in a Treatise of (all manner of Husbandry and
Trade by Land and Sea; plainly discovering the several ways of improving all
sorts of waste and barren Ground, and enriching all Earths, with the Natural
Quality of all Lands, and the several Seeds and Plants which most naturally
thrive therein, Together with the manner of Planting all sorts of Trees, with
Directions to make Walks, Groves, Orchards, Gardens: Also the way for ordering
of Cattle, etc. By Jo. Smith.


