(...) In English, To undo a City is an easy matter even for the Wicked; But
to set it right again is difficult.
Upon that worthily admired PATRIOT, (...).
AND Honor of his Country THE OBSERVATOR Secula Phaenices nulla tulere duos.
Here (viz.) in the matter of Odysseas.
Ulysses and L'Estrange.

Quam rem ita graviter tulit Alexander, ut fecunda legatione denuo bellum
deprecantibus ita demum remiserit, ut Oratores, et duces, quorum fiducia toties
rebellent, sibi dedantur; eo tamen demum res est deducta ut retentis
Oratoribus, duces in exilium agerentur.
WEre Brains now cheerd with such Caelestial Fire,
As the renowned Homer's did inspire.
England might Iliads, and Odysseas bear,
And Roger should Ulysses Ensigns wear.
Divine Achilles would, and but that one,
Stand here betwixt L'Estrange and Charles le bon.
Peers will not this grudge, their Virtues in each Scheme,
Are adaequate, they differ but in name.
The Greeks with Honors did Ulysses Crown,
(Brave grateful Greeks) and what shall ours have none?
Athens should Orators and Captains yield,
(In confidence of whom they so often rebelled:)
To his will, Earths Monarch said, so they compelled,
Warriors, by no means Orators expelled.
They Would yield their lives as soon, this speaks how dear,
With Wise men wise, and Loyal States men were:
And well they might, for in these Watchmen dwell,
Lives Liberties, and all that is Parallel.
Philipp would likewise from them raise his Seige. Curt. lib. 2. fol. 17.

Philippus, Macedo Pater Alexandri magni.
^o they ten Hostages would grant his Liege.
Then said Demosthenes; the Wolves would League,
With Shepherds; so their Mastiffs they would reneague,
^he cause of all the strife: this brings to mind, Viz. 10. Orators.

^treigues of late, of the same wolfish kind:
(...).

In English,

Glory from a Multitude is better than much Wealth. ISOCRATES. Alter Hippias
nomine cum imper um paternum teneret interfectorem fratris comprehendi jubet
qui cum per tormenta conscios caedis nominare cogeretur. omnes ami. cos tyranni
nom may it: quibus interfectis qua^^^ii tyranno an adhuc reliqui conscij
essent? nemo, ait, superest, quem amplius morigestiam, quam ipsum tyrannum.
Justini, lib 2.
Strange, Strange, Demands Smelled they of want of sense
Most, or of the Phanatique Impudence?
Or did the wolves that do infest our Land,
Think they a Dick, or Hippias had in hand?
No, no, our Sovereign Shepherd was too wise,
By Nature, Art, and the late Exercise;
To give those honest men who would repay,
As they his Father did but the other day
That is not yet forgot, nor will it be,
Till Time be swallowed in Eternity.
His Mastiffs give 'em, who would him devour,
(Nay God himself for money they would deflour)
Not only take the fruits but kill the heirs,
That the Vineyard might be for ever theirs.
This as the Shepherds Mastiff stout does keep,
Those Wolves, the Whigs from worrying of the Sheep
He merits from the Crown; all honest men.
He Will bring Fanatics to their wits again;
Unless they are damned by Crimes so insolent,
That they with the Sphinx Titus cannot repent.
Those Saints that Muffty for their savior cried,
Deflour, viz. to rob God of his Honor.
And now the savior will be Crucified.
Never did Villain yet deserve it more,
Then may our Turks their Mahomet adore.
Could mere man bear that Badge without a sin,
This Patriot for it, fairly has put in.
For when the savior designed nothing more,
Than a Sea of Blood, his Antidotes restore.
Good David with his lyre charmed raving Saul,
So this Isocrates, this learned Paul,
By Whigs blown frantic with his lovely strain,
Converts this Land to sober sense again.
A Land which does with Milk and Honey flow,
Here Is Dame and Daughter; Peace, and Plenty too.
A Canaan with all earthly Comforts Blessed, L'Estrange

Blessed yet in that it is Blessed Abraham's rest.
(...).

In English,

The Wise Man shall be called the Delight of the Citizens PHOCYLIDES. Ny Cred y
mol nes gwelo y mennyth. Proverb.
We have good David, and wise Solomon,
(Wonders of Mercy they to Whigs have shown)
Restored, preserved by such mirac'lous hand,
As transferred Israel to the holy land. Latina.

Here we have Moses and the Gospel read,
Ne suadela quidem persuaserit dum sero sit.
Yea, mighty apparitions from the dead.
Yet Corahs Gang rebels: saducean seed,
Ungrateful, Bloody, Antichristian breed.
A Land which does the Phaenix now possess;
The Athenians erected Statues in honor of Socrates. Laertius.
Too happy, if it knew its happiness.
Let it as Athens, for him statues raise,
Adorn his brow with everlasting Bays.
And men on earth do service at his Tomb,
When God this Victor does in heaven Crown:
Service to God at the Tombs of, etc. Jewel.
Divines conclude all humane Eloquence,
Beneath the God-like Abraham's excellence.
No Oratators completely could express,
The holy Patriarchs heavenly-mindedness.
Nor can I this. it is true I have too will,
How to perform I find not in my skill.
To soar so high is not of my poor wing,
If it were dipped in the Castalian Spring
Then would I volumes write, I tell thee Trim,
Protest they should be all in praise of him.
The Philosophers, had their Detractours. Plutarch.
Come Curtis, Care, and all the canting Crew,
You cannot face this sun, such Apes as you.
Grand Sophies ever had some Currs to whine
At them: but Heretics make Hero's shine.
Shine lofty soul, thy wit, worth, works aspire,
'Bove hate, yea praise: Theams for us to admire.
Which will, while time lasts, eternize thy name,
Open the Ears of Men, the Gates of Fame.
Hold then my Muse, none can this subject hit,
Unless L'Estrange himself, or Angels writ.
Mota manus Procerum est, et quid Facundia posset,
Tum patuit: Fortisque viri tulit arma Disertus.
(...)

In English,

Not Jove himself can all men please,
Whether he does Rain, or he does cease.
Theognis. Isocrates ad nicoclem oration secunda pagina.


(...).

81.87.93.109.
The Translation.
APply your self to the most prudent of them who are about you; and send for
what others you can, and think it not convenient to be a stranger to
well-approved Orators: give to the wise the Liberty of declaring their minds
freely; and have the discreet, and such as can see further than others, in
great esteem, and veneration; knowing this, that a good Counselor, is the most
profitable and Kingly Possession. Judge those to be likliest to make your
Kingdom who can best furnish your understanding: Honor your Friends with the
Principal, and the most Benevolent with the truest of your Honors.

Deem the safest Guard of your person to be the Virtue of your Friends, and
your own prudence, for these are the things by which Dominion is both gained,
and maintained.

This is some of the advice of Isocrates, a most excellent and learned Orator,
who was accounted the wisest Man on Earth; and indeed who rightly consider his
writings (than which nothing can be more curious) will easily imagine it to be
true. So that as Alexander the Great, often pronounced the Greek Heroes happy,
for that they had Homer to immortalise their Fame, by streining the
Quintessence, and Heroicness of Wisdom, and Fortitude to so sublime a pitch;
(which) besides that he was so Eminently learned himself, having been so long
the scholar of Aristotle, and so great a Proficient, that it became a question,
whether Alexander the Great owed more to his Father Philipp, or to his
Schoolmaster Aristotle) I fancy a Topic of that singular Veneration he had for
all learned men, testified by munificent Bounty, and a warm sympathising
tenderness, above (I think) any other Examples History affords.) So may we
esteem Nicocles happy, who had Isocrates (the wisest man in the World) to be
his Orator. And so may we Congratulate the happiness of our most Gracious
Monarch, and his Kingdoms in that incomparable Orator Roger L'Estrange; who for
Loyalty, Wisdom, and Eloquence comes, but in time, behind any of the Ancient
Philosophers; nay we may conclude all Princes and Potentates happy, who are
accommodated with such faithful worthy Orators; and do give such Honor; and
Deference unto them as Alexander did, by which means indeed, he might well
become great.

LONDON Printed for A. Harris, 1684.


