THE WHOLE ART OF REFLEX DIALLING, Shevving the way to make all manner of
Dials which shall show the hour by a spot of light reflected from a Glass
upon any Cieling whether it be flat or curved, or any other way irregular. AS
ALSO Upon any other object whatsoever, and whether the Glass be plain, or
unequal, as likewise whether it lie in the plain of the Horizon, or oblique unto
it. Together with all necessary furniture belonging thereunto. All performed by
an easy Instrument fitted, with lines to that purpose.

Published by ANTHONY THOMPSON.

LONDON, Printed, For William Leybourn M. DC. LVIII.

depiction of horological dial instrument The figure of the Instrument
M. N. the Window O. the Cieling C. D. the Instrument A. B. the Semicircle H.
the Center of the Glass H. I. the line in which the picture of the moveable
Socket is represented to the eye in the Glass. K. L. the perpendicular thread
H. I. being infinitely extended would meet with the Cieling in some point: F.
G. the movable Socket I. the slipping knot




depiction of horological dial instrument in use

The Publisher to the Reader.
Courtous Reader,
THese short precepts of reflected Dialling, the late invention of a Friend of
mine, I have thought fit to let the World see, and together with them, have
annexed some precepts of the same Nature, formerly written by their Author Mr.
Sam. Foster, sometime Astronomy Professor, in Gresham College; to whom the
world is indebted for much variety in all kind of Dialling, and the first I
know that in England made these sort of Reflected Dials to oblique Glasses, in
so much that although this now published be wholly new, and without any
dependence upon any thing ever done by him, yet the Author will not be ashamed
to acknowledge that the difficulties that he found arise in the practice of
some ways of that Author, put him upon this as he thinks more easy then any
yet published.

Farevvell.
CHAP. 1, The Description of the Instrument.
LEt there be a straight Ruler of Wood, or Brass made A G, the length, breadth
and thickness, at discretion: about the middle of it, or nearer to the end A,
let the hollow B be made large enough to encompasse a socket of Brass, into
which the Glass must be fitted, and so that the fiducial edge A B C may be
imagined to pass through the Center of the Glass, when it is fixed. On the
other side, as at F, may be made another hollow, like that at B, to the end you
may use either edge of the Ruler, as occasion may serve, to the end of this
Ruler must be added another at right angles C M, made moveable, yet so
supported by a bracket E, behind, that it may stand steady at right angles, and
unto this let there be fitted a slipping socket with a fiducial edge hi, let
the piece C M be divided as a tangent line to the Radius B C, and of that
length that it may contain about 47, or 48 degrees, which you need not divide
beyond 45, on the other side K M, to a shorter Radius, let the tangent line be
continued to 64 degrees or thereabout, which will be far enough for most Dials of
this kind, the whole representing two sides of a Rectangular Parallelogram, or
Carpenters square, the one leg longer than the other, all which by the figure
annexed, is easily understood.

CHAP. 2. Precepts for the ready Use of this Instrument.
FIrst, in the place where you intend the Glass shall lie, make fast some
piece of Wood or Brass, exactly Horizontal, unto which you may join some other
large piece of Board, Pastboard, or other, it matters not, so as it be made to
stand firm, and Horizontal, till the Dial shall be finished, and then taken
away.

Secondly, Having upon any part of your fixed piece of Wood made a mark, over
which precisely shall be the Center of your Glass, and upon this mark as a
Center describe so much of a Circle as is necessary, to as large a Radius as
the Pastboard will give way, and then the Sun shining hold up a thread, so that
the shadow of it may pass through the Center of your Circle, and mark where it
cuts the Circumference, and at the same instant take his altitude, and find his
azimuth either trigonometrically, or by some Astrolabe: (of all projections of
the Sphere I know none so exact for the performance of all things necessary for
the making these Dials, as the solution of all other Astronomical Problemes, as
that commonly called Blagraves Jewel, now put out, every way much amended, and
altered by Mr. John Palmer, Rector of Eton in Northampton Shire my especial
friend.)

Thirdly, Having found his azimuth, set off now the South or East line, by help
of a Scale of Chords made to the Radius of your formerly described Circle, we
will take the Example of an East Dial; As for Example, in the latitude of 52
degrees. 15 min. I observed in the Tropic of Cancer the Suns altitude 15 degrees. 00
min. by my Astrolabe I find his azimuth, then from the East, or six of clock
line was 19 degrees. or 71 degrees. from the Meridian or Midnight line Northward, but
because in this Example the Meridian could not be expressed, I set off 19
degrees upon Circle to the right Coast, and there through the Center draw a
line which shall represent the East azimuth.

Fourthly, Your East or Meridian line, if it may be, being thus drawn, have
recourse to your Astrolabe, or by Trigonometry find these ensuing things.
First, for all necessary hours which will come upon the Dial, find the Suns
azimuth, and likewise what altitude it has in that hour, and Azimuth, do this
for the Tropic, and the Horizon (in Dials made to Oblique Glasses) the
Aequinoctial, or for as many of the Suns Parallels as you please, I have made
choice of the distance upon the Horizon, and Tropic of Cancer, for in a flat
roof two are enough, because the hours will be straight lines, otherwise if the
roof be concave, unequal, or any way un-even, it will require the finding of
more points, write these down, as in the Table ensuing.

In the Latitude of 52 degrees, 15 minutes.
Distances from the East on the Horizon.
Hours degrees. min. 4 36 00 From East Northward. 5 18 40 6 00 00 7 18 40 From the
East Southward. 8 36 20 9 51 40 10 65 30 11 78 20 12 90 00 In the Tropi^k of
Cancer.
Hou. Azim. from East. Altit. H m. D. m. D. m. 4 00 37 30 02 00 5 00 25 40 10
00 6 00 15 00 18 30 7 00 03 30 27 30 8 10 09 00 37 00 9 00 22 30 45 30 10 00 40
00 53 30 11 00 62 30 59 20

CHAP. 3.
HAving gone thus far, your next work will be to fasten your Glass in its
socket, to what obliquity you please, at adventure, and so to order all things
that the Center of your Glass may be directly over the Center of your formerly
described Circle, and the height of the Center of your Glass equal to the
thickness of your Instrument, so that the hollow part of the Ruler
encompassing the socket, the fiducial edge may pass through the Center of your
Glass, which you may mark with a little speck of ink, till your Dial is done.

The hours are to be drawn in this manner; First, limit the Horizon, if your
Glass lie oblique to it, to the end the line be not extended where the Sun can
never shine; This work is easily done if the roof be flat, by finding only two
points thus;

Place your Instrument as before, and slip the moveable socket to 0 degrees. 0 min.
then hang up a perpendicular thread in any part of the roof, that it may fall
upon the Horizon, then putting your Instrument gently to the thread, observe
with your eye where the fiducial edge of the socket is reflected through the
Center of your Glass, and there make a mark by a slipping knot, or any other
way you please, then holding a thread upon the Center of your Glass, gently
extend it by the former mark, till it come to the Cieling, and there make a
mark, for that shall be one point of your Horizon reflected, repeat this work
as often as you please, so shall you have as many points as you desire, through
which draw a line that makes no angles, which shall be the reflected Horizon.

Go now to your Table of distances from the East and first set off the six of
Clock line, in this manner: Extend a thread infinitely, that may pass through
the Center of your Glass, and the six of Clock mark in your Horizontal Circle,
then in the reflected Horizon, hold up a perpendicular thread with a plummet at
the end, that may just touch your other thread, and in the reflected Horizon.
make a mark. Do thus for all the other distances according to your Table, and
make several marks.

Then lastly, go to your Table for the Tropic of Cancer, and in the mark in
your Circle belonging to every hour, place your Instrument, and move the socket
in the upright ruler to the degree of Altitude belonging to that hour, and
marked in the Table, and with your eye project it by a thread hung up any where
with a slipng knot in the same manner you did your reflected Horizon, and where
a thread extended from the Center of the Glass touching the Cieling that is
the point for that hour, and a line drawn from the point to its correpspondent
in the Horizon shall represent the line where the reflected spot of light will
be for all the year. Do this for all the rest.

Chap. 4.
IN this manner may the furniture of Dialls be easily put on, viz. the
Parallels of Declination, of Altitude, of Azimuth, points of the Compass,
proportions of the shadows to the Gnomons, and the like, which every man's
industry will easily perform.

Chap. 5. How to perform all the foregoing precepts, without any projection
by the eye.
FOrasmuch as the finding the reflection of the socket h i, through the Center
of the Glass; and after that the projection of the necessary points may seem
difficult to some not used thereunto, though in it self it be easy; I have
added this Chapter, whereby the help of an instrument A B, Let the
perpendicular ruler of your projecting Instrument C M be placed within the
room, and applied to that Azimuth to which you desire to project the
correspondent hour, and then by help of your plummet B C observe what
inclination your Glass has to the Horizon in that Azimuth, double that, and
add it to your tabular Altitude, and to that degree remove your sight, then a
thread drawn thereby from the Center of the Glass shall give you the point
desired in the roof. Example, In the latitude of 52. 15 in the Tropic of
Cancer, I find the Suns Azimuth 15 degrees. and the Altitude in our Horizon 18 d.
30. But by a plumb line B C, I find the Glass in that Azimuth to incline to
the Horizon 5 d. 00, I say if to 18 d. 30, the Altitude in our Horizon, I add
10 d. 00. the double of the inclination of the Glass, and to the Altitude,
viz. 28 d. 30, I remove the sight h D i, and from the Center of the Glass,
through the point D, I draw a thread that shall show the point upon the roof.
But because the Diameter of the Glass is commonly little, and consequently the
inclination, not accurately to be taken, you must either continue the plain of
your Glass, or work by this proportion.

As the Radius, is to the tangent of the greatest Inclination: So is the Cosine
of the Ark comprehended between that and the Azimuth in which you seek the
Inclination, to the tangent of the Inclination sought.

E

B

A

D

C



(...) ED the greatest inclination.

DC the Ark comprehended between the two Azimuths.

BC the inclination sought.

A the common intersection of the Horizon of the plain, and of the place, the
proportion is plain, as AD Radius, is to DE tangent: So is AC, the Cosine of
DC, to BC a tangent. But here it is necessary that the Glass be first fixed at
a given angle.

FINIS.
A general and most easy way, to project hour lines on all kinds of
superficies without any knowledge how they are situated in respect of
Declination or Inclination.
1. LEt the Gnomon being first sharpened with a point be shaped, and fastened in
such manner that it may no ways hinder, either the Draught of the Horizontal
line, or the point of the shadow from having free access to the Dial at all
times of the year.

2 Draw a Horizontal line by help of the Semicircle in a true level both in
regard of it self, and also to the point of the Gnomon, through the whole
superficies, on which the Dial is to be described, and if the superficies be
very much inclined to the Horizon, so that it will not receive the horizontal
line upon it, you must set up some board or such like, upon which for a time
you are to inscribe the Horizontal line, and by help of which the hour lines
are to be projected upon the superficies.

3 Observe the point of the shadow of the Gnomon, and the Suns Altitude at the
same instant of time.

4 By the Altitude observed, compute the Azimuth of the Sun from the Meridian.

5 The same Azimuth must be projected upon the Horizontal line, by help of a
perpendicular thread either applied to the point of the Gnomon, or else
covering to your sight the point of the Gnomon, and shadow both together; and
with the same view cutting thorough the Horizontal line, observe exactly where
it then cuts, for that same section shall be the Azimuth projected upon the
Horizontal line.

6 Let any kind of Plain board, or Past-board be now applied to the Horizontal
line, which must also touch the point of the Gnomon, and consequently shall
therefore exactly agree with the Plane of the Horizon, upon which Plane the
point of the Gnomon is to be signed, which may be called the Center, and
afterward a right line is to be drawn also upon the same Plane from the
Center to the sign of the Azimuth, which was before marked upon the Horizontal
line.

7 Then taking the same Plain board or past-board away, describe upon it the
Meridian line or the hour of 12, draw it from the Center before noted at the
true angle that it has from the Azimuth before drawn, and also to the true
Coast of the World, and let it be extended on both sides the Center if need be.

8 To the Meridian so pitched let the lines of an Horizontal Dial (for the
Latitude wherein you are) be drawn thereto out of the Center upon the Plain.

9 Then again, let the Plain be applied to its former situation, so as that
the Center of the Horizontal Dial upon the Plain, may agree to the point of
the Gnomon, and the Azimuth also, which was drawn upon the Plain may fit with
the azimuth before projected upon the horizontal line, which done, let a thread
be fixed in the center of your horizontal Dial upon the Plain, by help where
of you may transfer every hour from the Plain into the Horizontal line, and
let every hour be there noted with a several point, especially take notice of
the hour of 12, which if it chance to run off your superficies, you must
(till your Dial be finished) fasten some kind of object (whereon the Horizontal
line is also to be projected) that may receive it.

10 After all this, take your Plain away (for there will now be no more need
of it) and conjecture where about the Axis of the world would pass from the
point of the Gnomon, to the Poles of the world, for in that place is the
Meridian to be projected, which that it may be done more commodiously you must
place some object in the way that may receive the same Meridian, unless
perhaps the superficies of the Dial will supply that want which very often it
does, now it matters not whether that object be placed below or above the
Gnomon, you may do that which you find most convenient, only so that it stand
in the way where the Axis must pass, upon the said Object you are then to
project the Meridian line which will soon be done by help of a perpendicular
thread, cast by your eye upon the point of the Gnomon, and also upon the point
of 12 in the Horizontal line, both together, for so the perpendicular thread
projected upon the Object shall show where the Meridian is to be drawn.

11 Into this Meridian therefore one of the Poles of the world (which of them
you find to lie most expedient) is to be inserted, by help of your Semicircle
elevated or depressed from the point of the Gnomon, toward the projected
Meridian line, according to the Latitude of your place, so shall a thread
extended from the Pole point thus signed out, unto the point of the Gnomon,
represent the Axis of the World.

12 Last of all, by these you may easily project all the hours, for if by your
eye you repose the thread or Axis upon each point of such hours as were before
inserted into the horizontal line, every one of these projections shall
represent upon any superficies that stands in your way, each of the hours
required, now to draw the hour lines thus represented by the thread is an
easy thing for every one to do, among which hour lines the shadow of the
point of the Gnomon as it creeps along, will show the time of the day.

FINIS.

