The Regulating of LAWSUITS, EVIDENCES, and PLEADINGS.

AN ASSIZE-SERMON Preached at Carmarthen, March the 16th. 1656.

By WILLIAM THOMAS Vicar of Laughorn.

Inter legesipsas delinquitur, inter jura peccatur. Innocentia non illie ubi
defenditur, reservatur.

D. Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 2.

LONDON, Printed at the request of some eminent Auditors: Sold by Gabriel
Bedell and T. Collins, at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1657.

ERRATA.
Page 4. in the margin, for proct. read pract.

Page 8. lin. 19. read (...).

Page 10. in the marg. read (...).

Page 25. in the marg. for Passio, read Iussio.

Page 29. lin. 21 and 23. read Vatterotz and Vatteretz.

AN ASSIZE-SERMON Preached at CARMARTHEN, March the 16th. 1656.
Exodus 20. verse. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Laws are like fences, that serve for bounds, and for restraints. Tully call's
the Law a Tul. de leg. l. 3.
dumb Magistrate, and the Magistrate a speaking Law. As the Magistrate does
rule and sway the people, so the Law does rule and sway the Magistrate.

The Almighty God (whose actions are our patterns) has prescribed a Law unto
himself. This is the first, and properly called the Law eternal.

And as the Divine wisdom of the Creator has set a rule and measure to his
own actions, so he has ordained the like to his Creatures.

This is either an unwritten, or a written Law, (to borrow Plato's
distinction.) The most famous unwritten Law is that of Nature; which Justinian
extends Just. Iur. Civ. l. 1. ^. 2.
to all living creatures, but the Schoolmen confine to mankind, taking it for
that which the Civilians term the Law of Nations.

Aquinas defines the Law of Nature to be, the Aquin. 1^. 2ae. q. 91. a. 4.
participation of the eternal Law in the reasonable creature. Not to describe,
to enwrap it in a cloud; the Law of Nature is, a judgment naturally engrafted
in our hearts, for the discerning of good and evil.

This is the sovereign Rule, the Pole Star for the Heathens. For if the
Gentiles which have not a Law, do Romans 2. 14.
by nature the things contained in the Law, they having not a Law, are a Law
unto themselves.

Justinian mentions three Precepts cast in this Iustit. Iur. Civ. l. 1. tit. 1.
mould: to live honestly, to hurt no man, to render to every man his own. But
our blessed Savior recites the most renowned law of nature, even in the
judgment of Heathen Sages, so much magnified by Severus the Emperor, that he
commanded it to be engraven in his Palace; Whatsoever you would that Matthew. 7.
12.
men should do unto you, do you even so to them.

Nature it self prompts us this equality, indifferently to shift the scenes; to
look upon our own actions with that rigor, as if they were another man's, and
upon another man's actions with that candor, as if they were our own. But
because this Law was not sufficient to bridle the disorderly passions of wicked
men, God has seconded and reinforced it with diverse written laws to his
people.

The 1. for the deciding of their controversies. This was the Judicial Law,
raised to the Meridian of Iewry, framed to the Climate of Palestine (which as
to other nations may indifferently be abrogated, or retained.)

The second for the regulating of their Ritualls, the ordering of their
Circumstantialls in Religion. This was the Ceremonial Law of Moses; not to be
mingled, blended with the Evangelicall doctrine, (as the Ebionites heretically
asserted) not to be observed or approved under the Gospel. The Synagogue is
solemnly interred, the Judicial Law dead, the Ceremonial deadly.

The third sort, the Moral law (the practical test, the rule for
conversation) is not yet destitute of life, or vigor. The Gospel gives no
bill of divorce to this law, unstings only, but not unsinews it; acquits
believing repenting souls from the curse, not the observance; from the
penalty, not the duty of it.

This Moral law is of eternal force, being comprised in the ten Commandments,
which Melanchthon accounts the law of nature rightly expounded. These are not
to be engraven in tables of stone only, not in tables of brass, (as the laws
of Solon were;) but to be imprinted in the tables of our hearts, to be copyed
out in our lives.

I shall at this time (by Gods gracious assistance) take into consideration one
distinct branch of it. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Before I treat of the matter of the prohibition, I shall offer at a cursory
survey of the manner of the expression; like a limmer, that frames a rude
draught of his work, before he draws out the several lineaments in full
proportion.

That dreadful Judge, who will require of us an account for every idle word,
dictate's none himself.

Though there were many thousands of Israelites present, yet the charge is
framed in the singular number (Thou) not in a loose generality prescribed to
all, lest in a loose neglect it be observed by none. This denotes the divine
mercy, That he vouchsafes to take care of every man in particular; and chalks
out our duty, That every man in particular make application of Gods law to his
own conscience, as a compass to steer by, as a rule to live by.

The Charge is in a future severe tenor, (Thou shall.) This imports the
perpetuity of the obligation, and the authority of it. It was proclaimed with
thunder, and accented with lightning. If our obedience to Gods Law be not
active, it shall be passive. If his Commandment be not punctually observed,
his Judgment shall be sharply inflicted; it shall and must be endured.

This Law is Negative: not an Edict, an Injunction limited with opportunityes,
conveniences, to allay it is rigor; but an Interdict, a Prohibition, that
admits no dispensation of time or place, to mince, or qualify it.

This Prohibition serves as a glass to present the Mufculus.
uncomely complexion of the soul, it is unholy disposition, a swinge, a bent to
false testimonies. Other offenses are sorted, severed among the sons of men,
but this is communicable to all. Every man a liar, Romans 3. 4.
(at least in a corrupt, vehement inclination of a heart unregenerated.)

To proceed. Our English translation is too low and flat (Thou shall not bear:)
it is in the Original lo tagnaneh, (...)
thou shall not answer a false testimony.

It abates the luster, the credit of a disadvantagious testimony (against a
neighbor,) for to be voluntary.

An evidence that is commodious (behoofefull) may (in some cases) be tendered;
but if discommodious, it Ioh. P. de Fer. in proct. For. jur. Test.
ought to be required: it is justified only by an interrogatory, to be cited,
required, examined.

That discovery which sounds an unmeet detraction, a dart of slander at the
Table, may amount to a meet deposition, a fit Evidence at the Bar.

In the one case the rule of Charity debarres it, in the other case the rule of
Justice warrants it.

It is not expressed, Thoushalt not bear witness at all, but Thoushalt not
bear false witness. Courts of judicature are not abrogated, condemned in my
text; but directed, regulated.

If no evidence could be produced, no innocence might be defended, no justice
executed.

Whilst God brands and sorbids a false testimony, he allows, injoyns a true.

My Text explodes a false testimony expressly at the first blush that is
pernicious, but secondarily, consequently, a false testimony that is officious
also. An Evidence is not to be byast by favor, but truth. It is taynted not by
the damage which accrewes to another, but the falsehood which the Witness
himselfutters. As the expression of the Act, so of the Object challenges our
consideration, recommended by a propriety of relation, Thy neighbor. There is
much emphaticall Divinity in Pronounes. The relation it self is presented in
the widest latitude of sense, though the softest dress for language. Reang, a
friend, a neighbor. A name that is a charm of truth. This expression
endeares, but restraines not.

A Neighbor, not for nearness of place, of situation; but of nature, of
constitution. According to the Fathers gloss, Every man is a neighbor to
every Omni homini proximus omnis homo, S. Aug.
man.

I have thus broken the shell, the better to discern the kernel in my Text. I
shall not critically enlarge any nicetyes of observations on the words, lest I
be censured, like Antoninus Pius, to be a cutter of cummin-seed; or to deal
with my Text, as the Levite (...).
did with his Concubine, to divide it in pieces: But I shall humbly conduct
your attention from the manner Judge. 19. 29.
of the expression, to the matter of the Prohibition.

The offense forbidden is a false testimony; which is brancht out to be
extrajudiciall, or judicial.

I shall entirely wave an extrajudiciall false testimony in discourse, without
the pale of justice, and shall confine my meditation to a judicial false
testimony, as most suitable to the occasion of this present assembly. God grant
the meditation may be as profitable as it is seasonable. Deus faciat tam
commodum quam accommodum. S. Aug. 1 Kings 18. verse. 44.


This judicial false testimony at the first view is not unlike the little
cloud ken'd by Eliah's servant; but it will spread like that cloud which
quickly darkened the heaven. This will eclipse the whole Orb, the Court of
judicature, and shower down drops of guilt to every corner of it: it extends to
the injustice of the Cause, to the injustice of the Evidence, to the injustice
of the Pleading, to the injustice of the Verdict, to the injustice of the
Decree, to the injustice of the Record.

As many of these parts as the time will conveniently permit, are the
boundaries of my present meditations.

This is a varyed gradation of transgression, a Climax, a ladder of sin: not
like Jacob's, that reached from earth to heaven, for blessed Angels ascending
and descending; but a ladder it is that reaches from earth to hell, for lewd
men descending in their corruptions, for damned Spirits ascending in their
temptations.

The first Round in this ladder is, the injustice of the cause.

A Generation of men there is, who with more grains of zeal then knowledge
disallow all Courts of judicature, all suits of Law without distinction,
without moderation. Whose inconsiderate tenet is like a desperate Chymicall
pill, that works not on the humors, but the spirits; that purges out of the
body politic, not corrupt manners, but precious laws.

It were piety exhaled, refined to phrensy, holiness strained to madness.

This were to sacrifice sheep to wolves, to invite those wolves to worry them;
to open a gap to profaneness, to licentiousness; to encourage, to tempt all
exorbitancies of tumults, of rapines, of murders; to leave the innocent (in the
eye of man) without defense, or redress, and the violent without check or
control.

It is truly alleged, Vengeance is Gods prerogative; and it is as truly
replied, that he executes it not only immediately, by himself, but mediately
also, by his Vice gerent the Magistrate (supreme and subordinate.) He is Gods
Deacon, to officiate for (...), Romans 13. 4.
him in the administration of justice; the fort of good men, to secure them
from the assaults and outrages of the evil. He bears not the sword in vain: the
Same v. 4.
sword being the emblem, the rhetoric of greater punishments, as the rod of
less; to which end both were carried before the Roman Consuls. In the one
Camer. in Or. pro Flacco.
and the other the Ordinance is Divine, but the exercise humane: God only can
empower, man may execute it. But not to scrue this string too far.

Though the lawfullnesse of Magistrates and Tribunalls may clearly, abundantly
be vindicated, demonstratively maintained, yet lawsuits are not indefinitely
and peremptorily to be justified; unless we will run counter with the Apostle,
There is utterly a fault among you, that you go to law one with another. 1 Corinthians. 6. 7.
The scandal of the Church at that time, the reflection upon Christian
religion, in exposing it by lawsuits to the censure of unbelievers, is recited
in the former verse (as Theophylact observes:) but in this 7. v. the Apostle
condemns the action it self, (being not rightly qualifyed) displayes it is guilt
in the fullest dimensions. Some Divines start a Criticisme to Melan. in 1 Cor.
6.
mince it, That it is not expressed (...) a default, but (...) a defect, a
diminution, a lessening of Christian perfection, an impotency, a frailty:
whereas both Greek words appear in the same uncomely hue, in the same unholy
strain, Romans 11. 12. There is an enhancing aggravation prefixed by the Apostle:
It is utterly a fault. An error, according to the Arabic, a sin, according to
the Syriac Translation. The softness of the Greek word savours of the
sweetnings of the Apostles style, not of the abating of the sin at Corinth. If
we render this (...) a defect, it is a want of humility, of charity in most
men: This defect will amount to a full default.

This diminutive, this lessening of grace (without special caution) will
administer fuel to the increasing of sin. This impotency, this spice of
weakness will quickly be heightened to impiety, to a strain of wickedness, to
be subdued by a man's own passions, to be a captive to a solemn revenge.

Moses entirely cancelled private revenge, but Levit. 19. 18.
Christ warily restrains the public: You have heard it has been said, An eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Matthew. 5. 38.


The law talionis of returning like for like, wherein the sin was made a
pattern for the doom, (a law established among the Jews, approved by the twelve
Exodus 21. 24, 25.


Tables, eminently reputed, and anciently practiced by Arist. 5. Eth. Gell. At.
N. l. 20. Justin. l. 4. tit. 4. de injuriis.


many nations,) did not allow the parties themseves to carve out their own
reparation, but the Magistrates only: But our blessed Savior pronounces a
repeal to this judicial Judicial redress, as to the formality of it, not
without a check to our fierce rancor, to our eager desire, and pursuit of such
rigor; But I say unto you, Resist not evil: not (...), according to the
Septuagints use of the word, forbids the Matt. 5. 39. Dr. Hamm. in his Annotat.
forwardness to prosecute in Law, to implead in judgment.

I shall not too confidently press this sense.

However it is unquestionably the excellency of Christianity, to overcome evil
with good, to conquer violence with patience; as fire is not quenched by fire,
but water.

As to our Saviors Charge: In no case resist evil with tumult, with force; in
all cases resist not evil with Law, with justice.

Suits of law are like bitter pills, that ought to be candyed with due
qualifications.

The first is, That the cause we contend in be just. 1.
Otherwise we design to abuse a Court of Law, of Equity; to make it a shelter
for violence, a sanctuary for mischief, a protection for oppression: we
endeavor to render Justice it self a Pander for malice, or avarice. A crime of
the deepest dye, since a Magistrate is Gods Substitute; it is to make God a
stale, a cloak for Satan, and, like the Witch of Endor, to present the Devil in
Samuel's mantle.

The Apostle lays it to the charge of some Christians at Corinth, That they
who were injurious, were querulous, contentious. They who oppressed,
dedefrauded, yet complained, impleaded. You your selves do wrong, defraud, and
that your brethren. 1 Cor. 6. 8.


Oecumenius observes a threefold aggravation: the first, not to be passive, to
be contentedly, patiently injured, (mentioned in the former verse;) the second,
to be active, to befiercely set to injure (whereas it is better, in the
judgment of the wisest Philosopher, Socrates.
to suffer wrong, then to offer it; the third aggravation is, (and that to your
brethren) to those that are endeared by the same womb, by the same dugs, (the
two Testaments.) A link of relation, a charm to chase away the suits of
Christians, especially such as are unjust, injurious.

Among the Romans, before any Action was suffered to be entered, the Plaintiff
was required to swear the Godw. Romans Ant. l. 3. s. 4.
justice of his cause. The Athenian practice was the (...) In Arist. Vesp.
Schol.
same.

An unjust cause as it deserves a severe censure, when it is manifested,
convicted; so also a speedy repulse, (if possible) not to be admitted.

As for the first qualification, the cause ought to 2.
be just (no unholy interest;) so for the second qualification, it ought to be
substantial, weighty, not for every trivial petty flander, not for every
light damage, every slight trespass.

The Apostles negative question, (Why do you not 1 Cor. 6. 7.
rather take wrong? why do you not suffer your selves to be defrauded?) amounts
to a positive determination. Some indignities, neglects are to be brooked, some
injuries, some offenses to be smothered, rather then suits of Law are to be
prosecuted.

In our Saviors first instance of patience, though a personal provocation be
tendered (to smite thee on Matthew. 5. 39.
the one cheek;) yet a hot reparation is not counseled, but a settled
composition of mind (to turn the other also:) importing a readiness to receive
a second affront, Isid. Pel. l. 2. ep. 6.
rather then to revenge the first.

In the second instance of patience, (in the next Verse. 40.
verse) the scene is expressly laid in judicature (though Beza labors, and
wriggles to shift it off else where:) But our English translation is agreeable
to that of Erasmus, and the vulgar Latin, and renders the genuine force of the
Original; And if any will sue thee at the (...). Is. Casaub. (...).
Law, and take away thy coat (thy meaner, inner garment) let him have thy cloak
also (thy better, thy outer (...).
garment.)

In a case of so inconsiderable importance, as ordinary apparel, better it
were to quit a double vestment, then to espouse a single quarrel, then to
engage in one suit. Better in point of conscience, as to the next world:
perhaps better also in point of prudence, as to this.

These instances are not special counsels only, as to the excellency of
perfection (in the Romish gloss) but general precepts, as to the fincerity of
Religion. Which will afford us this doctrinall Observation, That small wrongs
are not commendable, (I had almost said) not warrantable grounds of suits and
quarrels.

Among the Jews there were peculiar Officers, Deuteronomy. 1. 15. Car. Sig. de Rep,
Heb. l. 7. 6. 7.
(significantly entitled by the Septuagint (...)) who were commissioned to
admit or reject all causes; without whose approbation, and recommendation to
the Judges, none were allowed to be determined.

Of this use, not without an affinity both in name and nature, were the (...)
among the Athenians; who were the keys of justice, to lock out Sigon. de Rep.
Atheniensi.
all frivolous, vexatious suits.

These are unholy blemishes, unseemly, unworthy disturbances, and scandalls to
Christian Courts.

As the Cause ought to be just, and weighty, so the 3.
mind ought to be calm and serene, not embittered with gall, not clouded with
rancour.

The defect of the necessary grace of Charity stains 1 Cor. 13.
other spiritual virtues, much more temporal jarrs.

Even in a legal contention, when any suit of law is started, by reason of the
temptation of Satan, and the corruption of a man's own heart, there is
ordinarily a bosom leven of wrath, a spice of secret spleen, which is not
destitute of a train of other guilt. Where S. James 3. 16.
there is envying and strife, there is confusion, and every evil work: There is
perturbation, trouble (as (...)
. Erasmus renders it) according to the Original, a discomposure, a disorder of
the soul, a tumult of the passions.

Certainly he is much damnifyed by his most successful suit, who gains his
cause, (be it his debt, his farm, his patrimony) who yet discards his charity,
and consequently forfeits his Christianity.

As in suits of law there ought to be no malicious, so no covetous tincture.

In the cause propounded to our Savior, for dividing an inheritance betwixt
two brethren, (A cause that, in the judgment of some Expositors, had been
bandyed in several Courts) at last he that was worsted in all, and injured,
having appealed to our Savior, Christ does not order a Writ of partition as a
Judge, but read a lecture of mortification as a Prophet, Take heed and beware
of covetousness. According Luke 12. 15.
to an ancient Greek edition, according to the Syriac and Vulgar Latin
translations, it is, beware of every covetousness. The caution thus rendered is
fitly proportioned to the variety of the occasion. Though one brother only
were injurious in the eye of the world, yet both (in several strains) were
covetous, irreligious in the sight of God. The one unjustly detained what was
not his own (his brothers portion, his August. in Ser. 196.
moiety;) the other too eagerly pursued what was his own: whose thoughts were
more eagerly bent, how to be redrest in his cause, then how to be reclaimed in
his soul.

Our blessed Savior diverts, takes off his edge from the interests of
possession, to the interests of Salvation.

Lastly, though the cause be just, weighty, and conscionable, the mind calm,
pure, and charitable in a suit of Law, yet this ought to be the last refuge,
That Omnia videntus prius tentanda esse, quam ad judicia disceda mus. P. Mart.
in L. Com. cl. 4.
there be an endeavor, a private treaty, a trial for peace, before a public
jarre, a suit, a trial in law.

Our bare affection to a reconcilement is not sufficient, without an active
solicitation. The Apostles word denotes not a bare following of peace, but an
Heb. 12. 14. (...).
eager pursuing, (not to be waved for the hazard of fortune, offame, oflife it
self, in the judgment of Origin.)

The motion of most men is fleet from it: but haste toward it, being clogged
and fettered with pride and rancor.

We cannot unload, unmanacle ourselves, unless before suits of law be
commenced, all engines, and expedients for prevention be assayed. As candid
Conferences: Both parties are oft-times bitterly enraged against each other,
because they understand not aright each other; they contend, because they
converse not. Abraham the more innocent, venerable person, condescended to
entreat his inferior Lot (whom he had educated, obliged) to court him with the
charm of their relation, with the rhetoric of an Hebraisme, Let there be no
strife betwixt me and thee, Genes. 13. 8.
betwixt my heardsmen and thy heardsmen, for we are brethren. It was no
complementall condescension: he quits not only titular respects, but real
advantages also; tenders the option, the choice of the soil, of the right hand
or the left, of the North or South, (according to the Chaldee Paraphrase.) They
are no sons of Abraham, who will not quit the least grain of respect, the
least punctilio of right and advantage; who are devoted to an implacable
spleen, wedded to an irreconcilable suit; who with the greatest hate and
expense, prosecute the least wrong and interest.

If candid conferences, calm discourses be not effectual to conjure out this
evil spirit of contention, yet unpartiall references may. The Apostles question
sounds a reprehension: Is it so? is there not a wise man amongst 1 Cor. 6. 5.
you? not one that shall be able to judge betwixt his brethren? Not as touching
one empowered to doom, commissioned to sentence; but is there none qualifyed to
discern, to intercede, to arbitrate, that (...).
private variances be not vainly and unnecessarily improved to public suits?
To be resolutely averse from arbitration, be men's causes never so just and
pious, argues the spirits of such persons to be peevish, and contentious.

They are like Salamanders, that cannot live but in flames of debate. (...)
Suits of Law are their darling delights, and designs. Their badge, Hom. Iliad.
(...).
and at last their entire treasure is a mere bundle of vexatious papers; the
character of a phrantick person in Theophrastus. But I forbear. This first
meditation, Theoph. (...).
of the injustice of the Cause, has too far transported me, which being once
embraced, (as sin must be fortifyed by sin) will be seconded by the
injustice of the Evidence, my next Consideration.

When Numerius confidently disclaimed a Crime Amm. Marcel. Hist. l. 18.
that he was charged with before Julian the Emperor, Delphidius tartly
objected, That if to deny, were to be guiltless, no man would be a Delinquent.
But the Emperor gravely and acutely retorted, That if to be accused, were to
be guilty, no man could be innocent. It is the Evidence alone that can give
light to justice to acquit, or condemn.

When the Evidence is indirect, it insensibly sets a false by ass on the
Verdict, and the Decree. For the degrees of justice are not unlike those of
concoction: An error in the first degree is not to be corrected or redressed
in the second, or the third. A false witness misguides, betrays the Jury, and
the Judge. He is an hammer, a sword, and an arrow (says Solomon.) An Prove. 25.
18.
Hammer to the Judge, whom he stounds and amazes, that he cannot distinguish
betwixt truth and falsehood: a Sword to the party that corrupts him, a sword to
fight for him, and a sword to pierce his soul: an Bernard.
Arrow to the innocent party, a poisoned arrow to fester, to wound him (with a
ranckling venom) in his life, his fortune, or his reputation. The consequences
of a false testimony being so pernicious, witnesses are not loosely to be
credited, or admitted.

In point of quantity of number, it is a rule in the Civil, and in the
Canon Law, One witness is no witness. Decret. tit. de test.

Mat. 18. 16.


It is Gods own statute, In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
shall be established.

In point of quality, in reference to Religion, the Schoolmen and Canonists
offer a Demurror against those whose infidelity is professed (as manifest
unbelievers Alex. Al. S. Th. p. 3. qu. 43. Aqu. 2a. 2ae. qu. 70. Art. 3. Greg.
did. 2. q. 1.
,) against those whose impiety is convicted (as notorious scandalous
miscreants.) In reference to Reason they debar distracted persons, Idiots,
and Children. Though Seneca's fancy, more ingenious then judicious, allows the
age of seven years to be capable of tendering an Evidence: because Children are
then old enough to observe, and too young to deceive, to dissemble. Upon this
rational account, because of the ordinary defect of weight of judgment, not
only the School-Doctors and Canonists Aquin. ib. can. did. 32. q. 5.
, but the Jewish Rabbis, have in some cases excepted against the female sex to
be Witnesses, in Car. Sig. de R. Heb. l. 6. c. 6.
regard of their vehement swinge, and excess of passion; their love being
prove to be too fond and indulgent to preserve, their hate apt to be too fierce
and violent to destroy.

In consideration of disaffection, the divinity of the School and Canon
excludes Enemies from the Aquin. ib. Non idonei testes quibus imperari potest,
ut testes fiant. Can. did. 4. q. 3. Ne inopes sint, Greg. did. 2. q. 1.
capacity of being Witnesses; in respect of condition, Servants, and others
whose relations are temptations to corrupt them, as also those whose
necessityes render them pliable to be molded for the impressions of mercenary
false testimonies, (Wherein I shall not track the scruples of the School, but
the sins of the Court) in concealing, in mincing of truths, in venting
untruths at the bar, in bolting out light uncertain conjectures, for firm and
certain evidences.

Whereas it was a Grecian provident Law, That ears perk not for witnesses,
That we make not the (...). Plutarch.
loose reports of others our stanch and sober testimonies. The Jewish
Iudicatories admit none but eyewitnesses. Some false testimonies are notorious
Talm. lib. sh^phetim.
without paint, or disguise. Such was the double deposition against Naboth; He
has blasphemed God, and 1 Kings 21. 13.
the King.

Others are more covert, when truth is presented but in a false dress and
accent. Such was the evidence against our Savior; This fellow said, I am able
to Matthew. 26. 61*
destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days. An evidence
misinterpreted, misrelated. It ill becomes a Witness to be a Sophister. To
equivocate, to dissemble in ordinary conference is heinous; but in judiciary
evidence monstrous. Subtle doubling expressions, dark winding reservations of
witnesses, have perhaps been the lewd practice of all Ages, but the owned tenet
only of the Romish Casuifts of the last Age. The guilt of a false witness is
much enhanced by his guile. He is worse then a murderer. A murderer destroys
the body natural, but a false witness banes the body politic, (the
administration of justice, which depends on the truth of witnesses, being the
sinews, nay the vital spirits of a Commonwealth.) To raise this to a higher
key of guilt. A false witness is worse then an Idolater. An Idolater makes an
idol a God; but a false witness makes God an idol, makes a direct mockery of
the Deity, as not discerning, regarding his falsehood. He seems to disown, to
outbrave Gods omnipotence, his omniscience, to deride, as it were to summon him
to descend from his throne in heaven, to countenance, to abett his villainy on
earth at the bar. Whilst a false witness appeals to God as the supreme Judge,
he presumes, he tempts, he dares his vengeance.

The false witnesses who conspired against Naboth are decyphered children of
Belial, Imps of Satan, because 1 Kings 21. 13
of the imitation of him, because pliable to be seduced at the beck of each
lewd temptation. It is emphatically expressed, of Belial, that in Hebrew
signifie's without a yoke: False witnesses are not yoked, restrained, not by
the rule of truth, not by the equity of justice, not by the piety of an oath.
This offense is a threefold cord of guilt, not easily unravelled Aq. 2a. 2ae.
q. 70. A. 4.
; it is twisted by a lie, an injury, a perjury. An Oath being the end of all
Controversies, is the seal Heb. 6. 16.
of depositions to ratify them; it is the sacred stamp of religion, not to be
soyled, falsified, profaned.

The Evidences of the Grecian witnesses were Alex. ab Alex. l. s. c. 10.
sworn at their Altars, (as a holy tie, and solemnity.) But Xenocrates was
called back from the Altar by the Laert. in vita Xenocrat.
Areopagites, who accounted his assertion a sufficient asseveration, because of
the strictness of his life, they esteemed his word as valid as an Oath; who
may rise up in judgment against professed Christians, whose oaths are less
credible then the bare word of a Heathen. Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it
in the 2 Samuel 1. 20.
streets of Ascalon.

It is Gods strict charge, Put not thy hand with the wicked, to be an
unrighteous witness. That is, says Exodus 23. 1.
Vatablus, Swear not unjustly; it being the customary Vatabl. in Exodus 23. 1.
practice of the Jews, ancient and modern, in their Oaths to lay their hands
on the Thorah, (the books of the law of Moses) to that end retained in their
Courts. The Ceremony is thence derived to Christianity: But let it be more then
an empty Ceremony, a heedlesse formality. When the Witness (or the Iuror)
lays one hand on the Bible, let him lay the other on his heart; lest if he
faulter in what he swears, he renounce his portion, the comforts, the ravishing
mercies of the Gospel; lest he contract for, lest he inherit all the menaces,
the terrifying judgments of the Law.

The Proverbiall passage, (...). Testimoniorum religionem and fidem nunquam
ista natio coluit. Tull. in Orat. pro L. Flac.
Lend me a testimony, was a foul stain to the Greek nation. Perjuries are
ungracious lones, or boons, to gratify any man with villainy. But the slurre is
not confined to Greece. The British feuds, and quarrels of persons and family
es have in former Ages been prosecuted with swords, but in latter times with
suits and perjuries: the tumults being less, but the crimes greater. Pardon my
just indignation. I wish from my soul, it were a scandal to aver it.

Let not any inducement of affection or obligation, any tie of alliance, or
dependence extend further then Pericles bounds, to the Altars; not to be
endeared (...). Plut. in Apo. phtheg.
to any so far, as in his behalf to be perjured; not to imagine to acquit our
selves true friends by being false witnesses; not to purchase the favor of a
mortal man with the frown, the doom of an immortal God.

The violation of justice by a false witness, the contempt of the religion of
an Oath has God for a Iurisjurandi contempta reliligio satis habet Deum
ultorem. In C. de reb. cred. et jur. l. 2.
sufficient avenger.

Let not any wonder, that a speedy earthquake does not swallow up, that a
fierce thunderbolt does not crush and blast a false witness, to chastise his
insolency: He sins against an invisible God, and has an invisible
punishment, the stings and lashes of a guilty conscience; which being seared,
and pacifyed, this very serenity, this calmnesse is a presage of a succeeding
low ring tempest. A false witness is recited among the abominations of the
Lord: He shall not Prove. 19. 5.
escape unpunisht. He may fence for a time from a humane vengeance, but a
divine shall in the end oretake him. He shall not be clean, (says Vatablus;)
His offense shall be imputed, the deformity of his iniquity shall be presented,
the stain, the horror of it discovered at the day of Judgment. If these
considerations scare us not from the injustice of the Evidence, the next refuge
and prop is the injustice of the Pleading; which directs my humble address to
you the Gentlemen of the long Robe.

To vilify your title, your Office, were in some measure to derogate from the
sacred Trinity. God the Father is titled Baalrib, the pleader. It was David's
Psalm. 119. Psalm. 35. 1.
humble suit to be Gods Client: Plead thou my cause. God the Son is recommended
to us by the endearment of this name and notion: We have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: A Mediator 2 John 2. 1.
for intercession to plead, as well as redemption to merit for us. The Holy
Ghost is decyphered (...). A word which in it is genuine signification John 15.
20. Vox Graeca frequens apud Iudaeos in versione Chaldaica, and apud
Thalmudicos, non pro consolatore, sed pro eo qui causa^ agi^ Grot. Quod Graece
(...), hoc Latin dicitur Advocatus. Francoford. Con. vol. 3.
more properly denotes the Pleader, then the Comforter. He pleads, makes
intercession for us, with the choicest flowers of Rhetoric, with groans that
cannot be uttered. The truth of this criticisme is honored with the
approbation of a Council.

To question the expediency of your function, were to control the wisdom of
all or most nations which have owned principles of piety or civility.

There is no man that has a more meet respect for your persons, nor a more
venerable esteem of your profession, then my self. Yet there is no calling can
justify the unjust practices of them that undertake it. As I am not to learn
whose message I ought to deliver in this place, so I am not to doubt, but that
your piety conducts you hither, not to censure the Preacher, but to practice
the Sermon; not to look up to the pulpit, as to a stage, for the pleasing of an
itching ear, but for the searching, the lancing of an ulcer'd soul, of a
fester'd tongue, if any be; for caution, for prevention, lest any be, by the
injustice of pleading. A varied injustice: By being engaged in more causes then
can sufficiently be discussed, or dexterously managed; (a course resented, and
taxed by Heathen Rhetoricians) Tull. in l. 2. de Orat.
Were Westminster the Scene, I should here with due reverence to the Sages of
the Law crave Quincil. Inst. l. 12. c. 10
leave to add, to amplify for illustration; By being Intelligences in diverse
spears, pleaders in several Courts, as opportunityes invite, whereby even in
the justest, weightyest interests, especially by the most eminent
practitioners, whilst one Client is supported, another at the same time at a
little distance may be unfortunately distressed; I say not betrayed, because not
entirely, voluntarily neglected, and yet perhaps by this occasion irrecoverably
ruined; Or by ingenious (perhaps injurious, irreligious) cavills to spin out
causes to the burdensome expense, the attendance of Clients. I humbly offer it
to your mature consideration. Since there is a portion of benediction, of
adoption expressed for those that compose jarres and differences, Mat. 5. 9.
Nec licet advocato ex industria jurgium protrahere. Alex. Alens. S. Th. p. 3.
q. 44. m. 2.
Blessed are the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God;
they shall be owned, crowned for such:) by the Topic proof, the rule of
Contraries, there is intimated a worse condition and relation for such who are
isntrumental, straining their wits unnecessarily to create, to protract, to
multiply suits; to be like bellows, to blow, to kindle these flames, to fan,
to heighten them. A Advocatos excommunicamus omnes qui -- vel ut contra
justitiam processus causae diutius suspendatur. Ox^n. Syn. a. 1222. Magd. Cent.
13. cap. 9. de Syn.
dilatory plea for suspense of justice has been sentenced by a Synod with
excommunication. But of this only (...) on the by.

The main injustice of pleading consists in deserting, in quitting a good
cause; in asserting, in maintaining a bad. The former was the blemish of
Demosthenes, who was muffled with the bribe of the adverse Plut. in vit.
Demosth.
party, disengaged, and silenced by the rich present of Harpalus; which
occasioned a tart Sarcasme, that his disease was not angina, but argentina.
There needs no multiplying glass of a Rhetorical aggravation to present the
bulk, or hue of this guilt. The title Tul. 2. Philip.
of a prevaricator (a treacherous Advocate, that warps in pleading) is the
blackest stain in the Civil law. Vlpian inserts such in the most infamous
vicious list. L. Athletas. pen. de his qui not. l. 1.. qui depos. de fall.
I shall forbear to press any dissuasive arguments (as to this horrid
injustice) upon the same account as Solon and Romulus did to enact penalties
against parricides, as presuming there are no such offenders; no Plut. in vitae
Romuli.

Tull. pro Sex. Rosc.


Christian face so steeled to own, no conscience so feared for to practice such
perfidiousnesse of wickedness.

I shall insist only on the latter branch of injustice, in vindicating, in
pleading for a wicked cause. Whilst the misinformation of the Client misguides
the Counselor, this exempts an unjust plea from guilt. But when the cause
pleaded for is manifestly injurious, the pleading it selfis manifestly
ungracious. This is to imitate the perfection, or corruption rather of the
Greek Sophisters; To make the better Tull. in lib. de cl. Orat.

Quint. Inst. l. 12. c. 1.


cause the worse, the worse the better. It was the observed eminent faculty,
and infamy of Carneades.

It may pass for art and skill, but it must pass for sin also, to smooth and
varnish the deformed complexion of a depraved interest. In this nature a
painted cause is more irreligious then a painted face. Indirect proofs,
patheticall strains, and proems were not allowed in pleadings before the
Areopagites (the Lucian. in. A^achar.
renowned Athenian Judges.) Though a false flourish cannot seel the eyes, not
delude prudent cautelous Judges; yet it may cast a mist, and beguile ignorant
credulous Iuryes, which commonly are kneaded out of the dregs of the people; such
as wait for empanellings, as the impotent person, the Cripple, did at the Pool
of Bethesda for the troubling of the waters. But not John 5. 7.
to digress. This false flourish is not consistent with the morality of
Heathens, much less reconcilable with the integrity, the severity of
Christians.

The Gloria Romanae, Quintiliane, togae. Mart.
great Master of the Roman Rhetoric (Quintilian) Quint. Instit. l. 1. in
prooe. l. 12. c. 7.
qualifyes his Orator to be a good man, wittingly and willingly to plead good
causes only. It became a great disrepute to Plut. in vit. Cicer.
Hortensius, notwithstanding a great fee, that he appeared in the defense of
the rapine and Sacrilege of Verres. Plato in Gorg. and Phaed.
Plato sharply censures those who would separate justice from Rhetoric, truth
from pleading, innocence from eloquence. Though it were the professed, it was
the disgusted, the branded Paradox of Quint. Instit. l. 2. c. 15.
Cornelius Celsus, That the Advocates design ought not to be the pursuit of
equity, but victory; not to regard the better cause, but to have the better in
the cause, to countenance his Client, to be his Champion, be the cause right or
wrong. Whereas it was the honor of Tull. de ^lar. orat.
Brutus, That his tongue kept correspondence with his heart, he ever approved
that Cause which he defended. The pleading of Scaurus was as solemn, as
sincere, as a deposition. I shall add only the luster of Phocion's upright
resolution, which set such an edge on his eloquence, that when he argued, it
was apprehended, and dreaded, as a sword for to cut, and destroy the most
vigorous false pleadings. I muster up these instances of the uncircumcised in
the Temple, with no vain affectation, but I consider to whom I propound them,
to literate, judicious persons, whose ingenuity may excite their blush, and
anguish, by the recollection of these Heathen Worthies; who though they could
not sufficiently acquit themselves, yet may serve abundantly to condemn others,
who are accountable not only for the bare talent of Nature, of Reason, but
that of Grace also, of Religion.

As the injustice of pleading is exploded by the morality of the Heathens, so
much more by the divinity of the Schoolmen. To Alex. Al. S. Th. p. 3. q. 44. m.
3. Aqu. 2a. 2ae. qu. 71. Ar. 3.
afford advice, assistance, defense to an unjust cause, is in their opinion to
cooperate, to share directly, eminently in the guilt, though but indirectly,
obscurely in the first wrongful fact. Though an oppressing, defrauding Client
affords the womb to the injustice; yet the pleading Counselor nurseth it
(says Dom. Soto de Inst. l. 5. qu. 8. Art. 3.
Soto,) he dandles, he cockers this pestilent brat. The Schoolmen stating this
practice to be an evident print of iniquity, of injury, peremptorily Scotus in
3. sent. did. 15. Aqu. ibid. Dom. Soto ib. Passio, consiliu^, consensus,
palp^, recursus, Participans, mutus, non obstans, non manifestans. The
Schoolmen in these verses sort, and state the cases of restitution.
prescribe restitution.

Indeed if the point of transgression be granted, that of restitution is not to
be disputed. This was the fruit of Zacchaeus conversion: if I have taken any
thing from any man by false acusation, if I have Ei (...).
acted the Sycophant: The phrase is borrowed from Schol. in Aristophanis. Plut.
Sycophantoe illi Athenienses falso criminabantur lucri causa. Piscator.
Athens, where the action was ordinary, a familiar calumny, falsely to charge
men for conveighing away of Figs, that were prohibited to be transported
thence. Though the occasion was special, yet our English translation is not
improperly general, Luke 19. 8.
If I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore to him
fourfold.

If the jnjustice of the cause appears not in the first engagement for the
Client, but in the prosecution of the suit, Aqu. 2a. 2ae. qu. 71. Art. 3. in
Concl. Licet non sit prodendus qui bona fide ad alium confugit, non tamen est
defendendus: quiae qui defendit delinquentem maledictus est apud Deum and
homines. Gabr. in Collect. l. 4. did. 15. qu. 2.
the secret of the cause is not to be betrayed, nor yet an apparent injustice
to be promoted, pleaded for; but the cause is either absolutely to be deserted,
renounced, or a private composure, a reconcilement betwixt the parties litigant
to be endeavored. Gerson Notetur hic juramenium quale debitum est praestari
per Advocatos, -- praesertim ut nihil agant, vel soveant, quod injustum esse
vel crediderint ab initio, vel postmodum compererint. Gers. in 2a. p. Op. in
ser. in Conc. Rem.
recites and recommends the Advocates solemn Oath to this effect.

As the determinations of the Schoolmen are severe in dooming all pleas in
unjust causes, so are the invectives of the Fathers of the Church sharp in
censuring them. Clem. Alex. in Strom. lib. 1.
Clemens of Alexandria rejects this contentious fallacious faculty, brands it,
with Plato, for a vicious skill, with Aristotle, for a pernicious rapine; He
blasts it with the menace of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 1. 19.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, I will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent. The most searching judgment, if unseason'd with
Grace, will quickly be tainted, insensibly putrified, in the end entirely
frustrated. To be an acute, polite Sophister, to enwrap a false plea in a fair
elegant dress, is to Isid. Pelusiot. l. ep. 67.

Isid. Pelusiot. l. 4. ep. 60.


temper poison in a golden vial; to borrow the resemblance of Isidore
Pelusiot: Whilst (says he) an Advocate vayls, justifies another offender, he
unmasks, condemns himself, discovers the depravation of his own heart, in the
corruption, the dissimulation of his tongue. Nay, Pelusiot, transported with
this meditation, conjectures this trim artifice of injustice to have been a
special occasion of the Apostles large hyperbolicall expression, The S. James
3. 6.
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: Even in this restriction, this
application of Pelusiot; This little member Isid. Pel. l. 4. ep. 10.
kindles the greatest contentions, combustions; and it self either commits, or
shelters and encourages all the iniquities, the enormities in the world. (...).
Theoph. in 1. c. ep. ad Romans ult. verse.
Theophylact determines this malady incurable. To glance from the Greek on the
Latin Fathers: S. Austin complains of the plausible lure of this injustice;
Unhallowed wiles, and windings of subtletyes in the managing, the pleading of
unjust causes, being Hoc laudabilior, quo fraudulentior. Aug. Confess. l. 3. c.
3.
reputed and magnified for singular parts and excellencyes.

To omit other copious testimonies, and reproofs. Bernard runs variety of sharp
descant on this impure note of guilt. Hi sunt quidocuerunt linguas suas loqui
mendacium, diserit adversus justitiam, eruditi pro falsitate, sapientes ut
faciant malum, eloquentes ut impugnent veru^, obstruunt judicii vias. Bern. de
Cons. l. 2. c. 10.
Who have disciplined, trained their tongues in lies, being quaint against
justice, learned to promote falsehood, prudent to commit evil, eloquent to
oppose truth, who revile innocence, obstruct all judiciary passages, block up
the channells.

This character may (I fear) sound a Satyr in your ears. As for modern
Divines, I know none, Reformed or Romish, that is an advocate to defend, to
approve this injustice of Advocates. But if the tenet of the Schoolmen, the
Fathers, be superciliously rejected by any as a fable, yet the sacred Scripture
must be acknowledged for a rule, an Oracle. This is the last and chiefest test
for to examine the injustice of pleading.

It is Gods express charge: Keep thee far from a Exodus 23. 7.
false matter. This distance imports defiance. As an indulgent countenance, a
connivence on the Bench, so a smooth, oily defense at the Bar, is too near an
approach to a false matter; It is a step of the same sin, a progress of the
same injustice, though not in the same path. An unjust plea is a bait to an
unjust decree It was Iehu's rebuke of Iehosaphat, a question that pierced like
Ehud's dagger; 2 Chro. 19. 2.
Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore the
wrath of the Lord is upon thee.

It is according to the Original, An impiodecuit te far opem? Nov. ex Hebr.
transl. apud Vatabl.
Has it become thee to aid the wicked? As if no assistance of an ungodly
person (in an ungodly enterprise) were decent, or innocent. Ei (...).
If thou succourest the sinner (as the Scptuagint translate it.) The legal
pleading for sin is a signal, principal succouring of the sinner. Whilst the
offender is abetted, argued for; the party offended is doubly injured. It is
related by David as a cognizance, an evidence, a special note, a property of a
true member of Gods Church, Psalm. 15. 5.
not to take reward against the innocent. This is Non folum Indices, aut
prim^res rerumpublicarum iniquos vult Vates intelligi, sed eos quoque qui
injustas sovent and protrabunt lites, compendii sui causa. Foleng. Mant. in 15.
Ps. ult. ^
not to be appropriated to the Judge, but to be enlarged to the Solicitor, the
Attorney, eminently to the Counselor. They receive unjust reward against the
innocent who daub, palliate Vt malis causis patrocinium accommoden^. Calv. in
15. Ps. ult. verse.
unjust causes, by their favors, their counsels, their pleadings. Nesimilis
Iudae efficiatur, qui accepto argenti pondere vendidit innocente. Hier. in 15.
Ps. vlt. v.
S. Jerome strains this to be a resemblance of the offense of Judas.

It is the description of an unsanctified person, Psalm. 36. 3.
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit. A terse false pleading is
woven with this mingled thread. He devises mischief on his bed, (in the 4. v.)
He contriveth it in his Cubile est cor. Aug. in Ps. 36. In cubile (i. e.) cord
eoru^. Hier. Tempus nocturnum in concinnandis flagitiis consumunt. Fol. Mant.
in Psalm. 36. 4.
heart, or it is his night study, his perplexity on his Couch, how to be
prepared to enter into the lists in this quarrel, how to fortify, to shroud
and adorn this work of darkness in the daylight. He sets himself in a way
that is not good, in 4. v. Isid. Pelus. l. 4. Ep. 16.
Pelusiot applies it to an expert Advocate, who is ready to engage in an
ungodly cause, to help, to vindicate, to acquit it.

The close is in the same verse, he abhors not evil, or more agreeably to
the Original, Malum non abjicit. Nov. ex Hebr. Transl. apud Vatabl.
he rejects not evil. He that pleades for any crime, neither sufficiently
detests, nor discards it.

It is yet a more rowsing, terrifying impeachment: Ps. 50. 18.
When thou saw a thief, then thou (...) in Sept. tr. Currebas in N. Tr.
Curris in Vat. Acquiescis ei in Iun. and Tr. translat. Modi varii currendi cum
fure recita^tur a Gul. Altiss. l. 4. q. 2.
rannest (or thou consenteast) with him. He who oppresses, defraudeth, (who
detaineth a just debt, says Philo) is a thief. If thou see him, or as soon as
thou see him craving thy defense, if thou runnest not with him to the bar to
support his cause by pleading, that's Valterotz; yet thou may consent to him
in the chamber by thy advice, that is Valteretz. Quantum ad Prophetae mentem,
parum interest utrum vis legamus; utru^que est probabile. Calv. in Ps. 50. v.
19.
Both readings are solemnly allowed by Interpreters. I presume your ingenious
souls do here take the cue, and tacitly object, That the Psalmists lecture is
the Levites portion, a manifest bill of enditement of the Ministers guilt. Your
thoughts may belike quivers fraught with arrows of retortions, That to preach
false doctrines for lucre is more heinous, then to plead false causes; That it
is more prodigious, in S. Ignatius language, to be (...), to adulterate, to
huckster it in the Gospel, then the law, to abuse the message of Christ, then
the cause of the Client, to make ungracious merchandise of religion then
justice; and that an unholy, corrupt, mercenary tongue in the pulpit, is much
more ulcerous, then at the bar. I abundantly confess it is, and that the
Prophets charge does eminently appertain to us of the Ministry: and were I to
preach to those of my own function, I should accent it with much more
sharpness then I shall to you. And in the first place I desire to press it
with the greatest severity to my own soul, recollecting Epiph. l. 2. To. 1.
Haer. 64.
Origens tears, and S. Austins Videtis fratres cum quo tremore ista dicamus.
August. in Ps. 50. ( suo calculo 49.)
trembling in the recital of this Psalm. But whilst it endites the Minister,
it acquits not the Counselor. The reproof is like a Mirror, which being
distinctly looked into, will discover disfigured lineaments of your profession,
as well as mine. Do but withdraw the curtain, -- Horat.
Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur: -- and I may close as Nathan did with
David, 2 Samuel 11. 7.
Thou art the man. ps. 50. 19.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, give full swinge, let the reins loose by
a liberty, a licentiousness of wickedness of a subtle voluble tongue. Thy
tongue frames deceit (in the same verse;) it Illo male agente. tu nequiter ac
dolose been agere collaudabas. Hier. Lingua tua concinnat d^los. N. Tr. (...)
Sept. tr.
smooths, it tricks, it polishes a cunning false plea; it has quilted it
round, according to the Septuagints expression. Ps. 50. 20. Sedebas, i. e.
diligenter faciebas. volebas ibi occupari. Aug. Sedendo alludere videtur ad
judicia, ubi in foro ipso bonos and simplices calumniantur improbi. Calv. in
Is. 50.
Thou sit and speak against thy brother. As if judiciary detraction were
an ordinary occupation. The act of calumny at the bar is vicious; much more the
art, the custom, the habit. It is a blemish in a martial profession; much
more in a legal.

The Baptists Catechism to the Soldiers, Luke 3. 14.
andAccuse no man falsely, is in Beza's judgment Magis togatae quam armatae
militiae convenit. Beza.
more applyable to Courts, then Camps, to the bandings, the clashings of
pleadings, then of swords. Neither the bar nor gown is priviledg'd for slander,
( Vir clarissimus Epictetus causidicorum more prolapsus -- togae forensis
honor privatus est. Symmach. l. 5. cp. 41.
Epictetus, a most famous Advocate, upon this account, for a single lapse of a
virulent aspersion, being excluded from both.) It is a tincture of the
Rhetoric of hell. A false impeachment, though never so accurate, is a glimpse
of the Hesychius illustrates (...). Erasmus derives (...) from (...) traducere,
descrre, in Annotat. 4. Mat.
name and the nature of the Devil. It appears in a blacker aspect to revile, to
traduce innocence, then to defend, to flourish an offense. However either
practice has an impure stamp, a destructive effect; it is the varyed artifice
of sin and Satan. Isaiah's sacred Rhetoric disswades from each: Isa. 1. 17.
Quaerite judicium, i. e. disquirite diligenter jus causae. Iudices and patronos
alloquitur. Dirigite negotia oppressi. Vatabl. in 1. Is. 17.
Seek judgment, (sift out the equity of a cause, abett no unjust quarrel)
relieve the oppressed, (be his director, his Counselor) judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow. Their desolate condition when injured, is most to be
vindicated, succored.

The same Prophet records a woe for them Isa. 5. 23. Qui justif. impium
phrasis Hebraica est: Qui dicunt causam impii esse justam. Vatabl. in Is. 5.
23. Non causas, sed donae considerans. Hier. in Is. 5. 23.
that justify (plead for) the wicked for a reward.

Though it has past as a traditionall conjecturall opinion, that the damned
rich man (in the Gospel) was an Advocate, and that he was most tortured,
enflamed in that member, wherein he had most transgressed, (that the punishment
might be proportioned to the guilt;) yet I shall not seek light out of a cloud
for the manifestation of this injustice, nor strain a proof out of a parable to
excite the detestation of it. The restraint of it is written by the Apostle as
in a sunbeam: Ephesians. 5. 11.
have no fellowship with the fruitless works of darkness. Subtle pleadings
are too gross interminglings, too manifest blendings with covert trespasses,
with mysteries of iniquities. Oecumenius glosseth every branch of wickedness
to be a work of darkness (in the Apostles phrase.) To communicate with Zanch.
in Ephesians. 5. 11.
such, is not only to cooperate, but either to counsel, or to countenance, to
connive, to conceal. The antithesis (the opposition) expressed undenyably
clears it; but rather reprove them. (...) denotes a discovery, not a disguise;
a rebuke, not a defense. If to be seconds and combatants in unjust civil
quarells, be not to be partakers of other men's offenses, to swerve from, to
violate the Apostles rule, I must confess, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
I understand not what is. Said I, to partake? It is to exceed, to improve, to
outstrip their offenses by a further start of unholy proficiency.

S. Paul having recited a catalogue of miscreants, he sums up all, They not
only do the same, but have Romans 1. last v.
pleasure in them that do them. They associate themselves, according to the
Syriac; are linkt with, entertained, interested, advantaged by those that do
them, are Advocates in their behalf: so Beza and Erasmus interpret it; so
Theophylact expounds it by (...), they plead for those that do them. This is an
aggravation beyond the horror of the act, for to evade the last earthly refuge
of injury, to elude the solemn redress of justice. The offense argued for may
be a sudden passion, a surprizall; but the arguing it self is a deliberate
design: The one may be a private Qui aliorum defendit errorem multo amplius
damnabili^r illis qui errant. Gabr. in coll. l. 4. did. 15. qu. 2.
injury, the other is a public injustice, a more eminent sin and scandal.
This is for to hide an unseemly scar or wen in another man's face, and to
discover a worse blemish, a wound, an ulcer in ones own.

The first commission of a Clients wrongful fact (in an unjust cause) entitles
him a Delinquent; but the additionall justification by pleading tempts him to
be impenitent: wherein the finer the varnish is of the Counselor, the fouler
is his sin.

This is no temper of a Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed John 1. 49.
in whom is no guile. Nor yet may the integrity of the heart be alleged,
notwithstanding the Sophistry of the tongue. By thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Matthew. 12. 37.
However this is not to copy out the pattern of our Redeemer, In whose mouth
there was found no guile. 1 Pet. 2. 22.
It is an Hebraism, There was no guile to be found.

If the nice subtlety of indirect pleading be not intended to be effectual, it
is to deceive the Client; if it be intended to be effectual, it is to deceive
the Jury or the Judge, thereby to injure the innocent party at least in the
purpose, the endeavor of the Counselor. Either edge of the dilemma is a sharp
fallacy to his own conscience, to beguile himself; though for a while it
appears not, it pierces not. The spreading practice of this injustice
unhappily escapes in most a resentment of it is guilt. But a multitude of
offenders is no security for an offense before the Divine awful Tribunal.
Hereby God is most enraged, and man most depraved: the face being rescued from
a blush without, and the heart from a sting within. The Stoic tutours us
better Divinity, not to trace men's Non quo itur, sed quo eundum. Sen.
steps, but Gods rules; not to steer by other vessels, but the stars; not to
regulate our courses by examples, but precepts; not to regard what the most
numerous or famous of a profession do, but what they ought to do.

It is Gods strict indispensable prohibition, Thou Exodus 23. 2.
shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall thou speak in a cause,
to decline after many to wrest judgment. The fairest gloss imaginable for
false colors, plausible pretenses in unjust pleadings, is an officious lie;
which though recorded in Scripture in the Historical passages of some eminent
Saints, yet it is very rarely: recited it is as a frailty to be eschewed, not
as a duty to be imitated. The Primitive Christians (...). Just. Mart. in Apol.
2. pro Christ.
would not allow, not employ this unholy engine in the fiercest persecution for
a preservative of their own lives, much less of the fortunes, the liberties of
others. S. Austin copiously disproves, vigorously Aug. in. l. de mend. ad
Consent.

Romans 3. 8.


condemns it. A gracious intention cannot warrant an ungracious action. He that
does evil that good may come of it, his condemnation is just. To offer this
Apology is to act Apelles part, to present the injustice of pleading, as that
Painter did Antigonus, Plutarch.
with half a face: one part of the countenance discovered being a comely
amiable aspect, an officious serene eye toward the Client; but the other part
of the visage concealed looks a squint, and casts a pernicious glance on the
opposite party.

Nor yet is the spell of profit a sufficient inducement, a warrant for the
injustice of pleading. Could every cause procure a shower of gold, ( Jupiter's
boon to Danae) could your purchases, your manors be multiplied faster then
your fees, had you a Kingdom for a garden, a sea for a fish pond, could you
engrosse the clouds, the Sunbeams to dispose each drop of rain, and ray of
light at your own rate and pleasure; yet what shall it profit a man if he gain
the Mark ^. 36.
whole world, and loose his own soul? In your languishing, gasping condition,
your own consciences will resolve the question put out of all question. It will
nothing profit: and being thus resolved, the determination is a Meiosis, an
extenuation; it will not be his profit, but his damage, his bane. An indirect
transitory gain smooths the passage to a direct forfeiture of bliss, a
perpetuity of misery. What shall a man Mark ^. 37.
give in exchange for his soul? what recompense, what truck shall he have for
his soul; as the word imports. (...).
Money is the ordinary unholy rate for it. Yet since the whole world is not to
be balanced with it, what folly, what phrensy is it to prostitute a precious
inestimable soul to vile gains, to mean inconsiderable advantages, to raise
your fortunes temporally on the ruins of your selves eternally? The getting of
treasures Prove. 21. 6.
by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. The
gloss on the words applies them to the injustice of pleading. It is a dismal
aphorism, and it should not have dropped from my mouth, had it not proceeded
from the Holy Ghost. Spira, the disconsolate example of despair, first
maintained false causes in Law, and afterward renounced true tenets in
Religion. To be a corrupt Advocate was his first step toward hell. I shall not
recommend Tert. in l. de Passione, c. 5. Ipse Christus Advocati officium non
paucis impertitus est; ue Magdalenae, item in mulieris de adulterio
accusatione, and in Discipulorum variis criminationibus. D. Ambr. 11 annis in
curiis and foro causas egit. Germanus and Lipardus in numerum Sanctorum relati.
Dor. Mart. de jur. p. 4. Cent. 2, ca. 15.
Tertul lian for a pattern, whose quitting his profession of an Advocate (upon
his conversion to Christianity) was a very unnecessary rigor. But beware of
Tertullus stamp, whose eloquence dispensed with his conscience. Let not the
luster of your Rhetoric abate the light of your Religion. Let not any
exquisite ability in the law prepare a fucus, a paint for oppression, or
malice: let not so sweet an ointment be spilt upon an unsavory cause, to be
ingeniously ungracious, accurately irreligious. It is an uncomfortable
commendation, an unhappy elogy, to be a better lawyer then a Christian, to be
more acute then upright, to plead well in ill causes. It is a perfume to the
fame of Ivo, that he pleaded only for the afflicted, Surius 29. Maii.
vindicated the oppressed, being entitled the Advocate of the poor, and
canonized for a Saint. Give not cause to present or succeeding ages to apply to
any of you that character of Coelius an Advocate, (which Quint. Inst. l. 10. c.
1.
sticks a slurre, a taint to his name unto this day) for to be reputed worthy
of a better mind, of an honester soul; for to be the pearl of Advocates in the
Iaperle des Advocats.
French style, and yet not to appertain to Gods cabinet in the day that he
shall sort, make up his jewels.

To conclude this caveat: Let not your counsels, your pleadings be tempered
with more grains of the Serpent, then the Dove. Let not your profits exceed,
eclipse your graces. The fees of just causes only can entayl blessings to your
families, and assure comforts to your souls. With melting bowels I tender this
unwelcome meditation to your candid censures, to your retired mortifyed
thoughts, which lay upon my own (being called to this place) like a weight of
lead, until I uttered it.

I have freely discharged my conscience in the presence of God and this
Congregation, and should now proceed from the injustice of the Pleading to the
injustice of the Verdict, of the Decree, of the Record. But the time has trod
upon my heels: like a wearied traveller I must take up my rest, before I have
scarce finished half my journey; and, like Issachar, must stoop betwixt two
burdens.

I have the rather enlarged my meditation on the three first rounds of
Injustice, because Courts are like Elements; the corruptions, the distempers
above take their rise from exhalations from below. Unjust causes, indirect
evidences and pleadings are the source and bane of all judiciary proceedings.
Well we may juggle with men on earth; we cannot play the Sophisters with
heaven, and put a cheat on our God.

As for all sorts and degrees here present; When you hear the trumpet sound,
let it be an alarm to your souls, to rowze you to an apprehension of the
general Sessions of the great judgment of the world, when we shall all appear
before the judgment seat 2 Cor. 5. 10.
of Christ; not only appear, but become transparent, like Drusus fancyed house
of glass. Our minds (...). Chrysostom.
shall be as clearly seen, as conspicuous, as our faces. Then all the Judges of
the earth shall stand at the Bar. The Counselors must plead for themselves,
render an account for every idle word. If for every light frivolous, pro
otioso, much more pro odioso, for every Matthew. 12. 36. Ambros:
false scandalous plea. Then the books of records, our own consciences shall be
unclasped, to be manifest evidences of our secret sins in the sight of God,
of Angels, and men.

No unjust causes, no corrupt evidences or pleadings can taint this judgment,
no demurror can shift it off, no quirk or subtlety reverse, no power or
authority repeal it.

Let us be awfully prepared, conscientiously qualifyed at this great Sessions;
that at the approach of a far greater, we may be graciously summoned, and
acquitted by the dreadful Judge of men and Angels; that we may be refresht,
ravished with the joy and solace of that sentence, Come you blessed, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the Matthew. 25. 34.
world.

Wherein God of his infinite mercy estate us, for the merits of his Son, and
our alone Savior Jesus Christ; to whom and the Holy Ghost be glory and honor,
power, majesty and dominion ascribed this day and for evermore.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

