The Third PART OF Modern Reports, BEING A COLLECTION Of Several SPECIAL CASES
IN THE COURT OF King's Bench: In the last Years of the Reign of King Charles
II. In the Reign of King James II. And in the two first Years of his present
MAJESTY.

TOGETHER WITH The Resolutions and Judgments thereupon.

None of these Cases ever Printed before.

Indignor quicquam reprehendi, non quia crasse
Compositum, illepideve putetur, sed quia nuper.
Hor. Epist. 2.1. Carefully Collected by a Learned Hand.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins Esqrs; for Charles
Harper at the Flower de Luce over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet,
1700.

helmet over coat of arms with shells Mr: Ambrose Holbech of Mollington. in the
County of Warwick, 1702



TO THE PROFESSORS OF THE Common Law OF ENGLAND.
Gentlemen,
ALL Human Laws are either Natural or Civil.

The Law of Nature, which is also the Moral Law, is at all times and in all
places the same, and so will always continue.

By Civil Laws, I mean, such as are established by Human Policy, which with us
are either Customs or Statutes; and these have also some resemblance to Natural
Laws, because they are for the most part introduced by the concurrent Reason of
Men; and Reason is the Law of Nature.

Customs are made by Time and Usage, and do thereby obtain the force of Laws in
particular places and Nations; but no otherwise than upon supposition that they
were reasonable at the beginning. To these may be added such Laws which are
usually called Responsa Prudentum, which, together with Customs, make a great
part of our Municipal Laws.

And because it is impossible that future Evils should be foreseen by the Wisdom
of Mankind so as to prevent them; therefore it is very reasonable that positive
Laws should be instituted by the Legislative Power, which we call Statutes; and
those are either Commands or Prohibitions, always enacted upon some present
Emergencies, and may be altered or repealed according as the Manners of Men
change, or as the Conjuncture of Affairs require for the public Good.

I do not find this Nation was governed by any settled Laws from the time of
William called the Conqueror, till 9 H. 3. but by the irregular Power of the
Norman King, and of those who immediately succeeded him.

It Is true, he swore to preserve approbatas and antiquas Leges Angliae; but
it is as true, that the same Force, which compelled our Forefathers to submit,
did likewise exact their Obedience to the Customs of Normandy, some of which we
retain to this very day.

It was then a term of Reproach to be called an Englishman, as if that
denomination imported to be a Slave. This made the lesser Barons (that is, the
Freeholders, or those which had such Lordships which are now called
Court-Barons) take up Arms to regain their ancient Rights, and by that means
they obtained a Grant of their old Laws from some of those Kings, which was
called Magna Charta Libertatum; but living in a tumultuous Age they did never
quietly enjoy those Liberties; for notwithstanding that Charter, many
Infringements were made upon them, which they continued in Arms to defend,
insomuch that in the Seventeenth Year of King John they delivered to that King
a Schedule of their ancient Customs in Writing, desiring that he would
establish them by another Grant, which was done accordingly.

But this Charter was as little observed as the former; for the Norman Customs
did still interfere with St. Edward's Laws, and the People were miserably
divided by those Innovations till Anno 9 H. 3. the Great Charter was
established by Authority of Parliament.

From that time those ancient Laws and Customs were had again in repute, they
were revived by that Grant, which was only declaratory of them; and because a
more exact Obedience and Conformity might be given to them for the future,
therefore did his Successor, the good King Edward I. encourage the Lawyers in
his time to reduce them into Order and Writing, which was done accordingly
about the middle of his Reign by John Breton, not the Bishop of Hereford, but a
Judge of the King's Bench; for, as Mr. Seldom has observed, the Bishop of that
Name died Anno 3 E. 1. And in that Book which is now called Breton, the Statute
of W. 2. is cited, which was made 13 E. 1. and therefore it could not be penned
by the Bishop, unless he could quote a Statute which was not made till above
ten years after his Death.

This is one of the first Systems extant of our Laws. It Is true, the Book
called The Mirror of Justice was written before, but many Additions were made
to it in this King's Reign by Andrew Horn, a learned Man in that Age.

There was likewise a small Tract then written by Sir Ralph Hengham, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, which only treats of Essoins and Defaults in Writs
of Right, Writs of Assize and Dower, and therefore cannot be called a Body of
our Laws.

I must admit that two such Books were written by the Lord Chief Justice
Glanvil and Justice Bracton, the one in the Reign of Henry the Second, and the
other in the time of Henry the Third, but not one more of that Nature almost in
the space of two hundred Years; for I do not think the Book which the Lord
Chancellor Fortescue wrote in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, can be
properly called a System of Law: It was published by him for these purposes,
first, to obviate the design of two great Favorites, the Dukes of Exeter and
Suffolk, who had used some endeavors to introduce the Imperial Law, and
therefore he showed the Excellency of the Common Law above that; and in the
next place, it was intended to soften the warlike Temper of the young Prince
Edward, by inclining him to the Study of those Laws by which he was to govern
his People, and to instruct him in some Occurrences therein.

The Abridgment by Baron Statham and the Year-Books are for the most part made
up with Cases then depending in the several Courts at Westminster, and with the
Opinions and Resolutions of Judges, which I rather call Responsa Prudentum than
Systems of Law.

The next Attempt in that kind was made by Justice Littleton in the Seventh
Year of Edward the Fourth, who has taught succeeding Ages with great Judgment
and Learning in his Profession; but it is now two hundred and thirty Years since
he wrote, and many alterations have been made in the Law since his time.

I only mention these things to show the necessity of new Books, and that the
old Volumes are not so useful now as formerly, because many of the great
Titles, of which they were composed, are now quite disused; they are mentioned
by my Lord Hales in his Preface to the Lord Chief Justice Roll's Abridgment,
which I shall not repeat, and those very Titles make the greatest part of
Justice Littleton's Tenures.

But amongst all the Old Tenures and Customs I admire that of Borough English
should still remain amongst us; it is a Custom contrary to the positive Laws of
God, and which inverts the very order of Nature; it was introduced amongst us
in a barbarous Age, and by a very wicked and adulterous practice after this
manner, viz.

The Lords of certain Lands which were held of them in Villenage did usually
lie with their Tenants Wives the first Night after Marriage; this Usage was
continued after those very Lands were purchased by Freemen, who in time
obtained this Custom on purpose that their eldest Sons (who might be their
Lord's Bastards) should be incapable to inherit their Estates.

I could never yet find any tolerable reason for the support or continuance of
this Custom; but the Reason of it, which was given by a learned Lawyer, is
because the youngest is least able to defend himself; certainly he could never
mean Ability of Body, because it is frequently seen that the youngest Son is the
Champion of the Family; and if he intended Ability in Estate, I would fain know
what the elder Brother has to defend himself, when by this unnatural Custom
the youngest is entitled to the whole.

I am not setting up for a Reformer of the Law or the Abuses of it; it is not a
work for a single person, but rather for a Committee of able and skilful Men of
that Profession appointed by the Government.

Neither will I object against the Practice of it as heretofore in the year
1654. it has been done, viz. That great part consists in known and apparent
Untruths; That a Common Recovery ought not to be suffered in a Christian
Nation, because it is Fictio Juris, which is an abuse of the Law; That when it is
suffered at the Bar by the Tenant and Demandant, there is scarce a true word in
all the Colloquium amongst the Sergeants, and that therefore an Estate Tail may
more righteously be discontinued by a Feoffment with Livery than by the Statute
de Donis.

This was the Language of those times: They found fault likewise with that
wicked Process of Latitat, that it was framed upon a supposed Falsehood by
suggesting of a Bill of Middlesex sued out which is never actually done; and
that the Defendant could not be taken there, because he is sculking about in
another County, which is seldom or never true, and presently afterward he is
in Custodia Marescalli, which is as false as the rest; and that John Do and
Richard Roe are Pledges de Prosequendo, when there are no such Men in Nature;
these things and many more I could name of the like Nature, I esteem as trivial
Matters, for no Injury is done to any Body by such Formalities.

But when there is danger of Corruption in that which was originally intended
for the great preservative of our Liberties, I mean in Trials by ordinary
Juries, it may be worth a great deal of Pains and Study to propose some
effectual means to prevent it, which is the chief end of this Preface, that you
may at some time employ your Thoughts in so useful a piece of Service to your
Country.

I shall only give you a short History of such Trials, which is as follows,
viz.

There are Opinions, that such Trials were had in this Nation by a Jury of
Twelve Men long before the time of the English Saxons, though the Writers in
those Ages give no account of this Matter.

This is collected from that great esteem the Chaldeans had for the number 12.
because of so many Signs in the Zodiac, those People applying themselves
chiefly to the Study of Astrology.

That from them this Number came to the Egyptians, and so to Greece, where
Mars himself was tried for a Murder, by a Jury of that Number, and acquitted by
an equality of Votes, which is the first Trial mentioned in History by a Jury
of Twelve.

That the Greeks frequenting this Island, to export our Tin, became acquainted
with the Natives, and in process of time cohabited with them, who being a more
polite People did introduce this way of Trials here; and it is very probable
that some of our Customs came from them, because some of our Law-Terms, as
Chirographer, Protonotary, and many more are derived from their Language.

After the Conquest of Greece by the Romans, new Laws were instituted by them
to govern this Nation, which was then a Province to the Conquerors; and though
such Trials were then disused, yet they had that Number in several subordinate
forms of their Administration.

Afterward when that great Empire declined, when the Britains were forsaken by
them, and left to the Depredations of the Pagan Saxons, then were other Trials
introduced by that barbarous People, which was by Battle in doubtful cases, and
when that could not be joined, then Purgations by Ordeal were allowed; Trials
very agreeable to the uncultivated Temper of those People.

Thus it continued till about two hundred years before the Norman Conquest; and
then Ethelbert an English Saxon King received Christianity, and by his Example
the Dispositions of the People were qualified into a more civil and peaceable
deportment; then were those Trials for the most part laid aside, and that good
King being at Wantage, (now a Market Town in Berk-shire,) did there by the
Advice of his Council ordain that Trials should be had by Juries consisting of
twelve Men, which Law does still continue.

But notwithstanding such were then and are still the best and most effectual
Methods to discover the Truth, yet Ordeals were used here for above one hundred
and fifty years after the Conquest; and then about the beginning of the Reign
of H. 3. were abolished by Act of Parliament.

But Combats continued here till 6 Car. 1. so difficult are the English to
part with any ancient Usage of their Ancestors, though in no wise suitable to
them who live in a more polite and learned Age.

Juries being thus confined to the Number 12. it was afterward enacted by the
Statute of 2. H. 5. That all Jurors returned for Trials of Issues, etc. should
have 40 s. per annum.

This Law continued for the space of an hundred and ninety years, or
thereabouts, and then the Wisdom of the Nation considering that to be a very
mean Estate for the support of a Jury-Man, a farther Provision was made by a
Statute Anno 27 Eliz. That such Jurors should have 4 l. per Annum.

And thus the Law stood for above an hundred years, in all which time this
Kingdom has been growing in Riches, its Trade is now extended to most parts of
the World; and as that has been enlarged, so the Price of our Lands, the Value
of our Rents, of our natural Commodities, and of all our Manufactures have
wonderfully increased, so that a Man of 4 l. per Annum is now in so mean a
condition of life that he is no longer to be entrusted with the Trial of an
ordinary Cause, and therefore by the Statute of 4 and 5 Willielmi and Mariae
such Jurors are to have 10 l. per Annum.

Now upon a moderate computation of the price of Provisions and other
Necessaries in 2 H. 5. and how they increased in Value from that time till the
Queen's Reign, it may be reasonably affirmed that 40 s. per Annum about the
time when that King lived, would bear an equal proportion to 40 l. a year in
her Reign; and if so, it may as reasonably be said, that 4 l. per Annum in her
days would almost bear the like proportion to 80 l. per annum now, because of
the vast increase of Riches by Commerce, and otherwise, in this last Age; and
such an Estate does now qualify a Man to be of the Grand Jury.

The 40 s. per annum in King H's. Reign was esteemed a sufficient Estate to
supply all the common Necessities of Life, Wheat being then sold for 12 d. per
Quarter, and good Gascoign Wine for 40 s. per Tun. It was an Age when 20 Marks
per Annum was a very good Allowance to maintain a Student at the Inns of Court,
but too great a Charge for a Commoner to bear; and therefore the Lord
Chancellor Fortescue tells us, that none but the Sons of Noblemen in Hospitiis
illis Leges addiscebant.

The Jurors in those days were all Knights, but are now mean and illiterate
persons; for it is a very poor Estate which qualifies them for that Service. How
can Matters of Fact, which often require great Examination, be tried by Men of
such narrow Capacities, which are generally found amongst Men of 10 l. per
Annum, for so it will be so long as the Degrees of Fortune make such a vast
inequality amongst us.

Experience teaches us, that Men of such low Fortunes, and whose Education is
generally amongst the Beasts of the Plow, have not the same sense of Honor and
Virtue with Men of more elevated Qualities and Conversation; there must be
danger of Subornation and Perjury among such Jurors: And what will the
villainous Judgment in Attaint signify? I mean in respect to their Estates,
viz. That their Goods be confiscate, their Lands and Possessions seized into
the King's Hands, their Houses demolished, their Woods felled, and their
Meadows plowed: This is a very dreadful Sentence to a Man of a good Estate,
which by the very Form of this old Judgment every Juror was supposed to have;
but it is an empty sound to a Man of 10 l. per Annum, who cannot have all those
Possessions, and but a very small proportion of either.

It may be therefore thought necessary, that a farther Provision be made that
none should be impanelled to try such Issues, but Men of 40 l. per Annum, or at
least such as like the Jurors in Attaint, qui multa majora habent Patrimonia,
than what will qualify a Petty Juror at this day.

Gentlemen,

The following Collection is the Product of your Labors: It was borrowed from
you at the Bar, and it is but just to restore it.

I know Men have generally very faint Inclinations to approve any Writings
beside their own, and seldom declare in favor of a Book till they hear what
success it has in the World; and even then are biassed by the Multitude, who
very often condemn without reading, or read without Understanding.

I have heard it often objected (though I am still to learn upon what account)
that we have too many Printed Books of the Law already, and that it was more
certain and intelligible when fewer Volumes of it were published.

I must confess some of the late Reports are collected with very little
Judgment.

But still there is a necessity of new Books, though not of such; for I would
feign know how any Lawyer can now be able to advise his Client with the help
and direction only of the Old Books? It Is true, we have but few of them, but
it is because in former Ages all Causes (where the thing in demand did not
exceed 40 s.) were tried either in the County Court, in the Hundred Court or in
the Court Baron of the Manor: In those days the great Courts of Record at
Westminster were not so full of Suitors as now.

When Bracton wrote, the Justices in Air (who had the same Power with our
Justices of Assise) went their Circuits but once in seven years; and a long
time afterward, even in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Judges would
often rise from the Bench in Term-time without hearing a Motion, or trying of a
Cause; and I think the Practice did not much increase till this last Age; for
Anno 10 Eliz. there was but one Sergeant at the Common Pleas Bar for a whole
Term together, and that was Sergeant Bendloes; and I do not read that he had
any Business there; Nay at that time the Court of Chancery had no greater share
of Practice than the Courts of the Common Law; for in the two and twentieth
Year of King Henry the Eighth, Sir Thomas Moor being then Lord Chancellor, did
usually read all the Bills, which were exhibited into that Court; but Business
is now so much increased, that all the Council can scarce find time enough to
read the Briefs of such Bills which are filed every Term.

But the Law has now its Residence in Westminster Hall, most Causes of Value
are there determined, and the great Number of Country Attorneys in our days,
who (according to my Lord Coke's Opinion) by daily multiplying Suits have so
wonderfully increased the Business of those Courts, that it seems very
necessary that the judicial determinations there should by new Books be
transmitted to future Ages.

And though some Cases in this Collection, which were adjudged in the late
Reign, may not have the Authority of Presidents, because they taste a little of
the Times wherein the Administration of Justice was not so nicely regarded, as
the Dispensation of such things which were then thought Political Rights, yet
the Reader will find some good Arguments of Learned Men then at the Bar who
endeavored to support our sinking Laws.

I do acknowledge, that if Men were just, honest and impartial to themselves
and others, there would be no occasion for Books of this nature; and because
they are not so, I will not make an Apology for the Publishing of this. I think
the Book, (being done with so much Care) may be of good use to the Professors
of the Law; but submit it to your Judgments. I confess, I am led by my
Profession to Affairs of this nature, though my Circumstances disingage me from
the suspicion of being an Author.

Vale.
A TABLE OF THE CASES Contained in the THIRD PART OF Modern Reports.
A.
ALdridge versus Duke, 110 Ashcomb versus Inhabitants Hundred de Eltham, 287
Airs versus Huntington, 251
B.
BAxter's Case, 68 Baldwyn versus Flower, 120 Ball versus Cock, 140 Barker
Mil', versus Damer, 336 Barnes versus Eggard, 39 Beak versus Tyrrwhite, 194
Banson versus Offley, 121 Bishops, their Case, 212 Bisse versus Harcoutt, 281
Blaxton versus Stone, 123 Boil versus Boil, 164 Boson versus Sandford, 321
Bowyer versus Lenthal, 190 Bradburn versus Kennerdale, 318 Brason versus Deane,
39 Brett versus Whitchott, 96 Bridgham versus Frontee, 94 Broad versus Piper,
268 Burgh's Case, 67
C.
CAlthrop versus Axtel, 168 Capel versus Saltonstal, 249 Carter versus Dowrish,
226 Chapman versus Lamphire, 155 Clarke versus Hoskins, 79 Claxton versus
Swift, 86 Coghil versus Freelove, 325 Cole versus Knight, 277 Cross versus
Garnett, 261
D.
DAvies Case, 246 Dawling versus Venman, 108 Dixon versus Robinson, 107 Dobson
versus Thornigrove, 112 Do versus Dawson, 274 Dorrington versus Edwyn, 56
E.
ECcleston versus Speak, 258 Evans versus Crocker, 198
F.
FItzgerald versus Villiers, 236 Fisher versus Wrenn, 250 Franshaw versus
Bradshaw, 235 Friend versus Bouchier, 81
G.
GRandison Lord, versus Countess of Dover, 23 Grantham, Mil', his Case, 120
Godfrey versus Eversden, 264 Gold versus Strode, 324 Goring versus Deering, 156
H.
HAcket versus Herne, 134 Hall versus Wybank, 311 Hamson Sergeant, his Case, 89
Hanchet versus Thelwell, 104 Harman versus Harman, 115 Harrison versus Austin,
237 Harrison versus Heyward, 295 Hebblethwait versus Palms, 48 Hexam versus
Coniers, 238 Heyward versus Guppee, 191 Hicks versus Gore, 84 Hyley versus
Hyley 228 Hinton versus Roffey, 35 Hitchins versus Bassett, 203 Hobbs, qui tam,
versus Young, 313 Hoile versus Clerk, 218 Holcomb versus Petit, 113 Holloway's
Case, 42 Horner's Company versus Barlow, 158
I.
JAckson versus Warren, 78 Jefferies Mil', versus Watkyns, 161 Jennings versus
Hankeys, 114 Joyner versus Pritchard, 103
K.
KEllow versus Rowden, 253 King versus Dilliston, 221 Knight versus Cole, 277
Knight Mil' Case, 117 Kingston versus Herbert. 119 The King against Ayloffe, 72
The King against Armstrong Mil'. 47 The King against Atkyns Mil'. 3 The King
against Barns, 42 The King against Baxter, 68 The King against Beale, 124 The
King against Bunny, 238 The King against Cony and al'. 37 The King against
Colson and al'. 72 The King against Dangerfield, 68 The King against Darby, 139
The King against Fairfax, 269 The King against G -- l. 97 The King against
Griffith, 201 The King against Grimes and al'. 220 The King against Hethersel,
80 The King against Hinton and al'. 122 The King against Hockenhal, 167 The
King against Inhabitants of Malden, The King against Johnson, 241 The King
against Kingsmill, 199 The King against Lenthal, 143 The King against Marsh and
al'. 66 The King against Plowright and al'. 94 The King against Rosewell, 52
The King against Saloway, 100 The King against Sellars, 167 The King against
Silcox, 280 The King against Sparks, 78 The King against Warden of the Fleet,
335
L.
LAngford versus Webber, 132 Lambert versus Thurston, 275 Lea versus Libb, 262
Leigh's Case, 332 Letchmere versus Thorowgood, 236 Lidcott versus Willows, 229
Lock versus Norborne, 141 Lutwich versus Piggot, 268
M.
MAcklesfield Earl, 41 Malloon versus Fitzgerald, 28 Marsh versus Cutler, 41
Mason versus Beldham, 73 Mather versus Mills, 252 Matthews versus Carry, 137
Mayor and Cominalty of Norwich versus Johnson, 90 Merchants Adventurers versus
Rebow, 126 Mordant versus Thorold, 281 Moss versus Archer, 135
N.
NEwton and al' versus Stubbs, 71 Newton Mil' versus Creswick, 165 Newton
versus Trigg, 327 Norwich Mayor, etc. versus Johnson, 90
O.
OBrian versus Ram, 170 Okel versus Hodgkinson, 99 Osborn versus Steward, 230
P.
Pain versus Partrich, 289 Palmer versus Allicock, 58 Panton versus Earl of
Bath, 227 Parkinson's Case, 265 Pawley versus Ludlow, 87 Peak versus Mather,
103 Perkins versus Titus, 132 Pit versus Brereton, 70 Plymouth Countess versus
Throgmorton, 153 Pool versus Trumbull, 56 Price versus Davies, 152 Prince's
Case, 295 Proctor versus Burdet, 69 Prodgers versus Frazier, 43 Proud versus
Piper, 268 Prowse versus Wilcox, 163 Putt versus Rawsterne, 1
R.
REves versus Phelpes, 264 Reeves versus Winnington, 45 Roberts versus Pain, 67
Rodney versus Strode, 101 Roe versus Clargis Mil'. 26 Rowsby versus Manning,
330
S.
SAvier versus Lenthall, 273 Shipley versus Chapel, 232 Shotter versus Friend,
283 Shuttleworth versus Garnat, 239 Smith versus Goodier 36 Smith versus
Pierce, 195
T.
Tailor versus Brindley, 136 Thirsby versus Helbott, 272 Thompson versus Leach,
296 Idem versus Eundem, 301 Tippet versus Hawkey, 263
U.
UPton versus Dawkin, 97
W.
WHitehal versus Squire, 276 Wytham Mil' versus Dutton Mil'. 159 Woodward's
Case, 211
Y.
YArmouth Earl versus Dorrell, 75 Young versus Inhabitants of Tottenham, 258
DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 34 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1682.
Sir Francis Pemberton Chief Justice. Sir Thomas Jones, Justices. Sir William
Dolben, Justices. Sir Thomas Raymond, Justices.
Putt versus Rawstern Mil'.
AN Action of Trespass was formerly brought for taking of Goods, etc. and upon
Not-guilty pleaded, Trespass is no Bar to Trover for the same Goods. Raymond
472
the Defendant had a Verdict.

The same Plaintiff now brought Trover against the same Defendant for those
Goods.

The Defendant pleads in Bar the Judgment in the former Action of Trespass,
and upon a Demurrer, the Question was;

Whether a Judgment in Trespass vi and armis may be pleaded in Bar to an Action
of Trover for the same Goods?

This Case was argued by Mr. Saunders for the Plaintiff; and by Mr. Pollexfen
for the Defendant.

And to prove that it was no Bar, Lacon versus Bernard. Cro. Car. 35. Hutt. 81.
Styles 202.
a Case was cited to be adjudged in the Common Pleas in the 20th year of King
James, which was an Action of Trover and Conversion of one hundred Sheep: The
Defendant pleaded a former Judgment in Trespass brought against him, quare
cepit and abduxit those Sheep, and that the Plaintiff in that Action recovered
2 d. damages, and that both Actions were for the same thing.

The Plaintiff replied, that the two pence damages were recoverd for the
chasing, and not for the value of the Cattle; and upon a Demurrer had Judgment:
For the smalness of the damages implies it was for the chasing, and it shall
therefore be intended that he had his Cattle again, and that the Conversion was
afterward.

My Lord Coke in Ferrer's Case tells us, Ferrer 's Case, 6 Co. 7. Cro. Eliz.
676. Co. Ent. 39. Cro. Jac. 15.
that a Recovery by Verdict, Confession, or upon a Demurrer in a personal
Action is a good Bar to an Action of the like nature, and for the same thing;
but that must be understood where the same Evidence will maintain both the
Actions.

Justice Croke reports the same Case to be ended by Arbitration; but that it
was the Opinion of my Lord Anderson and Justice Glanvil, that Trover and
Trespass are Actions of different natures, and one may be brought where the
other cannot be maintained; as upon a demand and denial Trover will lie, but
not Trespass vi and armis, because the taking was not tortious.

And therefore it may be well intended that when the Plaintiff brought Trespass
he was mistaken in that Action, and being in the wrong, was barred; but that
will be no Bar where a right Action is brought; as if I deliver a Bond to
another for advice, who refusing to redeliver it, I bring an Action of Trespass
and am barred either by Verdict or Demurrer, yet I may bring Detinue.

Trespass and Detinue are not the same Actions, Pro Def.
and therefore a Judgment in one shall be no bar to the other; but where two
Actions are brought for one thing to be recovered, in such case a Recovery in
one shall be a bar to the other.

There is no substantial difference between Trespass and Trover; for the
disposing of the Goods in the one case is the same with the Conversion in the
other; the taking vi and armis and likewise the Conversion are both tortious,
and therefore either Action may be well brought.

But for the Reasons given by the Plaintiffs Council, he had Judgment by the
Opinion of the Chief Justice and the other two Judges, Jones and Raymond; of
which Justice Dolben did very much doubt.

Dominus Rex versus Sir Robert Atkins Knight of the Bath and al'.
AN Indictment was found at the Quarter Sessions held for the County of the
City of Bristol, 4 October. 33 Car. 2. The County of the City of Bristol^
against Sir Robert Atkins Knight of the Bath, and Recorder and Senior Alderman
of the said City, Sir John Knight Alderman, John Lawford Alderman and Joseph
Creswick Alderman, setting forth,

1. That King Henry the VIIth. by his Charter dated 17 December. 15 Regni sui,
granted to the Mayor and Commonalty of the Town of Bristol ( the now City of
Bristol being then a Town) and to their Successors, That if any shall procure,
abett or maintain any Debate and Discord upon the Election of the Mayor, or
other Minister, he shall be punished instantly by the Mayor and two Aldermen,
to be chosen and named by the Mayor, after the quantity and quality of his
offense according to the Laws and Custom of the Realm.

2. That according to the Privileges granted by Queen Elizabeth to the Mayor
and Commonalty of the said City, and their Successors, by Charter dated 28 June
23d of her Reign: After which time (as the Indictment sets forth) the said Town
was made a City) there have been, or ought to have been, from the time of the
making the said Charter, twelve Aldermen, whereof the Recorder was to be, and
now is, one.

3. That according to the Privileges, so as aforesaid granted, by all the time
aforesaid (which is from the time of the Charter) after the death of every
Alderman, the Mayor and the rest of the surviving Aldermen, and eorum major
pars ad summonitionem of the said Mayor, being called together, have accustomed
to choose another person of the circumspect Citizens to be an Alderman in the
place of him so deceased; and the Mayor and Aldermen (by the same Privileges so
granted) have been, and ought to be, Justices of the Peace for the said City.

4. That continually after the time of the said Charter of Queen Elizabeth, the
Recorder, and the rest of the Aldermen, were and ought to be of the Privy
Council, (de privato Concilio) of the Mayor in particular Cases concerning the
Government of the City, whenever the Mayor shall call them together.

And such Privy Council (by all the time aforesaid) which still is from the
said Charter of Queen Elizabeth) have not accustomed, nor ought not to be
called together to transact any Business belonging to that Council, unless by
the Summons and in the presence of the Mayor.

That after the death of one Sir John Lloyd, being at his death an Alderman of
the said City, the said Sir Robert Atkins, then being Recorder, Sir John
Knight, John Lawford Esquire, and Joseph Creswick being all Aldermen then of
the City, and free Burgesses of the City, to make debate and discord upon the
Election of an Alderman in the place of the Alderman so dead, 8 March, 33 Car.
2. in the Parish and Ward of St. Andrew within the said City, did conspire to
hold a Privy Council of the Aldermen of the said City, and therein to choose an
Alderman sine summonitione and in absentia and contra voluntatem Richardi Heart
Militis, then being Mayor of the City. And in pursuance of their said wicked
Conspiracy, the day and year aforesaid, entered by force and arms into the
Tolzey, and in the Chamber of the Council of the Mayor and Commonalty of the
said City, commonly called The Council House, and there riotously, etc. did
assemble, and the same day and year they the said four Aldermen una cum aliis
Aldermannis, (which must be two more Aldermen at the least, which makes six,
(and there were but five more in all then in being taking the Mayor in) the
said rest of the Aldermen, not knowing their purposes, held a Privy Council of
Aldermen, and then and there as much as in them lay, chose Thomas Day for an
Alderman in the place of Sir John Lloyd, sine aliqua summonitione per
praedictum Richardum Heart then Mayor, to meet, and in his absence, and against
his Will.

And they farther caused to be entered in the Common Council-Book the said
Election, as an Order of the Privy Council; in which Book the Acts of the Mayor
and Aldermen in their Privy Council are commonly written; from whence great
Discord has risen, etc.

Which Indictment was tried at the Assizes at Bristol by Nisi Prius, and the
Defendants found guilty; and thereupon Sir Robert Atkins, one of the Defendants
(having then lately, before this Case, been one of the Judges of the Common
Pleas, but then discharged of his Place after eight years sitting there secure)
came into the Court of Kings Bench, and in Arrest of Judgment argued his own
Case, not as Council, nor at the Bar, but in the Court in his Cloak, having a
Chair set for him by the Order of the Lord Chief Justice, and said as follows;

1. The Indictment in the first place mentions the Letters Patents of King H.
7. made to the Mayor and Commonalty of Bristol, that the Mayor with two
Aldermen (such as he should choose) should by their discretions, according to
Law, punish such as should make debate and discord at the Elections of Officers.

They have not pursued this course against us, but gone the ordinary way of
Indictment, and therefore I shall not need to speak to it.

2. The Indictment in the next place proceeds to mention Letters Patents of
Queen Elizabeth, granted to the Mayor and Commonalty in the 23d. year of her
Reign, which provides, that there shall be twelve Aldermen, and how upon the
death or removal of an Alderman, a new one should be chosen, that is, by the
Mayor and the surviving Aldermen, and the greater number of them, being called
together (as the Indictment suggests) by the Summons of the Mayor.

The whole Indictment and the Offense, we are charged with being grounded upon
these Letters Patents, I shall apply my self to speak to it; for our Crime is
in the undue electing of an Alderman, namely not being summoned together for
that purpose by the Mayor, and doing it in his absence.

I must desire the Court to observe in what manner the mention of these Letters
Patents is introduced.

The Matter and Question before us is concerning the Election of an Alderman
for the City of Bristol, which concerns the very being, and succession, and
continuance of the Corporation: Nothing can more nearly concern it.

The defects I observe in the frame of this Indictment are these:

1. It does not so much as say or allege, that Bristol is antiqua Villa, or
antiqua Civitas, or that there was, or yet is, any Corporation at all there,
nor what it does consist of (if there be any) nor by what name they are called;
whether there ought to be a Mayor or not; whether their Corporation be by
Charter, or Prescription.

And this Court cannot judicially take notice that there is any Corporation
there, or what it is, unless it had been shown.

Now if there be no Corporation, and no Mayor of right, then our meeting to
choose an Alderman without his Summons, and in his absence, is no undue nor
irregular Proceeding: It cannot appear to the Court whether the Mayors Summons
and presence at the Election be necessary or not.

Now in all legal Proceedings that any way concern a Corporation, it is
constantly averred and alleged that there is a Corporation, and what it is,
and how erected; and the least that can be in any Case is, to say that it is
antiqua Villa or antiqua Civitas, where the Corporation extends to a Town or
City which make any Prescription, or set forth any Custom.

Thus we find it in the Case of the City of York, Dyer 279. plac' 10. in the
Case of a Custom of Foreign bought and Foreign sold, They Prescribe in being a
Corporation. So in Latches Rep. 229. Harris's Case.

In James Bagg's Case, 11 Co. f. 94. A Case of a Writ of Restitution to Restore
a Capital Burgess to his Place and Office of a Capital Burgess in Plymouth; the
Writ was directed to the Mayor and Commonalty of Plymouth; the very Words of
the Writ suppose a Corporation, and show what their Name is.

The Return thereupon by the Mayor and Commonalty is,

That Queen Elizabeth granted to the Mayor and Commonalty, that the Mayor and
Recorder should be Justices of the Peace, and that James Baggs was a Capital
Burgess, and did misdemean himself toward the Mayor, and thereupon he was
disfranchised.

In the printed Margent of that Case, (which I suppose is my Lord Cokes own
Opinion) it is said, That in their Return they first ought to prescribe, That
there has been a Corporation of a Mayor and Commonalty time out of the Memory
of Man; and not to begin with the mention of a Grant made to a Coporation, as
the Indictment does in our Case; and not show the Original and Erection of it,
either by Prescription or Charter. And Mr. Trotman (a Learned Man) in his
abridging of James Bagg's Case bids his Reader observe this Marginal Note.

Yet in that Case the Return was but in answer to the Writ of Restitution,
which Writ it self admitted there was a Corporation, and directs the Writ to
them by Name; yet by the Opinion there, it was a defect in the Return not to
show that they were by Prescription.

And if it be necessary upon a Return of a Writ of Restitution to set forth how
they came to be incorporated; to which Return there can be no Traverse taken,
nor no pleading to it, as has been held by some; how much more in such a Case
as ours of an Indictment, which must be traversed and pleaded to, and therefore
ought to be more exact.

That was in a Case of removing of a chief Member (a Capital Burgess of a
Corporation; ours is in a Case of the choosing in of a chief Member (an
Alderman) into a Corporation; so that ours is much resembling that Case in that
respect.

2. Another thing wherein the Indictment is faulty, is this, viz. In the manner
of introducing the mention of these Letters Patents of Queen Elizabeth, upon
which the Indictment is grounded, and upon the Construction of which the Case
depends.

The Indictment does not say positively and directly that Queen Elizabeth made
or granted any Letters Patents to the Mayor and Commonalty of Bristol, That
there should be twelve Aldermen, and for the appointing how they should be
chosen; (upon which our Case arises) nor does it so much as say (continetur)
which would not have been enough neither, but it introduces the mention of
those Letters Patents no otherwise than by these Words, viz. Secundum
Privilegia concessa per Literas Patentes, etc. There were or ought to be twelve
Aldermen, Et secundum eadem Privilegia sic ut praefertur concessa per totum
tempus praedictum after the death of an Alderman, the Mayor and the surviving
Aldermen and eorum major pars ad summonitionem ejusdem Majoris convocati
eligerunt and eligere consueverunt, etc.

Now this is no positive and direct showing that there ought to be any
Aldermen, nor how they should be chosen; but it is no more than the Opinion and
Conceit of the Jury that found the Indictment upon their perusal of the Letters
Patents, which were produced in Evidence to them; the Jury take it by way of
Collection out of a Record, of which they are no proper Judges.

And this being in an Indictment which is the Kings Declaration, and ought to
be very exact and certain, and which is in a criminal proceeding to which the
Parties must plead, and if convict, are liable to Fine and Imprisonment; the
Law is more curious in this, than where Parties do agree civiliter.

That all Criminal Proceedings must be very exact and certain, is proved by
this, (viz.) None of the Statutes of Jeofails would ever help them but by
express Words except and exclude them from the benefit of them.

It is said in Long's Case, 5 Co. 120, 121. That, If in Declarations between
Party and Party for Lands or Goods, there must be great certainty expres'd a
fortiore, says that Case, must it be so in Indictments, which are the Kings
Counts or Declarations to which the Party shall answer, they ought to be full
and not taken by Intendment, or to be by way of Argument; so it is held in
Leeches Case, Cro. Jac. 167. and in Sir William Fitz-Williams's Case, Cro. Jac.
19, 20.

Object. If it be objected, That the Indictment is but the finding of a Jury,
who are the Lay-gentz (as we call them) and they know not the forms of Law.

Answ. The Fact indeed is found by the Jury, but the constant course is to have
the Jury consent to mend the Form, and the Kings Council are addised-with in
the drawing of it, and after it is found; and sometimes the Judges peruse it.

The Indictment proceeds on and says, That continually after that time (which
must refer to the date of the Letters Patents of Queen Elizabeth) the Recorder
and the rest of the Aldermen were and ought to be de privato Concilio.

(I have been Recorder there above these one and twenty years and never knew my
self to be a Privy Councellor till now.)

But the Indictment (unhappily) says de privato Concilio Majoris; there the
Word Majoris (as big as it is) is but Terminus diminuens, it makes us but Privy
Counselors to the Mayor. But this is a mistake too; for the Recorder and
Aldermen are not a Privy Council to the Mayor, but the Mayor and they are a
Council to the City. The like to this too appears in the printed Margent of
James Baggs's Case.

The Clerk who drew this Indictment, or the Council, who ever it was, thought
they could not exalt the Mayor of Bristol high enough, unless they made him a
Prince and furnished him with a Privy Council, and to fill the Kingdom again
with a great many Reguli or petty Kings, as it was amongst the Britons before
the coming of the Romans.

It is part of the Misdemeanour charged upon James Baggs, that he did
Ironically say to the Mayor of Plymouth, You are some Prince are you not? Now
to say it to a Mayor in good earnest, as this Indictment does, I take to be
much worse.

3. The Indictment having made the Recorder and Aldermen to be of Mr. Mayors
Privy Council, it goes on, and lays it down for Law or Usage, That by all the
time aforesaid ( which is still from the date of the Patent of Queen Elizabeth)
such Privy Council have not accustomed, nor ought not to be called together, to
transact any Business that belongs to the Council (we must suppose the choosing
an Alderman is such Business) unless by the Summons and in the presence of the
Mayor.

But upon what ground does the Indictment lay this down for a Rule? Is it
because the Letters Patents so direct? If so, I agree it is a clear Case, for
the Letters Patents that create a Corporation may mould and frame, and form its
own Creature as it pleases.

But then the Indictment ought to have alleged it positively, that the Letters
Patents do so provide, which it does not; but the Indictment speaks it by a
kind of implication and uncertainty, but not positively, nor directly: It says,
that continually after the time of the Charter, they have not accustomed to
meet without the Mayor's Summons, and in his presence.

It may be they rely upon the Usage and Custom for it. This can be no legal
Custom nor Prescription, for we know the Head and Original of it, which is but
from the 23th year of Queen Elizabeth: so that it is not like the River Nile.

If they say the Usage shall interpret the Charter.

I answer. Usage may expound very ancient Charters, where the words are
obsolete and obscure, and may bear several senses; but this Charter has not so
much as ambiguous Words, nor any thing that can hear such a Construction.

But at last we shall be told, That the Common Law does operate with the
Charter, and requires the Mayor's Summons and Presence to the choice of an
Alderman, and also in all such like Cases.

This is now the only Point to be spoken to, and I shall apply my self to it.

I think it will be granted, That the Mayor has no Negative Voice in the
Election of an Alderman (as great a Prince, and as absolute as the Indictment
will make him;) he has but one single Voice, and if the majority of the Votes
be against his Vote, the majority must carry it against the Mayor.

The Words of the Charter do no more require the Mayor's Summons and Presence
than it does that of the senior Alderman.

The Mayor is named in the Grant, out of necessity, it being part of the name
of the Corporation to whom the Grant must be made. He is named out of
Conformity too, he many times being none of the Aldermen, and therefore could
not be included in the naming of Aldermen, but must therefore be named by
himself. And besides, I agree it is due to him out of Reverence. They usually
say, He represents the King, but that is but a Notion, and a Complement to him;
he has no more power than an Alderman, who is a Justice, and a Judge of the
Jail-delivery as well as the Mayor.

If the Charter had intended, That there can be no choosing of an Alderman, but
by the Summons of the Mayor, and in his presence, it would surely have made him
of the Quorum, in that Clause that provides for the Election of an Alderman;
but that it does not: The only Quorum is not of the sort of Persons, but of the
majority of the Electors, Major pars eorum (having mentioned before, the Mayor
and Aldermen.)

Nay, there is something to be observed out of the Charter it self, which
proves that the Queen intended no such thing; and that is, there are other
Clauses in the same Charter to other purposes, that do expressly appoint
Quorums, and the Mayor and Recorder are made to be of the Quorum, which proves,
That where it is not so expressed, the Mayor himself is not of the Quorum; and
this indeed led us to that Opinion and Construction, that we proceeded to make
our Election upon it: A Charter in one Clause of it, is best Expounded from
other Clauses in the same Charter.

In the Clause that gives them power of Jail-deliver, the Mayor and Recorder
are both of the Quorum.

So in the Swearing of a New Alderman, it is expressly provided, that it shall
be done before the Mayor and Recorder both.

In the Clause that gives them power to Try Felons, and to keep a Sessions of
the Peace, it appears by the express Words That it may be done in the Mayor's
absence, and without him; for there the Quorum for that purpose is, The Mayor
and Recorder, or one of them. So that a Sessions may be held without the Mayor;
yet I would never do it if I could prevail with the Mayor to join with us, as
we earnestly endeavored time after time to do in the Case before you, for the
choosing of an Alderman, but he utterly refused us, at four several times, at
some good distance of time.

Object. If it be said, That the power to elect an Alderman is given to the
Mayor and Aldermen, or the major part of them; and so the Mayor by himself is
particularly and expressly named by the Name of his Office; and therefore is of
the Quorum without any other express making of a Quorum.

Resp. This I have already spoken to, (viz.) upon what account he is so named,
and it could not be otherwise.

But that this does not so make him of the Quorum in it, is manifest by this,
that those other Clauses where there are express Quorums of persons, though the
Mayor be there likewise mentioned in the beginning of the Clauses, yet he is
repeated over again, when they come to make him of the Quorum: This shows the
naming him before by his Office did not do it, if it did, the naming of him
again in the Quorum, will be a Tautology, and a vain Repetition.

But perhaps it will be said, It belongs to the Office of a Mayor at the Common
Law, to summon the Corporation (and amongst the rest the Aldermen) when he sees
there is occasion, and he must as Mayor be present among them, or nothing can
be done.

Let us examine the truth of this.

Those that advised the Indictment were not of this Opinion; and I heard it was
said at the Trial, that it was drawn with good advice; for the Indictment it
self challenges this Right, to the Mayor upon another ground.

It would intimate as if the Words of the Charter gave it him, as I have
already observed; which says, that secundum privilegia concessa est: therefore
they thought it was not his due at the Common Law.

1. For his Name of Mayor, that imports no such thing: He is Major, that is,
the Greater, the more Eminent; this notes his pre-eminence in Respect and
Reverence, but gives him little more of power than what the rest of the
Aldermen have.

The like Office among the old Romans was the Praetor, which (as Minsheu says)
comes from prae-itor, a prae-eundo, he does praeire, or praecedere, or
praesidere. He goes first, and sits uppermost, but it gives him no more power.
But the Mayor in our Case would neither lead nor drive.

But if there can be no Election of an Alderman without his Summons and
Presence, and if he be wilful (as the Mayor in our Case was) he is not only
Major Maximus, but Dominus fac totum (as the vulgar Saying is) or Dominus
faciens totum.

The twelve Aldermen without him, will be but so many Ciphers; the Mayor will
be the Great Figure, and the Aldermen will signify only in conjunction with
him. We may then say of every Alderman, as the one Grecian Captain said of the
other of Ulysses, Nihil est Diomede remoto.

Mr. Mayor will be that which the Logicians call Causa sine qua non quae per se
nihil facit, sed tantum esse aliquid sine qua Reliquae causae non faciunt. So
much for his Name and Title.

Then for the Office it self. That does not require his Summons nor Presence in
all the meetings of the Aldermen; for the Business of the Corporation, it is
not incident nor essential to his Office of Mayor by the Common Law.

The Common Law looks upon him as the Head or Chief of a Corporation; but he is
no Officer of the Common Law, to whom the Common Law limits or prescribes any
Duty, as it does to a Judge, a Sheriff, a Conservator of the Peace, a Coroner
or a Constable: These are all Officers at the Common Law, and the Common Law
instructs them in their Power and Duty.

But the Mayor being the Head of a Corporation, and a Corporation having its
essence by Charter or Prescription (which presupposes a Charter) he has no
power but what the Charter expressly gives him. The Common Law takes no farther
notice of him.

Let us examine the Ground and Nature of a Corporation, and there we shall find
the true Nature and Office of a Mayor, or any other Head, (for it is all one.)

The true Ground and Original of Corporations in Cities and great Towns, is
this: Those are generally the Staples of Trade and Merchandise; and Trade (as
is said in the Case of the City of London, 8 Co. 125. a.) cannot be maintained
without Order and Government. And therefore the King, for the Public Good, may
exect Gildam Mercatoriam, a Fraternity or Society, or Incorporation of
Merchants, to the end that good Order and Rule shall be by them observed, for
the Increase and Advancement of Trade and Merchandising.

Suppose the King should by his Charter Encorporate a Town, by the Name of
Mayor and twelve Aldermen, and should not set out their Duty and Office.

What power would the Law give them in that Case? They would have no power as
Conservators of the Peace, or as Justices of the Peace: They could neither Fine
or Imprison. If they should take upon them to meddle in these matters, without
express power given them by the words of the Charter, It would be Suitor ultra
Crepidam.

Therefore Charters usually add these Powers by express Clauses to those
purposes, and make the Mayor a Justice of Peace, or a Judge of Jail-delivery;
but then he acts in those Powers not Quatenus Major, nor eo nomine; but because
of the express power given him, as it might have done to any other Man.

The uniting the Powers in one person, does not confound the several and
different Capacities of that person.

That the Charter gives the only Rule in these Cases, and that a Corporation is
a mere Creature of the Charters that does constitute it, and gives it it is
Being; and therefore the Bounds and Limits of it is working appears, by this.

Suppose that neither this nor any other Charter had given to this Corporation
of Bristol any power to choose a new Mayor, or new Aldermen upon the Death of
the old, they could then have made no new Election, but when the Mayor and
Aldermen had died, the Corporation had been dissolved. The Charter that gives
them their Being, must provide for their Continuance and Succession.

Thus it is held in the Case of the Corporation of Dungannon in Ireland, in
those Reports that go by the Name of the Lord Coke 's 12 Rep. 120, 121. So that
the Charter must provide for an Election in order to a Succession, or otherwise
the Law will not help them.

And though the Mayor is the more Eminent and Excellent, and ought to have
greater respect and reverence, yet the subject matter that we are upon is to be
considered in the nature of it, viz. The Election of an Alderman. It is not a
matter of Interest, or of Privilege, or of Power, for then the Mayor ought to
be preferred in it. But it is matter of Duty and Labor, and Trust and Trouble.
It is Officium, not Dominium, to choose an Alderman. It is rather a Burden
than a Power or Authority; as is said in the Mayor of Oxford 's Case in Latches
Rep. 231.

But then it will be ask't, that if it depend upon the Charter, and not upon
the Common Law, Who shall appoint the time of Election, if the Charter be
silent in it, as here it seems to be? This will be a great defect, and so there
will be no meeting, nor no Election, and so the Corporation will expire.

To this I Answer, That the Charter does provide for it, for those whose Duty
it is to make an Election, it is their Duty to agree to meet for that purpose,
and to appoint the time, or else they do not discharge their Duty. They break
their Oath and are punishable for their Omission, and may forfeit their Charter
by it.

Now I do not deny but it is the Duty of the Mayor, and it is the equal Duty of
the Aldermen, to see a time be appointed for an Election.

And as the Mayor is the Chief in pre-eminence, so it aggravates his neglect if
he refuses it: But his neglect of his Duty will not excuse the rest of the
Electors for the not doing of their Duty, and the performing of their Qaths.

If it be said, What if they do not agree upon the time, but are divided?

I Answer. Whoever can carry an Election when they are met and choose shall also
govern in the time of meeting if there be any difference about it; and that is
not the Mayor, but the Major pars eorum, etc.

Now this agrees with the Rule of the Law in the like Cases.

In a Commission of the Peace to try Felonies, etc. And to hold a Court of
Quarter Sessions, Who shall issue out the Summons, and appoint the Time?

Answ. Those that constitute the Court, and are to Exercise the Power, must
issue out the Summons. If twenty Justices of the Peace, not having one of the
Quorum amongst them, should issue out a Summons for a General Quarter Sessions,
it would be void; for twenty Justices of the Peace cannot hold such a Sessions,
if there be not one of the Quorum among them: Nor can the Custos Rotulorum
alone do it, though he is commonly most Eminent.

Thus is it in the Commission of Jail-deliver, and of Dyer and Terminer. We
may see the Forms of them in Crompt. Jurisd. of Courts, f. 121, 125. The
express words of their Commission, for appointing time and place, Ad certum
diem quem vos tres vel duo vestrum (Quorum vos A. B. and C. D. unum esse
volumus) ad hoc provederitis.

And therefore there was no need of any more express Provision in the Charter,
for a Summons for an Election of an Alderman, or the appointing of a time.

In the next place, for the necessity of the Mayor's being present, as well as
their meeting by his Summons, I see no reason for it.

It is true, there is a Case in Print that seems to make for it, though I never
yet heard it so much as mentioned, either at the Trial (for I was not there) or
throughout the whole Case; yet it is fit for me to take notice of it; for I
make no doubt but before we have done we shall hear of it. It is in Sergeant
Rolls's Abridgment, Part I. Tit. Corporation, f. 513, 514. Case 5, 6, 7.
Between Hicks and the Borough of Launceston in Cornwall.

Resolved per Curiam ( which were only two Judges, viz. the Chief Justice
Richardson and Justice Croke, no other of the Judges being there.)

That if a Corporation consists of a Mayor and eight Aldermen, with a Clause in
the Patent, That if any of the Aldermen dye, that then the Mayor and the rest
of the Aldermen within eight days after shall Elect another; though it be not
limited, that they or the greater number of them may elect, yet the greater
number of them may elect.

And if the Mayor, at the time of the death of an Alderman, be absent at London
till after the eight days; and the rest of the Aldermen within eight days, come
to the Deputy Mayor and require him to make an Assembly of them, to elect
another within the eight days, and he refuse; and upon that the greater number
of the Aldermen meet without the Mayor or his Deputy, and Elect an Alderman;
that it is a void Election, for the Mayor ought to be present at it, by the
Words of the Grant.

This seems to be a stronger Case than ours, for there is a certain time
limited, by which they must make their Election, viz. eight days.

I first Observe, That this Case (as far as I can find) was not a Case
depending by any Suit or Action; for in that Case it is said, That a Writ was
granted to make a new Election of an Alderman. So that I suppose it was upon a
Motion only: I have a Copy of the Rules which shows it to be so (as I take it.)

Then it does not appear to be upon an Argument, for had it been so, two Judges
(I presume) would not have determined it, but have put it off till the Court
had been full (as usually they do) therefore it was not so solemn, nor has not
so great Authority.

But take it as it is.

The time of eight days being limited, by which the Election was to be made,
makes the Case never a whit the stronger; for there the Judges declare, that
there may be an Election after the eight days, and the limiting that time was
to quicken them.

Then observe the ground those two Judges went upon, they do not say it ought
to be so at the Common Law, as doubtless they would, had they thought that the
Common Law would have ruled it; for if the Common Law serves for it, it was
idle to resort to any other ground.

But the Judges in the Case of Launceston say, that the Mayor must be present
at the Election, by the Words of the Grant. So that they went by that Rule
which I have urged, which is the words of the Grant: it is the Charter only must
give the Rule, as I have Argued all this while.

Now what the words of the Charter were, in the Case of Launceston, does not
appear in the Report of that Case. Perhaps there was an express Provision in
the Charter, requiring the meeting of the Aldermen by the Summons of the Mayor,
and in his presence, which if so, then there is no disputing against it.

And the drawer of the Indictment against us, has so drawn it, as if the
Charter in our Case did so require it too. But there is nothing to that
purpose; nay, as I have observed, there are concomitant Clauses that give
another construction, and argue to the contrary. Therefore the Case of
Launceston differs from ours.

But there is another thing wherein the Case of Launceston and ours differs.

I am no Enemy to the Government I Live under; if any man think otherwise of
me, I care not, because I cannot govern another Man's Thoughts.

I do agree that this Sovereign Court of the King's Bench, as is resolved in
James Bagg 's Case, has a super-intendency, and a special Authority in Cases
of this nature, which more concern matter of Government and the public Peace
and Order, than any Man's private Right or Property.

And in such Cases this Court governs it self much by the Circumstances of the
Case.

Now let us mind the Circumstances of the Case Reported by Sergeant Rolls, and
of our Case, and let them be compared, and there will be a very wide difference
between them. And therein I dare appeal to any rational unbiased Man in the
World, for the Innocence of our proceedings in the whole matter.

The Mayor in the Case of Launceston, happened to be in London at the death of
the Alderman (to supply whose place there needed the Election.) He was not in
the Town that was to choose, whereof he was Mayor when the Election was made.

The Aldermen were under an apprehension that they should be guilty of a great
omission and neglect of their Duty, and perhaps had some thought of their being
under an Oath too, and that they might be liable to punishment if they did not
choose within the eight days prescribed by their Charter; nay, it is likely they
thought they could make no choice at all if they did it not within the eight
days: Though all this was but their mistake of the Law, yet it was very
pardonable in them.

The Judges in their Resolution upon that Case, rectify that Mistake, and a
new Election is thereupon ordered by this Court.

The Mayor there was not wilfully absent, for he was at London when the
Alderman died: he was at a very great distance from his Town too viz.
Launceston, about 200 miles, as I take it; so that he could hardly hear of the
death of the Alderman in the eight days time, and go down thither before the
end of the eight days, there was no great necessity of an Election so soon.

And the Aldermen had done what they did out of a zeal for the Public; though
it were a zeal without knowledge.

But I do not find that the void Election and the Aldermens meeting about it
was held a Riot or an unlawful Assembly.

No, they were not so much as blamed for what they did; nay, sure they were
rather to be commended for their just intentions.

But our Case was quite another thing.

And all our Circumstances, and the very plain words of our Charter that
appoints the manner of our Election, we had, to our great charge, and upon good
advice, drawn up in a special Plea; (for the Question truly arises upon the
words of the Charter, and the construction of them.) How it happened I cannot
tell, but a Judge ruled us to plead not Guilty; our chargeable special Plea
came in a little too late.

It was a matter of Record, and of Law, and fitter to be determined by the
Judges than by a Jury.

But these in truth were our Circumstances, as I shall briefly relate them, and
I am ready to make out the truth of them.

An Alderman of Bristol though chosen, yet cannot officiate till he be sworn; he
cannot be sworn (by the express words of the Charter) but before the Mayor and
Recorder both.

I being the Recorder of Bristol, happenn'd to be there some time before the
day of choosing Members to the Oxford Parliament not long after Sir John Lloid's
death: I was indeed invited thither.

Sir Richard Heart the then Mayor, and all of us (I think not one Alderman
absent) were then met in the Council Chamber, the usual place for that purpose:
we had nothing else to do.

It was moved that we might then make choice of a new Alderman, while not only
Mr. Mayor was present, but while the Recorder was there too: So that the Party
chosen might instantly have been sworn and entered upon his charge; for they
have their distinct Wards: And the Recorder many times comes not thither in a
year or two; for I live forty Miles from them, and I seldom tarry above two
nights at a Jail-deliver; but then (as it fell out) I was there upon another
occasion.

None opposed it but Mr. Mayor, and he did it upon a Ceremony and Complement,
as he pretended, because Sir John Lloid, (as he said) was not yet buried.

Out of respect to Mr. Mayor, we did forbear.

Some good time after, and after Sir John Lloid had been buried, I happened
unexpectedly to be there again; and Mr. Mayor was earnestly pressed again then
to go to an Election upon the former reason, that the new Alderman might
presently be sworn.

Mr. Mayor still refused; I do not remember but all the rest were very willing
to have gone to an Election.

We did the second time forbear, though I think we were all there (I am sure a
great number.)

I tarried then four or five days, it was at the Election to Parliament, the
Poll lasted six days; but I left them at the Poll, I was not fond of being
chosen.

The Evening (as I take it) before I went away, we were again upon the place,
and the Mayor with us, and he was again pressed to it, but wilfully went away,
and we still forbore.

But that night some of us signed a Writing, desiring Mr. Mayor to join with
us, and we declared in it, if he did not join, we would proceed without him,
being the major pars.

This shows we had no design to choose in his absence; nay, it plainly appeared,
that the design was on the Mayor's part; for he knew I could not stay, and he
was desirous to choose in the absence of some of us, that he might carry the
Election against the person next in course to be chosen, and every way
qualified (viz.) ( Alderman Day.)

I consulted the Charter, and found it as I have now observed upon it, and was
clearly of Opinion, for the Reasons I have offered, that in such Circumstances
the major part might choose.

We gave notice to the Mayor and all the Aldermen then in Town, and though the
Government is most miserably divided, yet in this Business there was nothing of
Faction, and the different Parties were not engaged; only the Mayor had his
Design. For we were six Aldermen at the Choice: Sir Robert Cann, an intimate
Friend of the Mayor's being lame of the Gout, sent us an Excuse, but would
approve of our Choice.

Another of our number, one of our six, is a zealous Man of Mr. Mayor's way;
yet not taking that to be now concerned, joined with us, and voted the same
way. We were six, and this appears by the Indictment, and we were unanimous in
the person we chose.

No other person was so much as named, nor I believe thought on by any Body,
unless by Mr. Mayor; there were but four Aldermen more in being, for Mr. Mayor
was none.

And the person chosen was not only next in course, but every way qualified;
has a great Estate (worth three or four of some of the Aldermen) no Tang of a
Fanatic, a constant Churchman, he had but one great Fault; he gave his Vote at
the Election to Parliament for my self and Sir John Knight, against Mr. Mayor
and Sir Tho. Earl.

The person is not sworn to this day, nor does desire the Office, but rather
declines it, being fit for it: He should have been Mayor this Year in course,
but is put by it, and he is contented.

There has been another since chosen in his place, by the Votes of five only,
(Sir Richard Heart the Mayor being one.) I am sure they are not major pars.

And for this choice by six, who are Justices of the Peace as well as Mr.
Mayor, and the other four, we who are four of six, are all Indicted for a Riot
upon the account of this Election. And this Indictment is found before Mr.
Mayor our Fellow Justice, and four more at the most; so that five, who are the
lesser number, exercise their Authority over those that were six in number when
they acted, which fix were as much Justices of the Peace as they five.

It is observable, that though we were six of us, and all unanimous in our
Election, yet they have politickly Indicted but four of us, and left two out,
because it would have been too gross and palpable, if six Justices of Peace
should have been indicted before a lesser number of their Brother Justices.

But had they Indicted all six, it would then plainly have appeared too that
the choice had been made by the greater part, which they wisely thought to
conceal; but yet it does appear in their very Indictment (though darkly couched
in it,) for it says that we four being Recorder and Aldermen, Cum aliis
Aldermannis, did choose the Alderman; that word (Aldermannis) being in the
Plural Number, must be two more at least.

If it shall be adjudg'd that we cannot choose an Alderman, but by the Mayor's
Summons, and in his presence, these Mischiefs will follow.

That he will wholly govern and dispose of Elections at his single will and
pleasure; for he that can order the time as he pleases, and forbear to summon
the Electors till he sees his own opportunity and advantage, though often desired
to go on upon it, and refuses to do it time after time, till such as will not
comply with him be out of the way (as the Recorder is very seldom there, and
tarries but a night or two, and then is in a hurry of Business, and most of the
Aldermen are often at their Country Houses) the Mayor will cast the choice upon
whom he thinks fit, as in this case he has done. This Mayor and four Aldermen
have rejected the choice made by six, and of the person that was next in
course, and every way qualified: And yet the Charter thought not fit to trust
any fewer than the Mayor and the whole Bench of Aldermen, in a matter of this
importance to the City.

If it be said, That in case the Mayor unreasonably defer it, we may complain
to this Court, viz. the King's Bench, and have a Mandamus, or apply our selves
to the King and Council to compel him to proceed to an Election.

Who will be at so great a charge and trouble? And that course is not so
speedy, it may chance to be in a Vacation; but let it be as speedy as can be,
the Mayor in the mean time has obtained his Ends, and gained his Opportunity,
and done his Work, as the Mayor in our Case did; where the Mayor and four more
(but five in all) being minor pars, have controlled the choice made by the
major pars.

If it shall be said, That if the major pars be present, and join in Voting to
an Election, though they divide in the person, yet the major pars so met shall
make a good Election, and in Law it shall be the choice of all present.

That I must deny, for the words of the Charter are, That the major pars
superviventium, shall make the choice, that is, as I understand it, agree in
their Votes or Voices in the Party chosen, and so it was in the choice that we
six made. This agrees with the Rules of the Common Law, in Elections and Leases
to be made by Corporations. Dyer 247. plac. 74. and Sir John Davies Rep. 47.
And this agrees with the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 27.

But if this should not be Law (as I take it is) yet the subsequent Election of
an Alderman, made by the Mayor and four Aldermen more, cannot be good; for
though the Mayor and seven Aldermen were present at it, yet three of them did
not join in going then to an Election; for they had joined with us before in
our choice, and therefore opposed any after Election to be made.

But they have gotten a conceit among them at Bristol, that what is done in a
Man's presence, where his presence is required by their Charter, tho he dissent
and oppose what is done, is yet legally done.

As in the Case of the Swearing of an Alderman, by the express words of the
Charter it cannot be done but before the Mayor and Recorder both. This Sir
Richard Heart was duly chosen an Alderman long ago, but not sworn until the last
Jail-deliver when we were going to Try the Felons. I being present, they
thought that sufficient to satisfy the Charter, and in a Tumultuous manner,
with an hideous noise, they cried out to swear him, and this was not the usual
place neither for it. I opposed the Swearing of him, and I will justify it,
that he was utterly unfit to be Sworn, by something that happenn'd since his
being Elected an Alderman; they would not hear me, but resolved to proceed to
swear him, because I was present with the Mayor. Thereupon I withdrew, and in
my absence they went on to swear him, and he now acts as an Alderman, and as a
Justice of Peace, under this color.

If no Election of an Alderman can be made but in the Mayor's presence, it will
be in the power of one single person (if he be obstinate and wilful) to forfeit
the Charter. For if he find the Aldermen like to choose contrary to his mind, he
need but with draw, and all the rest are insignificant persons, and so there
shall be no Election in any reasonable time, and thereby the Liberties
forfeited.

If this absolute power allowed to Mayors may serve a politic Turn for once,
it may do as much Mischief another time; for he may be of a contrary and cross
humor to what may be desired. And he is not a person nominated by any
superior power to that place, or imposed upon the Corporation, but chosen from
amongst themselves, and chosen by themselves: But though they choose him, yet it
is not safe to trust all the Liberties of the City in the Breast of one Man;
for one man may easily change and be wrought upon, where many cannot. It is
better to trust twelve than one.

The Right of Election is a very tender thing, and it is a Maxim at the Common
Law, and strengthened by several Acts of Parliament, That Elections should be
free.

By the Stat. of Westminster. the 1st. in the time of that Wise and Excellent King
Edward the I. It is Enacted, That Elections be free. And it forbids under a
grievous Penalty (those are the words) that null haut home, no great Man (such
as every Mayor is in his sphere) shall disturb to make free Election.

Sir Edward Coke in his 2 Inst. f. 169. in his Exposition of that Statute, says
it extends to all sorts of Elections, and agrees with the Maxim of the Common
Law.

Now if the Mayor shall at three several times refuse the advice and desire of
the Aldermen, and knowing that they can make no choice without him, refuse to
join with them till he sees his own time and advantage, he will have his own
choice, do what they can; for before they can complain of him (which is a work
of time and charge, and trouble) he will have done his work, and so prevent
them.

And then where is the freedom of Election?

This could never appear more plainly than in this Case of ours, where the
Election by the majority is set aside, and the choice made by a lesser number,
and in effect by Mr. Mayor only, is that which carries it. It plainly appears
that we had no sinister design to do any thing without the Mayor, for we did
all we could to get him to join with us, and he thrice denied us; but it as
plainly appears that the Mayor had a design in refusing to do it till some of
us must be gone, and then to steal an Election behind our backs, by a lesser
number, when he had the advantage.

After all that I have said I do agree, that had eleven Aldermen of us gone
about an Election without so much as desiring the Mayor to join with us, or it
may be upon once or twice being refused; or when the Mayor had been
occasionally absent; or had it any way appeared that we meant a surprise in it;
or had we made a Choice, subject to the least Exception, and had he not
obstinately gone away from us, being in person upon the place, without so much
as giving us the least reason for his refusal, I should have held my tongue and
not have concerned my self any farther in it. I hope it sufficiently appears,
that I have been no Enemy to Government and Order.

But to choose an Alderman was our Duty, and we were under an Oath to do our
Duty, and we did but discharge our Trust.

I may (I think) save my self the labor of arguing, that however, if we were
mistaken in the Construction of the Charter, and in the point of Law in the
making of our Election, yet here is no Riot in the Case (for we are indicted
for a Riot) for a Riot is the doing of an unlawful act with force and violence;
neither are we an unlawful Assembly, for that is, where there is an intent to
do an unlawful Act, but still with force and violence, but they go away without
doing it, as appears by Poulton de Pace Reg. and Regin. fol. 25.

And in case the Election we made be adjudged duly made, then the pretense of a
Riot vanishes of it self, as is held in Eden's Case, Cro. Eliz. 697. If the
Indictment be void for the principal matter, which in the Case there, was an
unlawful Entry against the Statute of 8 H. 6. where that Statute was
mis-recited, they were not allowed in that case to stand upon the Riot.

I have but a short word more.

I have been the Recorder of Bristol these one and twenty years, longer I think
than any Man can be remembered. I have sworn all the Aldermen that are now upon
the Bench, in my time, and many more who are now dead. I can say it without
vanity, till the time of this unhappy Election of Members to the Oxford
Parliament (which I sought not) I had the good Will of all sides, even of this
Mr. Mayor, who was, Sir Richard Heart; for I never would join with any Party,
but did all I could, when I came amongst them, to join them together and unite
them: For ever since they grew rich and full of Trade and Knighthood, too much
Sail and too little Ballast, they have been miserably divided.

And unless this Court (to whom I think it properly belongs upon complaint in
such Cases) will examine their Dis-orders and command Peace and Order to be
observed in our Proceedings, I cannot safely attend there any more, nor hold
any Gaol Delivery.

I submit what I have said to the Court.

Whereupon the Court arrested the Judgment.

Lord Grandison versus Countess of Dover.
IN a Prohibition the Case was. Where an Administration once granted ought not
to be repealed.
Charles Heveningham died Intestate leaving an only Sister Abigail, then an
Infant. The Countess of Dover, who was her Great Grandmother, came into the
Prerogative Court, and prayed to be assigned her Guardian Ex officio, which was
granted, and thereupon she obtained Administration durante minore aetate.

Afterward my Lord Grandison brought a Prohibition suggesting that the Court
had granted Administration upon a surprise, and being Grandfather to the
Children, and so nearer of kindred, prayed that Administration might be
committed to him.

The Lady replied, that it was obtained after great deliberation, and without
any surprise; and upon a Demurrer the Question was, Whether this Administration
was well granted to the Lady.

It was argued now by Dr. Master for the Plaintiff, and afterward by a Common
Lawyer on the same side, in Hillary- Term following. And by Dr. Reins, and Sir
William Williams for the Defendant.

The Civilian argued, That the Father of both the Children, died intestate, and
that their Mother administered, and afterward made a Will, of which she
appointed my Lord to be Executor, and thereby committed the Infant to his
Custody; which being in Fact true, the Curatorship of the Living Child, by the
Civil Law, draws to it the Administration of the Estate of the dead Child.

There is a Statute Law which empowers the Father by Deed or Will to dispose
the custody of his Child under Age, 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.
to any in Possession or Remainder, who may take the Profits of his Lands, and
possess himself of the said Infant's personal Estate, and bring Actions in
relation thereunto, as a Guardian in Socage might have done. And wherever a
Father or Quare of the Mother.
Mother has made such a disposition, a Judge cannot assign a Guardian.

The Spiritual Courts have power to repeal this Administration granted to my
Lady Dover; the Right is not in question, for whoever has it reaps no
advantage, because it is for the benefit of the Infant; the contest is, who
ought to be admitted by the Spiritual Court to Administer?

It cannot be denied but that the Great Grandmother is a degree more remote
than the Grandfather: If therefore that Court has entrusted one who ought not
to have Administration, they have an undoubted power in such case to make an
Alteration.

If my Lord had been Administrator, it had been agreeable to the Common Law,
for he is Guardian in Socage durante minore aetate.

E contra. E contra.
It was said, That my Lord was really indebted to the Estate of the Infant
intestate, and therefore as this Case is, the Spiritual Court ought not to
repeal the Administration once granted, for it is for the benefit of the Infant.

It Is not material who shall be Administrator, for he who is so durante minore
aetate, has no power over the Estate; he is only a Curator in the Civil Law,
which is in the nature of a Bailiff in our Law, who has only power to sell
bona peritura.

Probate of Wills did not Originally belong to the Spiritual Courts de jure,
they had that Authority per consensum Regis and Magnatum: And as those Courts
had not original Jurisdiction in such Cases, so they had no power to grant
Administration, 'till enabled by the Statute of Edw. 31 Ed. 3. cap. 11.
3. For before that time the Kings of England by their proper Officers solebant
capere bona intestatorum in manus suas.

It Is plain that the Ordinary had no power by the Common Law over an
Intestate's Estate, for he could not maintain an Action to recover any part of
it: now if the Law had given him a power over the Goods; it would likewise have
given him an Authority or Remedy to recover them.

An Action would have lain against him at the Common Law, 13 E. 1. cap. 19.
and by the Statute of Edw. 1. which was made in affirmance thereof, if he had
possessed himself of such Goods, and refused to pay the Debts.

Then since he has no original Power in this Case, and this being a special
kind of Administration, when he has once executed that power he shall not
repeal it; and the Court inclined to that Opinion, vid. 9 Rep. Henslow's Case.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 35 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1683.
Roe versus Sir Thomas Clargis.
IN a Writ of Error, Papist is actionable. Raymond 482.
upon a Judgment in the Common Pleas, in an Action upon the Case, wherein the
Plaintiff declared, That the King had made him one of his Privy Council in
Ireland, and that he was a Deputy Lieutenant of the County of Middlesex, and
had served in several Parliaments for the Borough of Christ-Church in
Hampshire; and that the King having summoned a Parliament to meet at
Westminster, he did stand to be a Member of that Borough, and that the
Defendant Roe did then speak these words of him, Viz. He (meaning the
Plaintiff) is a Papist. Upon a Trial there was a Verdict and a Judgment for the
Plaintiff.

This Case was argued by Sir Francis Winnington for the Plaintiff in the
Errors, and by Mr. Roger North for the Defendant.

The Questions were these.

1. Whether the words abstracted from the Offices set forth in this Declaration
were actionable or not?

2. Whether they are actionable as joined to those Capacities?

The Council for the Plaintiff in the Errors, held the Negative in both Points.

1. The word Papist is not defined either by the Common Law, or the Statutes of
this Realm; for from the first of the Queen to the 25 Car. 2. it is not to be
found what a Papist is.

There are several Statutes between those times which provide against the
Jurisdiction of the Pope, and which inflict particular Punishments upon
committing Offenses therein prohibited, but none of those Laws give any
definition of a Papist.

If by a Papist is meant him who embraces the Doctrine of the Pope; it was
punishable before the Reformation to be of a contrary Opinion: Now in the
vulgar acceptance of the word, a man may hold the same Opinion with the Church
of Rome, and yet not profess the Popish Religion, so as to bring himself in
danger of any of the Penalties in these Laws.

There was never yet an Indictment against a person for being a Papist, but
many have been indicted upon the breach of those Laws made against Recusants,
by which they incurred the Penalties thereby appointed.

In Michaelmas 27 H. 8. 27 H. 8. 14. B.
an Action on the Case was brought in the Common Pleas, for calling of the
Plaintiff Heretic, and Willoughby the King's Sergeant argued, That the Action
would not lie, because the word did import a Spiritual Matter, of which the
Temporal Courts had no knowledge; and of that Opinion were the Chief Justice
Fitzherbert and Justice Shelley: The same may be said in this Case, that the
word Papist relates to something which is Spiritual, of which this Court has
no cognizance.

Words which are actionable must immediately injure the person of whom they are
spoken, either in his Profession, or bring him in danger of some Punishment,
Hob. 8.
as to call an (Attorney Bribing Knave, which are adjectively spoken, yet it is
an Injury done to him in his Profession.

It was said at the Trial in the Common Pleas, That it is actionable to call a
Man Papist at this time, though it might not be so at another time. This seems
to be a very vain assertion, for though the Times may alter, the Law is still
the same.

It would be a very great inconvenience, if Men should be deterred by Actions
to call another Man a Papist, for this would be an encouragement to Popery, and
a check upon the Protestant Religion, to punish the Professors thereof, for
saying a Man is a Papist, who is really so both in his Judgment and Profession.

But admitting the word to be actionable, Not actionable to call a man Papist.
Cro. Eliz. 191.
it is not so before Conviction, for it is very improperly used, and of no
signification or discredit before that time.

2. These words are not actionable as coupled with his Offices, because he has
alleged no particular damage or Loss, and his Offices are only Honorary, and
of no Profit, and therefore he could receive no Damage by speaking these words,
if true, when they in no sort relate to his Offices, and are too remote to be
applied to them.

1. E contra.
The words are actionable in themselves, for they scandalize the Plaintiff in
his Reputation, and may be a means to bring him to corporal Punishment; for by
several Acts of Parliament many Punishments are inflicted upon Popish
Recusants, which is the same thing with a Papist; they are disabled from
holding any Office or Employment in the Kingdom, they are not to come into the
Kings presence, or within five Miles of the City of London, and the calling of
him Papist subjects him to the danger of being Indicted for a Traitor, for the
words are Synonimous.

When H. 8. took upon him the Supremacy which the Pope had unlawfully Usurped,
there were certain Papists in those days who called themselves Roman
Catholics, that they might be distinguished from those who bore Allegiance to
their lawful King; which general appellation was afterward changed into the
word Papist, so that both signify the same thing.

The Objection that tho Times change, the Law is still the same, may receive
this Answer, That when the force of words is changed with the Times, those
words shall be actionable now, which were not so at another time. As for
Example: the proper and genuine signification of the word Knave is a Servant,
but now the Times have altered the sense of that word, and made it to be a term
of Reproach; so that it is actionable to call an Attorney Knave, who is but a
Servant to his Client.

1. Then as to the Objection that the word Papist is not defined in our Law.
There is a Statute which disables a Man from having any Office whatsoever who
shall affirm the King to be a Papist, 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.
that is, a person who endeavors to introduce Popery.

2. But if the word Papist is not actionable of it self, yet as coupled with
his Offices it is otherwise, and the Plaintiff may well maintain this Action.
And of that Opinion was all the Court: So the Judgment was affirmed.

Malloon versus Fitzgerald.
ERror of a Judgment in Ireland, Where an Estate Tail shall not be determined
for want of notice of a Proviso to determine it.
for Lands in the County of Waterford; the Case upon the special Verdict was
this.

John Fitzgerald was seized in Fee of the Lands in question, who had Issue
Katherine his only Daughter: He by Lease and Release made a Settlement of those
Lands upon the Earl of Ossory and other Trustees therein named, and their
Heirs, to the use of himself for Life, and after his Decease to the use of his
Daughter Katherine in Tail, Provided that she Married with the consent of the
said Earl and the Trustees, or the major part of them, or their Heirs some
worthy person of the Family and Name of Fitzgerald, or who should take upon him
that Name immediately after the Marriage; but if not, then the said Earl should
appoint and raise a Portion out of the said Lands for the Maintenance of the
said Katherine, with a Remainder to Laetitia in Tail.

John Fitzgerald died, his Daughter being then but two years old. She
afterward at the Age of fourteen had Notice of this Settlement, but not by the
Direction of the Trustees. That on the 20th of March, in the 16th year of her
Age, she Married with the Plaintiff, Edward Villiers Esquire; without the consent
of the Trustees, or the major part of them; and that her Husband Mr. Villiers
did not take upon him the Name of Fitzgerald after the said Marriage. That
Laetitia the Aunt was married to Franklyn, who likewise did not take upon him
the Name of Fitzgerald.

1. The Questions were, Whether the Estate limited to Katherine be forfeited,
without Notice given to her of the Settlement, by the Trustees themselves?

2. Whether her Estate be not determined by her marrying Mr. Villiers without
their consent?

And it was argued, That the Estate Tail was determined.

And first as to the point of Notice; it is not necessary to be given to the
Daughter, because the Father had not made it in the Settlement. He might
dispose of his Estate at his pleasure, and having made particular Limitations
of it, there is no room now for the Law to interpose, to supply the defect of
Notice in the Deed. And to this purpose the Mayor of London 's Case was cited,
which was, That

George Monox Devised certain Houses to his Executors in Trust, and their
Heirs, Cro Car. 576. Idem Jones 452.
upon condition to pay money to several Charitable uses, which if not performed,
then he devised them over to his Heir in Tail, upon the same Conditions, and if
not performed by him, then to the * The Devise to him was void, because it was
a possibility upon a possibility.
Mayor and Commonalty of London. The Trusts were not performed by the first
Devisees. A Stranger entered and levied a Fine with Proclamations, and five
Years passed. Then the Mayor of London brought his Action, supposing he had a
right of Entry, for the non performance of the Trusts, but was barred by the
Fine, although it was argued for him, that he had not notice of the Devise or
breach of the Trust till after the Fine levied; which shows that Notice was not
necessary, for if it had been so when his Title accrewed, he could not have
been barred by the Fine.

As Katherine the Daughter takes notice what Estate she has in the Land, so as
to pursue a proper Remedy to recover it, so she ought to take notice of the
Limitations in the Settlement, and has the same means to acquaint her self
with the one as with the other; and the same likewise as her Aunt had to know
the Remainder.

Suppose a Promise is made to indempnifie another from all Bonds which he
should enter into for a third person, 2 Cro. 432. Hob. 51. Jones 207. Pop. 164.
and then an Action is brought against him, wherein the Plaintiff declared that
he was bound accordingly, and not saved harmless, but does not show that he
gave notice of his being bound, yet the Plaintiff shall recover.

As to the Case of a Copyholder having three Sons who surrendered to the use of
his Will, 2 Cro. 56.
and then devised to his middle Son in Fee, upon condition to pay Legacies to
his Sisters at full age, which were not paid. Now though it was adjudged that his
Estate was not determined upon the nonperformance of this Condition, without
an actual demand and denial, and that he was not bound to take notice of the
full age of his Sisters; yet this is not an Authority which can any wise
prevail in this Case, because it is a * If the Devise had been to the eldest
Son, then it had been a Limitation annexed to his Estate, and not a Condition,
because if it had been a Condition, it would have descended upon the Heir, who
could not be sued for the breach. 1 Ventr. 199. Rep. Canc. 140. Sid. Poph. 104.
Condition to pay Legacies, which is a thing in its nature not to be paid
without a demand, which implies notice.

In all Cases where Conditions are annexed to Estates to pay Money, there notice
is necessary; but where Estates are limited upon the performance of collateral
acts, it is not necessary: And this has been held the constant difference.

So is Fry and Porter 's Case, which was this. The Earl of Newport had two
Daughters, and he devised Newport- House to the Daughter of his eldest Daughter
in Tail, which she had by the Earl of Banbury, Provided, and upon condition
that she marry with the consent of her Mother and two other Trustees, or the
major part of them, if not, or if she should dye without Issue, then he devised
the said House to George Porter in Fee, who was the Son of his youngest
Daughter, and who had married one Thomas Porter, without her Fathers consent.

The Lady Ann Knowles, the first Devisee married Fry, without the consent of
her Grandmother or Trustees, and it was adjudg'd against her upon point of
Notice, that it was not necessary, because her Grandfather had not appointed
any person to give notice; he might have imposed any Terms or Conditions upon
his own Estate, and all Parties concerned had the same means to inform
themselves of such Conditions.

The third Resolution in Frances Case, 8 Co.
comes nearest to this now in question, it was in Replevin, the Defendant
avowed the taking Damage Fesant. The Plaintiff pleaded in Bar to the Avowry,
that R. Frances was seized in Fee of the place where, etc. and devised it to
John (who was his eldest Son) for sixty years, if he so long lived, Remainder
to Thomas for Life, and that John made a Lease to the Plaintiff for a year. The
Defendant replied, that after the Devise R. Frances made a Feoffment in Fee of
the same Lands amongst others, to the use of himself for Life. Then as to the
other Lands to diverse Uses contained in the Deed; but as to those Lands in
which the Distress was taken, to the same Uses as in the Will, in which
Conveyance there was this Priviso, That if John should disturb his Executors in
the quiet Enjoyment, etc. or if he shall not suffer them to carry away the
Goods in his House, then the Uses limited to him should be void: He did hinder
the Executors to carry away the Goods, yet it was adjudged that he should keep
his Estate, because being a Stranger to the Feoffment, he shall not lose it
without notice of the Proviso.

But in answer to that Case, notice was not the principal matter of that
Judgment, it turned upon a point in Pleading, for the Avowant had not showed
any special act of disturbance, and a bare denial without doing any more was
held to be no breach of the Condition.

Some other Authorities may be cited to prove notice necessary, Green's Case, 6
Co. 24.
as where Tenant for Life of a Manor to which an Advowson was appendant did in
the year 1594. present Durston, who neglecting to read the Articles was
deprived nine years afterward by the Ordinary at the Suit of the Patron who
presented him, who also dyed two years after the Deprivation; then the Queen
presented by Lapse, whose Presentee was inducted, and six years afterward
Durston dyed, after whose death he in Remainder presented Green; now though the
Patron was a Party to the Suit of Deprivation, and thereby had sufficient
notice that the Church was vacant, yet it was adjudged that a Lapse should not
incurr but only after notice given by the Ordinary himself, and not by any
other person whatsoever.

But this Case may receive this Answer, viz. That notice had not been necessary
at Law, but it was provided by a particular Act of Parliament, 13 Eliz. ca. 12.
that no Title by Lapse shall accrue upon any deprivation, but after six months
notice thereof given by the Ordinary himself to the Patron.

It Is true the Law is very tender in divesting the Rights of the Subject; but
where an Estate is created by the Act of the Party, and restrained by
particular limitations without any appointment of notice, there the Law will
not add notice and make it necessary, because the person who made such a
disposition of his Estate might have given it upon what conditions he pleased.

Therefore it may seem hard that this Estate should be determined by the
neglect or omission of the Trustees to give notice of this Proviso; but it is
apparent that it was the intent of the Father it should be so; for by this
Limitation the Estate is bound in the Hands of an Infant; the reason is,
because there is a Privity between an Heir and an Ancestor, and therefore the
Heir is bound to take notice of such Conditions which his Ancestor has imposed
on the Estate.

2. This Estate is determined by the Marriage of the Daughter with Mr.
Villiers, because there is an express Limitation in the Deed, for that very
purpose she is enjoined to marry a Fitzgerald, or one who should take upon him
that name, which is still more extensive, and she having neglected to do the
one, and her Husband having refused to do the other, the Aunt in Remainder
shall take advantage of this Nonperformance.

And it is this Remainder over which makes it a Limitation; 1 Ventr. 202. Owen
112. Goldsb. 152. Lit. Sect. 723.
for if it had been a Condition then the intent of the Father had been utterly
defeated; for none but the Heir at Law can enter for the breach of a Condition,
and such was Katharine in this Case.

The Proviso in this Deed depends upon another Sentence immediately going
before, 2 Co. 70.
to which it has reference, and then by the express resolution in Cromwell's
Case it is a Limitation or Qualification of the Estate, and not a Condition,
which Estate is now determined without Entry or Claim.

It was argued that in this Case three things are to be considered: E contra.


1. The Nature of the Proviso.

2. That Notice is absolutely necessary.

3. That the Notice given was not sufficient, being not such as is required by
Law.

As to the 1st. The very nature of this Proviso is condemned by the Civil Law,
and because it works the destruction of Estates it has never been favored at
the Common Law.

All Conditions to restrain Marriage generally are held void by both Laws, so
likewise are such which restrain people from marrying without the consent of
particular persons; because they may impose such hard terms before they give
their consent, that may hinder the Marriage it self, and therefore a bare
request of such, without their subsequent assent, has been always allowed to
preserve the Estate.

2. And which was the principal Point, Notice in this Case is absolutely
necessary both by the intent of the Father, and by the construction of the Law.

There are three things of which the Law makes an equal Interpretation, viz.
Uses, Wills and Acts of Parliament, in which, if the intention of the Parties
and of the Law makers can be discerned, the Cases which severally fall under
the direction of either shall be governed by the intention without respect to
the disagreeing words, nay sometimes the Law will supply the defect of words
themselves.

The Books are full of Authorites, where Constructions have been made of Acts
of Parliament according to the intent of the Makers, and not according to the
Letter of the Law.

As in Eyston and Stud's Case in the Commentaries, Plowd. Com. 2 pt. 463.
where the Husband and Wife levied a Fine of the Lands of the Wife, and
declared the Uses to their Heirs in Tail, the Remainder to the Heirs of the
Wife, they had Issue, and the Husband died; the Widow married a second Husband,
and he and his Wife join in a second Fine, and declared the Uses thereof to
themselves for Life, the Remainder to the Husband and his Heirs for sixty
years, the Remainder in Tail to their Issue, the Remainder to the Heirs of the
Wife; the Issue of the first Husband entered supposing the Estate had been
forfeited by the Statute of H. 7. 11 H. 7. c. 20.
which Enacts, That if a Woman has an Estate in Dower or in Tail jointly with
her Husband, or to her self of the Inheritance or Purchase of him, and she does
either sole or with another Husband discontinue, it shall be void, and he in
the Remainder may enter.

Now this Case was directly within the words of the Statute, for the Woman had
an Estate Tail in possession jointly with her first Husband which she had
discontinued by joining in the Fine with her second Husband; but yet it was
adjudged no Forfeiture, because it was not within the intent of the Statute to
restrain Women to dispose of their own Estates, but only such as came from the
Husband.

So here Uses are in the nature of private Laws, and must be governed by the
like intention of the Parties; now it is not to be supposed that the Father did
intend to disinherit his only Daughter and Heir without notice of this
Settlement, therefore though he had not appointed any person in particular to
give her notice, yet it must of necessity be presumed that his intention was,
that she should have the Estate unless she had refused upon notice to comply
with those Conditions imposed upon her.

Now the Daughter being Heir at Law and so having a good Title by descent, if
there be any Conveiance made by her Ancestor to defeat that Title, and to which
she is a Stranger, she ought by the Rules of Law and Reason to have notice of
it, and so is the express Resolution in Frances's Case, where the Devise and
the Feoffment were both made to the Heir at Law: And the reason why in Fry and
Porter's Case notice was not held necessary was, because the Devise was to a
Grandaughter, who was not Heir at Law; for the Earl of Newport had three Sons
then living, and therefore the Parties whom it concerned had the same means to
inform themselves upon what Conditions they were to have the Estate.

3. The notice here given was not sufficient; for as the Ordinary himself in
Green's Case ought to have given the Patron notice of the Deprivation before a
Lapse should incurr, so the Trustees here ought to give the Daughter notice of
this Proviso before she shall lose her Estate for Nonperformance of the
Conditions on which she should take it, especially since the notice she had of
this Proviso was not certain; for it is said she had notice not to marry without
the consent of the Trustees, but it is not showed who they are, or how she
should apply her self to them.

Besides there is something in this Proviso which the finding in the Verdict
will not supply, for it may be literally true that the Daughter married without
the consent of the Trustees, and yet no breach of the Condition, because the
Proviso is to restrain her from marrying without the consent of them or their
Heirs; now it was not found that the Feoffees were then living, and if they
were dead their Consent cannot be required, and she might have the consent of
their Heirs.

Mr. Franklyn, who was the Husband of Laetitia the Aunt in Remainder, has
likewise forfeited that Estate which he has, or may have, in right of his Wife
(if she had any right) by not taking upon him the name of Fitzgerald; for if
the Father would have disinherited his Daughter for Nonperformance of this
Proviso a fortiori, he shall be intended to disinherit his Sister for making
frustrate his desire in the settlement of his Estate.

In Easter-Term following Judgment was given, That the Estate Tail was not
determined for want of notice according to the resolution in Frances's Case.

Hinton versus Roffey.
AN Action of Debt was brought against the Defendant, In pleading the Statute
of Usury the Agreement and the Sum taken must be set out. 12 Car. 2. c. 13.
who pleaded the Statute of Usury, but did not show any particular Agreement,
only in general that he was indebted to the Plaintiff in a Sum not exceeding
180 l. neither did he seth forth when the Interest of the Money did commence,
and on what day it became due: And upon a Demurrer it was objected, that this
Plea was too general, because the Defendant ought to show in particular what
the Sum was in which he was indebted, and how much the Plaintiff took above 6
l. per Cent. for if the certainty thereof did not appear, there could be no
Fact applied to it.

But on the other side it was alleged that it was not material to show the
certain Sum which the Plaintiff took above 6 l. E contra.
per Cent. and therefore not necessary to set forth the particular Agreement
between them; for having pleaded and made a substantial Averment to bring his
Case within it, it is well enough without showing how much he took above six in
the hundred. And this Case was compared to Debt against an Administrator, Moon
versus Andrews. Hob. 133.
who pleaded in Bar a Judgment, etc. and that he had fully administered, and had
not Assets praeterquam bona, etc. non attingen. to 5 l. and upon Demurrer this
was held a good Plea; for though in strictness of Pleading the Defendant ought
to have showed the certain value of the Goods, and not to have said non
attingen. to 5 l. yet the substance sufficiently appears that he had not more
than 5 l. to satisfy a Debt of an 100 l. for which that Action was brought.

Jefferies Chief Justice and the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, because
the Defendant ought to have set forth the Agreement, and to apply it to the Sum
in the Declaration.

Smith versus Goodier.
IN Ejectment for the Manor of Heythorpe: Attornment must be proved where an
Ejectment is brought for a Manor, parcel in Rent and Services, etc.
Upon Not-guilty pleaded there was a Trial at Bar by an Oxfordshire Jury.

The Title of the Lessor of the Plaintiff was, That Edmund Goodier Esquire was
seized in Fee of the said Manor, part in Demesnes, some part in Leases for
years with Rent reserved, and some part in Services, and being so seized made a
Feoffment in Fee to Sir John Robinson and Sir William Rider, and their Heirs in
Trust for Sir Robert Masham: This Deed was dated in 1647. and the consideration
was 5000 l. paid to Goodier; there was a Letter of Attorney of the same date
with the Deed and Livery and Seisin endorsed.

Sergeant Maynard, who was of Council for the Defendant, put the Plaintiff to
prove an Attornment of the Tenants; for having declared for a Manor, Lit.
Sect. 553. 1 Roll. Abr. 293.
parcel in Rents and Services, those would not pass without an Attornment; and
of this Opinion was the whole Court, but the Plaintiff would not prove an
Attornment.

The Defendant made a Title under the Marriage Settlement of the said Goodier,
who in 17 Jacobi married Elizabeth Mees, and then he settled the said Manor
upon himself for life, and upon his Issue in Tail Male, and that the Defendant
was the Heir in Tail.

But on the other side it was insisted that this Settlement was fraudulent
against the Purchasor, Evidence of a Fraudulent Settlement.
and that it could not be thought otherwise, because both the Original and
Counterpart were found in Mr. Goodiers Study after his death; and because he
had made Oath before a Master in Chancery, that there was no incumberance upon
the Estate, which Affidavit was produced in Court, but not suffered to be read
but as a Note or Letter, unless the Plaintiff would produce a Witness to swear
that he was present when the Oath was taken before the Master.

And an Objection was made to the Settlement it self, which recited, That
whereas a Marriage was intended to be had between the said Edmund Goodier and
Elizabeth Mees, now in consideration thereof and of a Portion he conveyed the
said Manor to the Feoffees, to the use of himself for life, and after his
decease, to the use of the said Elizabeth for life, but does not say, from and
after the Solemnization of the said Marriage; so that if she had not married
Mr. Goodier, yet after his decease she would have enjoyed the Estate for life.
Upon the whole matter the Jury found for the Defendant.

Dominus Rex versus Coney and Obrian.
THE Defendants were convicted for the Murder of Mr. Murder was pardoned by the
name Felonica interfectio, and held good. 10 E. 3. c. 3. 13 R. 2. c. 1.
Tyrrwhite and Mr. Forster in a Duel, and now pleaded their Pardon, in which
there was a Clause Non obstante the Statute of Ed. 3. which appoints him that
has a Pardon of Felony to find Sureties for his Good Behavior before it shall
be allowed; and another Non obstante to the Statute of R. 2. which enacts, that
if the Offense be not specified in the Pardon it shall not be allowed.

Now the Word Murdrum was not in this Pardon, the Offense was expressed by
these general Words Felonica interfectione; and whether it did extend to pardon
Murder was the Question.

Mr. Astry, the Clerk of the Crown, informed the Court that one Alexander
Montgomery of Eglington pleaded the like Pardon for Murder, but it was held
insufficient, and the Court gave him time to get his Pardon amended, which was
done likewise in this Case.

The Defendants came again on another day, and Council being allowed to plead
for them, insisted that the Pardon was good, and that the Murder was
sufficiently pardoned by these Words, that it is in the power of the King to
pardon by general Words, and his intent did plainly appear to pardon the
Defendants.

That the murder of a person is rightly expressed by felonious killing, though
not so properly as by the word Murdrum it self, the omission of which word will
not make the Pardon void.

And to prove this he cited the Sheriff of Norfolk's Case, 2 R. 3. 7. a.
who was indebted to the King during the time he was Sheriff, and was pardoned
by the Name of J. W. Esquire (who was the same person) de omnibus debitis and
computis, etc. Afterward he was charged in the Exchequer for 100 l. where he
pleaded this Pardon, and it was held good, though he was not named Sheriff, and
so not pardoned by the name of his Office; yet the Kings intention appearing in
his Charter, and having pardoned him by his right Name, that was sufficient,
and in that Case the King himself was concerned in point of interest.

The Books all agree, More 752. Lucas's Case, 8 Co. 18. 3 Inst. 234.
that before the Statute of R. 2. the King might pardon Murder by the word
Felony; now this Prerogative being incident to the Crown and inseparable from
the person of the King was not designed to be wholly restrained by that Act;
for the Parliament only intended that by specifying the Offense in the Pardon
the King should be rightly informed of the nature of it, and when he
understands it to be Murder he would not grant a Pardon.

But admitting his power to be restrained by that Statute, Stamf. 101.
yet a Non obstante is a dispensation of it, and therefore this Pardon ought to
be allowed.

The Pardon was held good by the whole Court; And Jefferies the Chief Justice,
said, that he had proposed this Case to all the Judges of England, Sid. 366.
and they were all of the same Opinion, and that he remembered Dudley's Case,
where a Pardon in general words was allowed.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 35 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1683/4.
Brason versus Dean.
A Covenant upon a Charter Party for the Freight of a Ship. A thing lawful to
be done, when the party did covenant to do it, and afterward prohibited, the
Covenant is binding.
The Defendant pleaded that the Ship was loaded with French Goods prohibited by
Law to be imported; and upon Demurrer Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; for
the Court were all of Opinion, That if the thing to be done was lawful at the
time when the Defendant did enter into the Covenant, though it was afterward
prohibited by Act of Parliament, yet the Covenant is binding.

Barnes versus Edgard.
TRespass for breaking his Close and impounding of his Cattle: Where Damages
are under 40 s. the Plaintiff must have ordinary Costs.
Upon Not Guilty pleaded the Plaintiff had a Verdict, but Damages under 40 s.
Whereupon Mr. Livesay, the Secondary, refused to tar full Costs, alleging it
to be within the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. by which it is Enacted, 22 and 23
Car. 2. cap. 9.
That in all Actions of Trespass, Assault and Battery, and other personal
Actions wherein the Judge shall not certify upon the back of the Record, that
a Battery was proved, or the Freehold or Title of the Land chiefly in question,
if the Jury find the Damages under 40 s. the Plaintiff shall recover no more
Costs than Damages.

Mr. Pollexfen moved for Costs, alleging that this Act does not extend to all
trespasses, but only to such where the Freehold of the Land is in question. If
the Action had been for a Trespass in breaking his Close, and Damages given
under 40 s. there might not have been full Costs; but here is another Count for
impounding the Cattle, of which the Defendant is found guilty, and therefore
must have his Costs.

The like Case was adjudged in this Court in Hillary Term last, Smith versus
Batterton. Raym. 487. Jones 232.
which was Trespass for breaking and flinging down Stalls in the Market place:
The Plaintiff had a Verdict and 2 d. damages, and upon a debate whether he
should have full Costs, the Court were of Opinion, that it was not within that
Statute, because the Title could not come in question upon the destruction of a
Chattle. In the principal Case the Plaintiff had ordinary Costs.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 36 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1684.
Marsh versus Cutler.
THE Plaintiff obtained a Judgment in an Hundred Court for 58 s. and 4 d. If
Debt be brought upon a Specialty for part of the Sum, the Plaintiff must show
how the other is discharged. 2 Cro. 498, 499, 529, 530.
and brought an Action of Debt upon that Judgment in this Court for 58 s. only,
and did not show that the 4 d. was discharged, and upon Nultiel Record pleaded,
and a Demurrer to that Plea, the Declaration was held to be naught for that
very reason; for if a Debt upon a Specialty be demanded, the Declaration must
be for the whole Sum; if for less, you must show how the other was satisfied.

The Earl of Macklefield's Case.
THE Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Statute de Scandalis Magnatum against
Sir Thomas Grosvenor, Special Bail denied in a Scandalum Magnatum.
for that he being Foreman of the Grand Jury in Cheshire spoke these Words of
the Plaintiff, viz. That he was a tedious Man, and a Promoter of Sedition and
tedious Addresses.

The Plaintiff desired that the Defendant might put in Special Bail, but the
Court would not grant it, and said it was a discretionary thing and not to be
demanded of right: It was denied to the Duke of Norfolk, unless Oath made of
the words spoken, and therefore the Court ordered Common Bail to be filed.

Holloway's Case.
HE was taken at Nevis in the West Indies and brought over hither, and now
appeared in Custody at the Bar being outlawed for High Treason in the late
Conspiracy.

Sir Samuel Astry Clerk of the Crown read the Indictment upon which he was
outlawed, and the King by his Attorney General consented that the Outlawry
should be reversed (which could not have been done without such consent) and
that he might come to his Trial; but he having nothing to allege in his
defense, other than that he had made an ingenuous Confession to the King, and
hoped that he might deserve Mercy, the Court made a Rule for his Execution to
be on Wednesday following, and did not pronounce any Sentence against him, and
he was executed accordingly.

Dominus Rex versus Barnes, and al'.
THE Defendant Barnes and others were excommunicated for not coming to their
Parish Churches, who pleaded the Statute of 5 Eliz. 5 Eliz. c. 23.
which inflicts pecuniary Penalties for not appearing upon the Capias, but
enacts, That if the excommunicate person have not a sufficient addition
according to the Statute of 1 H. 1 H. 5. c. 5.
5. or if in the Significavit it be not contained that the Excommunication
proceeds upon several causes in that Statute mentioned, and amongst the rest,
for refusing to come to Divine Service, he shall not incurr the Penalties.

Now Mr. Pollexfen made these Objections.

1. The Defendant was excommunicated for not coming to his Parish Church, which
is not required by this Statute; for if he does not tefuse to hear Divine
Service in any Church the Penalties are saved.

2. The Statute of Additions requires that the Condition and Dwelling place of
the Defendant shall be inserted, which was not done in this Case, for they are
excommunicated by the Names of A. B. Mercator, B. C. Scissor' and E. F. de
Parochia, etc. which last Addition of the Parish shall referr to him only last
mentioned, and not to all the rest; and so it was always ruled in Indictments.

Attorney General contra.

The Statute of 5 Eliz. is grounded upon that of 1 of the Queen, which enjoins
every person to resort to his Parish Church, or (upon let thereof) to some
other, or to forfeit 12 d. every Sunday and Holy day, to be levied by the
Churchwardens there for the use of the Poor.

Now though the Parish is not named in this Act, yet the Law must be
interpreted, as it was then.

2. The word Parish goes to all, so it is in Informations for Riots. And by
Astry, Clerk of the Crown, it is always so in Significavits: Tamen quaere.

Curia. If the Defendant had pleaded below or here that he had heard Divine
Service in any other Church, though not in his own Parish, the Penalties should
not have went out, but being now incurred there is no remedy, and the word
Parish goes to all preceding.

Prodgers versus Frazier.
IN Trespass, The Defendant pleaded, The Grant of the Custody of an Idiot
passes an Interest to the Executor of the Grantee.
that before the time of the Trespass supposed to be committed, Bridget Dennis
was seized in Fee of the Lands in question, who by a Writ de Indeota inquirendo
was found to be an Idiot not having any lucid intervals per spacium octo
annorum, etc. by virtue whereof the King was entitled, who granted the Custody
to Sir Alexander Frazier, who died, and that the Defendant Mary Frazier was his
Executrix.

The Plaintiff replied and confessed the Ideocy, but that the King granted the
Custody of the Idiot to the Plaintiff: And upon this Replication the Defendant
demurred.

In this Case it was agreed by the Council on both sides, that the King by his
Prerogative has the sole interest in him of granting the Estate of an Idiot to
whom he pleases without any account, but it is otherwise in case of a
Lunatique; for there the Grantee shall have nothing to his own use, but must
put in Security to account to the Lunatic, if ever he comes to be capable, or
else to his Executors or Administrators, Vide Frances's Case in Moor fol. 4.

But the Questions that did arise in this Case were:

1. That there was not sufficient Title found for the King; for by the
Inquisition the Idiot was found to be so per spatium octo annorum, etc. which
is uncertain, because before that time she might have lucida intervalla, and
then she cannot be an Idiot without being naturally so, therefore the Jury
ought to have found her an Idiot a nativitate, for that is the only matter
which vests an interest in the King.

But it was answered and agreed by the Court, that the finding her to be an
Idiot was sufficient without the addition of any other words, and therefore per
spacium octo annorum shall be surplusage; for in this Case Words are not so
much to be regarded as the reason of the Law, which does not allow of Ideocy
otherwise than a nativitate.

But supposing a seeming incertainty in this Office found, yet it being said
generally, that she was an Idiot, the subsequent words shall not hurt, because
the general finding shall be taken in that sense, which is most for the
advantage of the King.

As for Example, Dyer 155. b. 161. b. 306. b.
It was found by Office that a person died seized of two Manors, and that he
held one of the Queen by Knights Service generally, and the other of a Mesne
Lord in Chivalry which is the same Tenure; now it was held that the first
general finding shall be intended Knights Service in Capite because it was most
for the King's benefit, that he might thereby be entitled to the Wardship of
the Heir, who was found to be under Age.

2. Whether the Grant of the Custody of an Idiot will pass any Interest to the
Executor of the Grantee, because such a Grant carries a Trust with it, and the
King may have some knowledge and consideration of the Grantee, but not of his
Executor.

To which it was answered, that here was an interest coupled with a Trust, as
in the Case of Wardship formerly, which always went to the Executor of the
Grantee, and which was of greater consideration in the Law than the feeding or
clothing of an Idiot, and of that Opinion was the Court, that the King had a
good Title to dispose of both the Ward and the Idiot, one till he was of Age,
and the other during his Ideocy.

Judgment for the Defendant.

DE Term. Sanctae Trin. Anno 36 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1684.
Reeves versus Winnington.
THE Testator was a Citizen and a Freeman of London, A Devise of all his Estate
passed a Fee.
and being seized in Fee of a Mesuage, etc. and likewise possessed of a
considerable personal Estate made his Will, in which there was this Clause, viz.

I hear that John Reeves is enquiring after my Death, but I am resolved to give
him nothing, but what his Father has given him by Will. I give all my Estate
to my Wife, etc.

The Question was, Whether by these words the Devisee had an Estate for Life or
in Fee in the Mesuage?

It was argued that she had only an Estate for life, because the Words (All my
Estate) cannot be construed to pass a Fee, for it does not appear what Estate
was intended; and Words in a Will, which go to disinherit an Heir, must be
plain and apparent.

A Devise was in these Words, viz. Sid. 191. Bowman versus Milbank.
I give all to my Mother, all to my Mother, and it was adjudged that a Fee did
not pass, which is as strong a Case as this; for by the word (All) it must be
intended All that was in his power to give, which is as comprehensive as if he
had said All my Estate.

It Is true, Kerman and Johnson. Styles 281. 1 Roll. Abr. 834. Cro. Car. 447.
it has been adjudged that where a Man devised his whole Estate to his Wife,
paying his Debts and Legacies, that the word Estate there passed a Fee, because
it was for the benefit of the Creditors, there being not personal Assets
sufficient to pay all the Debts.

But that is not found in this Case, therefore the Word Estate being doubtful,
and which will admit of a double construction, shall not be intended to pass a
Fee.

Mr. E contra.
Pollexfen contra. The first part of this Sentence consists in negative words,
and those which are subsequent explain the intention of the Testator, viz. That
John Reeves should take nothing by the Will.

The Word Estate does comprehend the whole in which the Owner has either an
Interest or Property, like a Release of all Actions, which is a good discharge
as well of real as personal Actions.

In common understanding it carries an interest in the Land, and then it is the
same as if he had devised all his Fee-simple Estate.

In the Case of Bowman and Milbank it was adjudged that a Fee-simple did not
pass by the Particle All, because it was a Relative Word and had no Substantive
joined with it, and therefore it might have been intended All his Cattle, All
his Goods, or All his personal Estate, for which incertainty it was held void;
yet Justice Twisden in that Case said, that it was adjudged, that if a Man
promise to give half his Estate to his Daughter in Marriage, that the Lands as
well as the Goods are included.

The Testator devised all his Tenant-right Estate held of such a Manor, 3 Keb.
245. Mod. Rep. 100.
and this being found specially, the Question was, Whether any more passed than
an Estate for Life, because he did not mention what Estate he intended; but it
was held that the Devisee had a Fee-simple, because the Words were as
comprehensive, as if he had devised all his Inheritance, and by these Words a
Fee-simple would pass.

Curia. It plainly appears, that the Testator intended nothing for John Reeves
therefore he can take nothing by this Will, and that the Devisee has an Estate
in Fee-simple, for the Words (All my Estate) are sufficient to pass the same.

Rex versus Sir Thomas Armstrong.
Saturday, June 14th.
THE Defendant was outlawed for High Treason, and being taken at Leyden in
Holland was brought into England, and being now at the Bar he desired that he
might have leave of the Court to reverse the Outlawry, and he tried by virtue
of the Stature of Ed. 6. which Enacts, 5 and 6 E. 6. cap. 11.
That if the Party within one year after the Outlawry or Judgment thereupon
shall yield himself to the Chief Justice of England, and offer to traverse the
Indictment upon which he was outlawed, he shall be admitted to such Traverse,
and being acquitted shall be discharged of the Outlawry.

He alleged, that it was not a year since he was outlawed, and therefore
desired the benefit of this Law.

But it was denied, because he had not rendered himself according to the
Statute, but was apprehended and brought before the Chief Justice; Whereupon a
Rule was made for his Execution at Tyburn, which was done accordingly.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 36 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1684.
Hebblethwaite versus Palms. Mich. 36 Car. II. in B. R. Rot. 448.
AN Action on the Case was brought in the Common Pleas, Possession is a
sufficient cause to maintain an Action against a wrong doer.
for diverting of a Watercourse. The Declaration was, That the Defendant Primo
Augusti, etc. injuste and malitiose, did break down an ancient Damm upon the
River Darwent, by which he did divert magnam partem aquae ab antiquo and solitu
cursu erga molendinum ipsius quer. etc. ad dampnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded, that before the said Breach made, he was seized in Fee
of an ancient Mill, and of six Acres of Land adjoining, upon which the said
Damm was erected, time out of mind, to turn the Water to his said Mill, which
Damm was always repaired and maintained by the Defendant, and the Tenants of
the said Land; that his Mill was casually burnt, and he not intending to
Re-build it, suffered the Damm to be broken down, and converted the Timber to
his own use, being upon his own Soil, prout ei been licuit, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that by the breaking of the Damm the Water was diverted
from his Mill, etc.

The Defendant rejoyned, and justified his Plea, and Traversed that the Mill of
the Plaintiff was an ancient Mill.

And upon a Demurrer to this Rejoinder, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
and a Writ of Error now brought to reverse that Judgment: and for the Defendant
in the Action, it was argued.

1. That the Declaration is not good, because the Plaintiff had not set forth
that his Mill was an ancient Mill.

2. Because he had not entitled himself to the Watercourse.

3. That the Plea was good in Bar to this Action, because the Defendant had
sufficiently justified having a Right to the Land upon which the Damm was
erected, and always repaired it.

As to the first Point, it has been the constant course for many years in such
Actions, to set forth the Antiquity of the thing, either in express terms, or
in words which amount to it.

In 8 Eliz. such an Action was brought, Dyer 248. B.
Quod defendens divertit multum aquae cursum per levationem and constructionem
Waerae etc. per quod multum aquae quae ad molendinum (of the Plaintiff) currere
consuevit e contra recurrit.

Which word (consuevit) does imply, that it was an ancient Mill, for otherwise
the Water could not be accustomed to run to it.

Anno 25 Eliz. the like Action was brought, 1 Leon. 273. Russel versus Handford.
wherein the Plaintiff declared, Quod cum molendinum quoddam ab antiquo fuit
erectum, whereof he was seized, and the Defendant erected a new Mill per quod
cursus aquae pred. coarctatus fuit.

And eighteen years afterward was Lutterell 's Case in this Court, 4 Co. 86.
wherein the Plaintiff showed that he was seized of two old and ruinous Fulling
Mills, and that time out of Mind, magna pars aquae cujusdam rivoli did run from
a certain place to the said Mills; and that during all that time there had been
a certain Bank to keep the current of the said Water within its bounds, etc.
That the Plaintiff did pull down those old Mills and erected two new Mills, and
the Defendant dug down the Bank, etc.

The like Action happened 14 Car. I. Cro. Car. 499. Palm. 290.
it was for diverting an ancient Watercourse, Qui currere consuevisset and
debuisset to the Plaintiffs Mill.

In all which Cases, 1 Roll. Abr. 107.
though there are various ways of declaring, yet they all show that the constant
course was to allege that the Mills were ancient; for it is that which intitles
the Party to his Action.

It Is for this reason also, that if two Men have contiguous Houses, and one
stops the other's Lights, if they are not ancient, an Action will not lie for
stopping of them up.

There may be some seeming difference between a Right to a Watercourse, and to
Lights in a Window; for no Man can prescribe to Light Quatenus such, because
it is of common Right to all Men, and cannot be claimed but as affixed to a
particular thing or purpose.

A Watercourse may be claimed to several purposes, but Water is of as universal
use and benefit to Mankind as Light; and therefore no particular Man has a
Right to either, but as belonging to an ancient House, or ruunning to an
ancient Mill, or for some other ancient Use.

Anno 15 Car. Cro. Car. 575. Sands versus Trefusis.
I. The Plaintiff Sands declared, that he was seized in Fee of a Mill, and had
a Watercourse running through the Defendants Lands to the said Mill, and that he
stopped it up: There was a Demurrer to this Declaration, and the same Objection
as now was then taken to it, (viz.) that he had not showed that it was an
ancient Mill. And though the Court seemed to overruled that Objection, yet no
Judgment was given.

The Case of Sly and Mordant was there cited (which is Reported by Mr. 1 Leon.
247. id. 1 Roll. Abr. 104.
Leonard,) and is this, viz. That the Plaintiff was seized in Fee of certain
Lands, etc. and the Defendant had stopped a Watercourse, by which his Land was
drowned; it was adjudged that the Action would lie for this Injury; but that is
no Authority to support this Declaration.

2. The Plaintiff has not entitled himself to this Watercourse, either by
Prescription, or that the Water debuit vel consuevit currere to his Mill, for
so is the Pleading in Lutterell 's Case, and in all the other Cases before
cited.

3. Therefore the Plea in Bar is good, the Defendant having sufficiently
justified his Right, and the Plaintiff having not Prescribed to it, here can be
no Trespass done, and so concluded that Judgment ought to be reversed.

This Case depends upon the Declaration; Ex part Quer.
for the Plea in Bar is only argumentative, it is no direct answer to it, and
the Replication and Rejoinder are not material.

The Plaintiff has a good cause of Action, for it cannot be denied, but where
an injury is done to another, and Damages ensue, it is sufficient to maintain an
Action of Trespass, or upon the Case.

It Is plain, that an Injury was done to the Plaintiff, and the Damage is as
manifest, by diverting of the Watercourse, and the loss of his Mill; and the
Fact is laid to be injuste and malitiose.

The Defendant gives no reason why he injured him, but only that he had no use
of the Water, because his Mill was burnt.

This is an Action brought by the Plaintiff upon his Possession against a wrong
doer, Roll. 339, 394. Palm 290.
in which it is not necessary to be so particular, as where one prescribes for
a Right.

A Man may have a Watercourse * Bracton lib. 4. cap. 32.
by Grant as well as by Prescription, and in such case be need not set forth
any particular use of the Water, as that it ought to run to his Mill; neither
is it absolutely necessary to mention the Mill, for that is only to inform the
Court of the Damages.

In the Printed Entries there are many Forms of Declarations, without any
Prescription, Rast. Ent. 9. B.
or setting forth that the Mill was ancient; as where an Action was brought
against the Defendant, De placito quare vi and armis stagnum molendini ipsius
(the Plaintiff) fregit, and this was only upon the Possession. Antea.


The Case in Dyer is a good Authority to support this Action, for it is as
general as this, viz. for diverting a Watercourse, per Constructionem Waerae,
and does not show where it was erected, or what Title he had to it.

So where the Action was for disturbing the Plaintiff, 2 Cro. 43. Dent verse.
Oliver. Nota, This was after Verdict.
in collecting of Toll, and does not show what Title he had to it, either by
Prescription or Grant; but declared only that he was seized in Fee of a Manor
and Fair, and held good: And it was the Opinion of my Lord Hobert, That a
Declaration for breaking down of a Bank generally includentem aquam, Hob. 193.
Biccot versus Ward.
running to the Plaintiffs Mill, was good.

The Authorities cited on the other side, do rather maintain this way of
Pleading, than the contrary, for those Cases are wherein the Plaintiff
declared, that the Water currere consuevit and debuisset to the Plaintiffs
Mill, time out of mind, Cro. Car. 499.
which words are of the same signification as if he had showed it to be an
ancient Mill; and that agrees in substance with this Case, for the Water cannot
be diverted ab antiquo and solito cursu, if the Mill was not ancient.

The word solet implies Antiquity: Reg. 153.
The Writ De secta admolendinum is quam ad illud facere debet and solet: And it
was the Opinion of a * Justice Doderidge in Surry and Piggots Case, Pop. 171.27
Assise placito 8. Br. Prescription 49. Rast. Entr. 441 Tit. Nuisance.
learned Judge, that the words currere consuevit and solebat did supply a
Prescription or Custom.

Thus it was in an Assise of Nuisance, wherein the Plaintiff set forth, that he
had a Fountain of Water currentem usque ad rotam molendini, etc. and that the
Defendant divertit cursum aquae and this was held good.

The Cases of stopping up of Lights and diverting of Watercourses are not
parallel; the Prescription to Lights must be ratione loci; and therefore if a
Man will erect a new House, and a Stranger will stop the Lights; it is an injury
done, and the Action may be maintained upon the Possession.

Lutterel 's Case was grounded upon the Possession; for upon the Plaintiff
Cottell 's own showing the Prescription was gone, because he set forth, that he
had pulled down the old Mills, and that the Defendant Lutterel diverted the
Water from running to those Mills which the Plaintiff newly built.

All which prove that a Prescription goes to the Right, but a possession is
sufficient to support an Action against a Tort-fesor.

Lastly, Slackman verse. West. Palmer 387. 2 Cro. 673.
in the Case of a Common or a Rent, which cannot pass without Deed, if the
Plaintiff shows a Que Estate he must produce the Deed by which it was granted;
but where he prescribes for a Way, he may set forth his Estate without showing
how he came by it, because it is but a Conveyance to the Action, which is
grounded upon the disturbance done to the Possession.

Cur. The word solet implies Antiquity, and will amount to a Prescription; and
solitus cursus aquae running to a Mill, makes the Mill to be ancient; for if it
be newly erected there cannot be solitus cursus aquae toward that Mill: For
which Reasons the Judgment in the Original Action was affirmed in Hillary-
Term, Primo Willielmi: But the Chief Justice was of Opinion, that if the Cause
had been tried upon such a Oeclaration, that the Plaintiff ought to prove his
Prescription, or else he must be Nonsuit.

Anonymus.
ONE was Indicted for drinking of an Health to the Pious Memory of Stephen
College, who was Executed at Oxford for High Treason. He was Fined 1000 l. and
had Sentence to stand in the Pillory, and was ordered to find Sureties for his
good Behavior.

Rex versus Rosewel.
THE Defendant was a Nonconformist Minister, and Indicted for High Treason, in
Preaching of these words, viz. Why do the People ( innuendo the People of
England) make a flocking to the King (innuendo Carolum Secundum,) under
pretense of curing the Kings Evil, which the King cannot do; but we are the
Priests and Prophets to whom they ought to flock, who by our Prayers can heal
them.

We have had two Wicked Kings now together (innuendo Carolum Primum, and
Carolum Secundum) who have suffered Popery to be introduced under their Noses,
whom I can liken to none but wicked Jeroboam, and if they (innuendo, the
People, etc.) would stand to their Principles, I make no doubt but to COnquer
our Enemies, (innuendo, the King and all his Loyal Subjects) with Rams Horns,
broken Pitchers, and a Stone in a Sling, as in the time of old.

Upon this Indictment he was arraigned, and pleaded Not Guilty, and was Tried
at Bar, and found Guilty of High Treason upon the Evidence of two Women. And
the Court having assigned Mr. Wallop, Mr. Pollexfen, and Mr. Bampfield to be
his Council; they moved in Arrest of Judgment.

First, That the Words discharged of the Innuendo's, if taken separate, or
altogether, have no tendency to Treason. The first Paragraph does not import
any Crime; and to say that we have had two wicked Kings, may be a Misdemeanor,
but it is not Treason, either by intendment of the Death of the King, or by
levying War against him.

The Crime seems to consist in the next Words, which are (if they would stand
to their Principles, etc.) This seems to stir up the People to Rebellion, but
as they are placed in the Indictment, they will not admit of such a
Construction, neither as they have reference to the words precedent, or as they
stand by themselves.

The words which go before are, viz. We have had two wicked Kings together.
It Is not expressed what Kings, or when they Reigned, which is very uncertain
(Et si ipsi ad fundamentalia sua starent) which word ipsi is relative, and must
refer ad proximum antecedens, and then it must be ipsi Reges) which is the
proper and natural sense of the words.

But now if the Innuendo's must be incerted, 4 Co. 17.
it must be under some Authority of Law, either to design the person or the
thing, which was not certain before, that the intention of the Party speaking,
may be more easily collected; and this is the most proper Office of an Innuendo.

It will not change the meaning of the words, Hob. 45. 2 Cro. 126.
for that is to make them still more uncertain.

Now most of the Innuendo's in this Indictment are naught, because they do not
ascertain the subject matter.

First, by the word People (innuendo the People of England) may be as well
intended any other People, because there was no previous Discourse of the
People of England.

Then follow these words, We have had two wicked Kings now together, (innuendo
King Charles the First and Second) which may be as well intended of King
Ethelred and Alfred, because the words denote a time past, and therefore cannot
possibly intend the King, of whom there was no precedent Discourse. And the
Rule is, De dubiis and generalibus benignior Sententia recipienda est.

Besides, those words are insensible, and indeed impossible, for we cannot have
two wicked Kings together, it ought to be successively.

Then to say, we shall Conquer our Enemies, cannot be intended the Enemies of
the King, because the word Enemies is of a large sense; for Man, by reason of
his Sins and Infirmities has many Enemies, and possibly such might be intended.

If therefore it be doubtful what Enemies were meant, if it shall not be in the
power of a Clerk, by an innuendo to make Words of another sense than what they
will naturally bear, nor to help where they are insensible, as in this Case: If
there was no precedent Discourse either of Kings, People, or Enemies, which
must be proved by the Evidence, then is this Indictment naught, and therefore
Judgment ought to be arrested.

Mr. Attorney and Solliciter contra.

It Is laid in this Indictment, that the words were spoken to stir up Rebellion,
and to depose the King, and it is so found by the Verdict of twelve Men.

That which aggravates the offense is, That it was spoken in a public Assembly
to the People, which must be intended the People of England, for to such the
Defendant Preached, and to them he declared the power given unto him by God, to
heal them by Prayer: Then he tells them that their King is wicked, and having
insinuated this Doctrine into their Minds, he then bids them stand to their
Principles in opposing and subduing wicked Kings.

It Is objected that there ought to have been a precedent Discourse of the King,
but the Presidents are otherwise.

In 33 H. 8. Rot. 17. There was an Indictment against the Lord Gray, for words
spoken against the King, without setting forth any precedent Discourse of him.

So was my Lord Cobham 's Case in 12 Jac. for that he proditorie dixit and pro
palavit haec verba, viz. It will never be well for England, until the King and
his Cubbs are killed, without an Avernient that the words were spoken de Rege.

And in William 's Case, 2 Roll Rep. 88.
Reported by my Lord Rolls, who was Indicted for High Treason, for writing two
Books, in which were many Traitorous Assertions, but no Averment of any
previous Discourse concerning the King, all these Indictments were thus, viz.
Dixit such words de Domino Rege.

Therefore the Indictment is good in form if the words therein contained amount
to Treason; now they do import Treason or not, if they do import it, then it is
unnecessary to aver that they were spoken de Rege, because it cannot be
intended to be Treason against any other King.

If a Man should say that he would go to Whitehal and kill the King; it is not
necessary to averr any precedent Discourse de Rege.

In Actions on the Case for Words, there must be an Averment of the person,
because many men are of the same Name; but in Indictments the form will govern
the Case.

Several Traitors have suffered Death in such Cases as this at Bar, and many
learned Men in all Ages have attended this Court, and this Objection was never
made till now; and therefore the Presidents being without this Averment de
Rege, where the overt Act is by words, Judgment was prayed against the Prisoner.

Curia. Words may be an overt Act; but then they must be so certain and
positive, as plainly to denote the intention of the speaker.

If a Man should tell another that he would drive the King out of England;
there needs no averment that such words were spoken de Rege, because they tend
immediately to depose the King; but if he had said that he would go to Whitehal
and destroy his Enemies, that is not Treason without an Averment, etc. Judgment
was arrested.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 36 Car. II. in Banco Regis, 1684.
Pool versus Trumbal.
THE Defendant was sued in the Spiritual Court for Dilapidations, 25 Car. 2.
cap. 5.
and pleaded the general Pardon by which all Offenses, Contempts, Penalties,
etc. were pardoned; and for this reason he prayed a Prohibition, but it was
denied, because the Statute never intended to pardon any satisfaction for
Damages, but only to take away Temporal Punishments.

Dorrington versus Edwin. Mich. 36 Car. II. Rot. 277.
SCire Facias against Pledges in a Replevin brought by Pleint, Sci. Fac. will
lie against pledges in Replevin, by pleint.
setting forth, that John Temple did levy a Pleint in the Sheriffs Court of
London, for the taking of three Baggs of Money, in which Suit he found Pledges
de prosequendo and de retorno habendo, if it should be awarded.

That this Pleint was transmitted out of that Court into the Hustings, and by *
If it had not been a Court of Record it might have been removed by Re falo.
Dalt. 425. 9 Hob. 6.58. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 2. F. N. B. 74. F. Dalt. 273.
Certiorari removed into the King's Bench, where the Plaintiff declared as
aforesaid, etc.

Dorrington avowed the taking, etc. and Temple was Nonsuited and thereupon a
Retorn' Habend' was awarded to the Sheriff, who returned elongat', etc.

Then a Sci. Fa. was brought against the Pledges upon the Statute of Westminster. 2.
which provides that where Lords upon Replevins cannot obtain Justice in
Inferior Courts, against their Tenants, when such Lords are attached at their
Tenants Suits, they may have a Recordari to remove the Plea before the
Justices, etc. and the Sheriff shall not only take Pledges of the Plaintiff to
prosecute his Suit, but also to return the Cattle if a Return be awarded, etc.

The Defendants appeared and prayed Oyer of the Certiorari, which was returned
by the Mayor and Sheriffs only without the Aldermen.

And upon a Demurrer the Question was, Whether a Scire Facias will lie against
them by virtue of this Statute, they being only Pledges in Replevin brought by
Pleint without Writ.

This Case was argued by Mr. Pollexfen for the Defendants.

And for the Defendants it was said, that they could not be charged by this
Scire Facias, because the Pleint was removed by Certiorari, and thereby the
Plaintiff Dorrington had lost the benefit he had against the Pledges in the
Sheriffs Court.

This Case was compared to other Actions in inferior Courts, which if removed
by Habeas Corpus the Bail below are discharged of course.

By the Common Law there were no Pledges of Retorn' habend. Dyer 246.
for before this Statute the Sheriff could not make a Replevin without the
King's Writ: Now he has power to take Pledges; but if he will make deliverance
of the Goods ad querelam alicujus sine brevi, the fault is still in him; for he
may * Dalt. 434.
compel the Party to bring a Writ, and then the Pledges will be liable, because
it will appear who they are.

And therefore it has been adjudged, Cro. Car. 446.
that where a Replevin is brought by Writ the Sheriff cannot make deliverance
without taking Pledges, because if the Plaintiff should recover, he has a
remedy against them by Scire Facias; but if he recover upon a Replevin brought
by Pleint, Cro. Car. 594.
the Judgment shall not be avoided by assigning the want of Pledges for Error,
because in such Case the Sheriff is not by Law obliged to take Pledges.

2. This Scire Facias is brought too soon, for there ought to go an Alias and
Pluries Retorn' habend. before the Return of Elongata, and then, and not
before, the Scire Facias is properly brought.

The Pledges are answerable, E contra.
and the Scire Facias is well brought, and this grounded upon the Statute of W.
2. which directs Pledges to be taken before the delivery of the Goods: It takes
notice that Replevins were sued in inferior Courts by the Tenants against their
Lords, who had distrained for Rents due for Services or Customs; and that such
Lords could not have Justice done in those Courts, and therefore to remedy this
mischief the Statute gives the Writ Recordare, etc. to remove the Pleint before
the Justices; and because such Tenants, after they had replevied their Cattle,
did usually sell them, so that a Retorn could not be made to the Party
distraining, therefore it directs that the Sheriff shall take Pledges for
returning the Beasts, if a Return should be awarded, which would be to little
purpose if such Pledges were not liable upon the Retorn of Elongar.

Now as to the removing of the Pleint by Certiorari that makes the Case more
strong in the Plaintiffs behalf, because the Record it self una cum omnibus ea
tangen. is removed; but by an Habeas Corpus the person is only removed, and the
Court has thereby a Jurisdiction over his Cause, which the inferior Court has
lost, because it has lost his Person.

2. This Scire Facias is not brought too soon, as has been objected, for it is
in vain to bring an Alias and Pluries after the Sheriff had returned Elongat';
it is like the common Case where a Scire Facias is brought against the Bail and
Non est inventus is returned, after which there never was an Alias or Pluries
Capias.

And afterward in Michaelmas-Term following Judgment was given that the
Pledges are liable.

Palmer versus Allicock.
BY the Statute of Distribution of Intestates Estates it is provided, 22 and 23
Car. 2. cap. 10.
That in case there be no Wife then the Estate of the Husband dying intestate
shall be distributed equally amongst the Children, and if no Child, then to the
next of Kin of the Intestate in equal degree, and to those who legally
represent them.

A Man died intestate having no Wife at the time of his death, and but one
Child, who was an Infant, afterward Administration was granted of the Fathers
Estate durante minore aetate of the Child who died before the Age of seventeen.

Then Administration was granted by a peculiar to the next of Kin of the
Infant, and an Appeal was brought in the Arches by the next of Kin of the
Father to revoke that Administration.

In a Prohibition the Question was, Whether Administration de bonis non, etc.
of the first Intestate shall be granted to the next of Kin of the Father or the
Child?

Mr. Pollexfen argued this Term for the Plaintiff in the Prohibition, viz.

That the Statute gives a power to the Ordinary to take Bonds of such persons
to whom Administration is committed, the Forms of which Bonds are expressed in
the Act, and the Conditions are to make a true and perfect Inventory, and to
exhibit it into the Registry.

He has also a power to distribute what remains after Debts, Funeral Charges
and Expenses.

Thus the Law stands now.

Then as to the Case at the Bar three things are to be considered:

1. If a Man dies intestate leaving two Sons and no Wife, each has a Moiety of
his personal Estate immediately vested in him, so that if one Brother should
afterward die intestate the other shall have the whole.

2. If an Interest be vested in two, then by this Statute the like Interest is
vested in one, so that if he die Intestate his Administrator shall have the
Estate.

3. If so, then the consequence will be, that in this case Administration de
bonis non of the first Intestate shall go to the next of Kin of the Infant.

By Interest is meant a Right to sue for a share after Debts paid, which
Interest every person has in a chose in action: As if a Man does covenant with
two, that they shall have such an Estate after Debts paid, an Interest vests in
them by this Covenant, and if they die, it goes to their Executors, such also
is the Interest of every Residuary Legatee.

Now if any of them die before the Residue can be distributed, the Wife or
Children of him so dying shall have it.

And to make this more clear it will be necessary to consider how the Law stood
before the making of this Act.

At the Common Law neither the Wife, Child or next of Kin had any Right to a
Share of the Intestates Estate, but the Ordinary was to distribute it according
to his Conscience to pious Uses, and sometimes the Wife and Children might be
amongst the number of those whom he appointed to receive it; but the Law
entrusted him with the sole disposition of it. 2 Inst. 399.


Afterward by the Statute of Westminster. 13 E. 1. c. 19.
2. he was bound to pay the Intestate's Debts so far as he had Assets, which at
the Common Law he was not bound to do, and an Action of Debt would then, and
not before, Pl. Com. 277. Greisbrook versus Fox.
lie against him, if he did alien the Goods and not pay the Debts.

Then the Statute of * 31 E. 1. c. 11.
31 E. 1. was made, by which he was empowered to grant Admstration to the next
of Kin, and most lawful Friend of the Intestate; 1 Inst. 133. b. 2 Inst. 397. 9
Co. Hensloes Case.
and by this Statute the person to whom Administration was committed might have
an Action to recover the Intestate's Estate, for at the Common Law he had no
remedy.

But then afterward the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 5. Enacts, That the Ordinary
shall grant Administration to the Widow or next of Kin of the person deceased,
or to both; and this was the first Law which gave any Interest to the Wife, to
whom Administration being once granted the power of the Ordinary was
determined, Hob. 83. 1 Cro. 62, 202.
and he could not repeal it at his pleasure as he might at the Common Law.

But after the making of this Statute many mischiefs did still remain, because
the Administration being once committed, the person to whom it was granted, had
the whole Estate, and the rest of the Relations of the deceased were undone;
and therefore if his Children were under Age, or beyond the Seas, and a
Stranger had got Administration, it would have been a Bar to them.

And thus it continued many years, the Ordinary still making distribution as he
thought fit, taking only a Bond from the person to whom he granted
Administration for the purposes aforesaid, and sometimes to dispose the Surplus
after Debts and Legacies, as he should direct, and no Prohibition was granted
to remedy these inconveniences till about the 12th year of King James the
First. Hob. 83.


But now by this Act a good remedy is provided against these mischiefs, and
it is such which takes away the Causes thereof, which is, that the Administrator
shall not have the whole Estate, but that a Distribution shall be made.

The Title of the Act shows the meaning thereof to be for the better Settlement
of Intestates Estates, and the Body of it shows how Distribution shall be made;
so that such Bonds which were usually given by the Administrator before this
Law to make Distribution, as the Ordinary should direct, are now taken away,
and other Forms are prescribed; and there can be no remedy taken upon such new
Bonds till the Ordinary has appointed the Distribution, so that in effect this
Act makes the Will of a person dying intestate, and tells what share his
Relations shall have; and it is probable that the Custom of London might guide
the Parliament in the making of this Law, which Custom distributes the Estate
of a Freeman amongst his Wife and Children.

This shows that an Interest is vested in them, which goes to the
Administrator, the consequence whereof is very considerable, for if such
Children should marry they have a Security by this Act that a Portion shall be
paid; and if the Wife should take another Husband he will be entitled to her
share, and this may be a means of giving credit in the World, when the
certainty of their Portions are so well known and secured.

It Is such an Interest which is known in the Law and may be compared to that in
Sir Thomas Palmer's Case, 5 Co. 24.
who sold 1600 Cord of Wood to a Man, who assigned it to another, and
afterward the Vendor sold 2000 Cord to one Maynard to be taken at his
Election, the Assignee of the first person cut 600 Cord and Maynard carried it
away, thereupon an Action was brought and the Plaintiff had Judgment, because
the first Vendee had an Interest vested in him which he might well assign.

This Case is a plain proof that a Man may have an Interest in a Chattle
without a Property, and such an Interest which gives the person a remedy to
recover, and where there is a remedy there must be a Right, for they are
convertibles.

It Is not a new thing in the Law that a contingent Interest in the Ancestor
shall survive to the Heir; Wood's Case, cited in Shelleys Case, 1 Co. 99.
as if a Man be seized of the Manor of S. and covenants that when B. shall
make a Feoffment to him of the Manor of D. then he will stand seized of the
said Manor of S. to the use of the Covenantee and his Heirs, who dyed leaving
Issue an Heir, who was then an Infant, B. made a Feoffment to the Covenantor
accordingly; it was held that no Right descended to the Heir of the Covenantee,
but only a possibility of an Use which might have vested in the Ancestor, and
therefore the Heir shall claim it by descent.

It Is like a Debt to be paid at a day to come, Lit. Sect. 512.
which is debitum in praesenti though solvendum in futuro, and though the
Obligee cannot have an Action before the day is come, yet such an Interest is
vested in him that he may release it before that day, and so bar himself for
ever.

Now if this Act makes a Will it ought to be construed as such, and it cannot
be denied, that if this Case had happened upon a Will the Executor of the Son
would have a very good Title.

It Is a weak Objection to affirm that this Law was made to establish the
practice of the Ecclesiastical Courts, and that it is only explanatory of the
Statutes of Ed. 3. and H. 8. because it is plainly introductory of a new Law,
for Distribution is now made otherwise than it was before.

2. An Interest is vested where there is but one Child.

For the better understanding of this Point the Clause in the Act ought to be
considered, which is, viz. If there be no Wife then to be distributed amongst
the Children, if no Child, then to the next of Kin of the Intestate; upon which
Clause these Objections have been made.

Object. 1. That it is insignificant, because the Statute of H. 8. gives the
right of Administration to the Child.

2. That Distribution cannot be made where there is but one.

3. That this Clause ought to be construed according to the Law in the
Spiritual Courts.

Answ. Now as to the first Objection it is true, that before this Act the Child
had a Right of Administration, but that Right was only personal; so that if he
had died before he had administered his Executor or Administrator could not have
it.

Besides, many inconveniences did attend this personal Right of Administration,
which are now prevented by the vesting of an Interest.

For when the Right was personal and the Administrator gave Bond with Sureties
to administer truly, and the Ordinary had appointed Distribution to be made,
the Administrator was bound to perform it though not in equal degree; and if he
died before the Estate was got in, it was lost for ever.

But now by this Clause Distribution must be made equally, viz. one third part
of the Surplus to the Wife, the rest by equal portions to the Children, so that
what was very uncertain before, and almost at the Will of the Ordinary, is now
reduced to a certainty; and therefore an Interest must vest in such persons to
whom such equal Distributions of filial Portions are given.

2. Object. That Distribution cannot be made where there is but one Child.

Answ. This also is true in propriety of Speech and taking the Word distribute
in the strict sense.

But this was never intended by the Statute as may plainly appear upon the
construction of the whole; for the Word Children does comprehend a Child and
more, and the form of the Bond directed by this Statute is that the
Administrator shall deliver the Goods to such person and persons, etc. which
shows that one is comprehended, and therefore Distribuere in this Case is no
more than Tribuere, and must be so taken.

The Parliament never intended that Distribution should not be made where there
is but one Child, as may be easily collected from the reason of the thing and
the inconveniences which would ensue.

1st. If a Man should die leaving a Wife and one Child, the Wife would be
entitled to one third and the Child to the other two thirds of the personal
Estate; now if the Child shall have two thirds being comprehended under the
Word Children; what reason can be given why he should not have the whole where
there is no Wife, which he could not have if the Word Children did not
comprehend Child in this Case.

2dly, If a Man has a personal Estate to the value of 2000 l. and dies
leaving Issue three Sons, but has in his life time made provision for the
second Son to the value of 1000 l. the eldest Son dies intestate shall the
youngest be totally excluded from the remaining 1000 l. because there is none
left to have distribution, his second Brother being preferred in the life time
of his Father by an equal portion with what remains.

3dly, If the Father has a Son married, and two Brothers, and dies intestate,
now if his Estate should not be vested in the Son, then if he should also die
intestate, his Wife could have nothing, but it would go to the Uncles; and this
would be a very hard construction of this Law to carry the Estate to the Uncles
and their Executors from the Son and his Administrator.

But there is a Case which proves that a Child is intended by the Word
Children, 8 Co 96.
it is between Amner and Lodington cited in Matthew Manning's Case, which was, A
Man being possessed of a Term for years devised it to his Wife for life, and
after her death to her Children unpreferred, and made her Executrix and died,
she married again and had but one Daughter unpreferred, and after the death of
the Mother this Executory Devise was held good to the Daughter, though it was
by the Name of Children, and she enjoyed the Term.

3. Object. That this Act should be construed according to the Spiritual Law.

Answ. That cannot be, for all Statutes ought to be expounded according to the
Rules of the Common Law and not according to their Law; for they have no Law
which gives power to sue, nor to distribute to the Wife or next of Kin, but the
usual course was for the Ordinary to dispose of Intestates Goods to pious uses.

Then admitting this to be an Interest vested, the consequence will be that it
shall go to the Administrator, and then Administration must be granted where
the Estate legally ought to go.

The Administration of the Husband to the Goods of the Wife is grounded upon
this reason, 4 Co. 51. Ognel's Case. 1 Cro. 106.
because the Marriage is quasi a gift to him in Law.

It was not the only mischief before this Law that the Administrator run away
with the whole Estate; for if a Man died intestate leaving but one Son then
beyond Sea, and Administration was granted to a Stranger, he who had right
could not appeal after fourteen days, which the Son could not do at that
distance, and so by this means a wrongful Administrator was entitled to the
whole, and he whose right it was had no remedy to recover at his return.

But now this inconvenience is likewise redressed by the Statute of
Distributions, for when the Son returns he may put the Bond in suit; and for
these reasons it was prayed that the Prohibition might stand.

Mr. E contra.
Williams argued for the Defendant in Easter-Term 2 Jacobi; the substance of
whose Argument was, that though the Plaintiff had gotten Administration, yet no
Interest was thereby vested in him, but that the Appeal was proper; and for
this he cited the Case of Beamond and Long, Cro. Car. 208.
which was Baron and Feme Administratrix of her former Husband recover in Debt;
the Feme died, the surviving Husband brought a Scire Facias to have Execution;
and upon a Demurrer all the Court, but Hide, agreed that the Scire Facias would
not lie for the Husband alone, because it was a debt demanded by the
Administratrix in auter droit.

This Statute has not wholly altered the Common Law in this matter; it only
limits the Practice of Ecclesiastical Courts and makes provision for particular
purposes, viz. That Distribution shall be made to the Wife and Children, and
their Children, which is so far introductory of a new Law, but no farther; so
that the Right of Administration is as it was before, and therefore must be
granted to the next of Kin of the Father.

This Court has no power to grant a Prohibition in such a Case, and if it
should, it is the first which ever was granted of this kind, for it ought not to
be determined here, but in an Ecclesiastical Court, which has an original
Jurisdiction of this Cause, and the Appeal is in proprio loco.

To which Mr. Pollexfen answered, that the contrary was very plain, for here
have been many Prohibitions granted even upon this very Act; and the Question
now before the Court is not concerning the manner of Distribution, but the
Right of Administration, whether any Interest is vested in the Son or not? It Is
true, the Estate in Law goes to the Administrator, but the Interest and Right
to sue for and to recover the Estate goes to the Son; so that if he should die
before he is in actual possession, his Administrator shall have it to pay Debts
and to distribute, etc.

In the Case of a Will, if a Man should devise his Estate to his Wife and
Children after Debts and Legacies paid, an Interest vests in those Children,
which does not differ from the Case at the Bar, but that in the one Case the
Testator makes the Will, and in the other it is made by an Act of Parliament.

Some Inconveniences have been already mentioned if the Law should be
otherwise taken, but there be many more; for if no Interest should vest in the
Child till actual Distribution he could neither be trusted for his Education or
Necessaries whilst living, and no body would bury him if he should happen to
die before the year and a day, for the Funeral Charges would be lost.

It will likewise occasion delays in Administrators to make Distribution in
hopes of gain, neither will any honest man take an Administration upon himself,
because he can neither pay Money safely, or take a Release, for if the Infant
die before distribution it is void.

But notwithstanding these Reasons the Court gave Judgment in Michaelmas-Term
following, That a Consultation should go, the Chief Justice being absent.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 1 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1685.
Coram Georgio Jefferies Mil' Capital' Justic'. Francisco Wythyns Mil',
Justiciariis. Richardo Holloway Mil', Justiciariis. Thoma Walcot Mil',
Justiciariis.
Rex versus Marsh, and others.
JAmes Marsh, Information for a Forgery.
John W. and John L. were indicted upon the Coroners Inquest for the Murder of
R. D. at H. in Kent; and upon this Indictment they were arraigned and tried at
the Bar this Term.

The Fact upon the Evidence appeared to be, that the Prisoners were
Custom-House Officers, who suspecting that some Wool would be transported, went
to the Seaside in the Night time, where there happened an Afray, and the
Prisoner Marsh was twice knocked down, and recovering himself shot the
deceased; they were all acquitted of the Murder; and then upon complaint made
that Marsh was only found guilty upon the Coroners Enquest, two of the said
Jury were now sworn in Court, who deposed, that they upon the Coroners Enquest
found the Indictment against Marsh alone, which Indictment was in English; but
that one J.D. who was then Mayor of H. and who by virtue of that Office was
also Coroner, took the Indictment and told the Jury it must be turned into
Latin, which was done, and he then inserted the Names of the two other
Prisoners now at the Bar, whereupon the said Mr. D. was now called, and he
appearing was bound in a Recognizance to answer this matter; and the two
Prisoners, who were acquitted, were likewise bound to prosecute him, and the
Jury Men were ordered to put their Affidavit in writing, and swear it in Court.

An Information was afterward exhibited against Mr. D. which was tried at the
Bar in Trinity-Term following, and he was found guilty; but having spoke with
the Prosecutor in the long Vacation he was only fined 20 Nobles in
Michaelmas-Term.

Roberts versus Pain.
IN a Prohibition to the Court of Arches, the Case was: Prohibition not granted
where a temporal loss may ensue.
The Plaintiff was presented by the Mayor and Aldermen of Bristol to the Parish
Church of Christ-Church in the said City, and the Defendant libelled against
him because he was not 23 years of Age when made Deacon, nor 24 when he entered
into the Orders of a Priest; 13 Eliz. c. 12.
and the Statute requires that none shall be made a Minister or admitted to
preach being under that Age.

The reason now alleged for a Prohibition was, because this Matter was triable
at Law, and not in the Spiritual Court, because if true, a Temporal Loss, viz,
Deprivacion might follow.

But the Court denied the Prohibition, and compared this Case to that of a
Drunkard or ill Liver, who are usually punished in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
though a temporal loss may ensue; and if Prohibitions should be granted in all
Cases where Deprivation is the consequence of the Crime, it would very much
lessen the Practice of those Courts.

David Burgh 's Case.
THE Parishioners of St. Leonard Foster Lane, gave this Man (who had a Wife and
five Children) 5 l. in Money to remove into another Parish, upon Condition that
if he returned in 40 days that he should repay the Money; he removed accordingly
and stayed away by the space of 40 days; the Parish to which he removed
obtained an Order upon an Appeal for his settlement in the last Parish, where
he was lawfully an Inhabitant; which Order being removed into this Court and
the Matter appearing thus upon Affidavits, they declared their Opinion only
upon the Order to remove, viz. That the Man had gained a Settlement in the
Parish to which he removed; for he being an Inhabitant there for so long time,
as was required by Law to make a Settlement, and not disturbed by the Officers,
they were remiss in their Duty, and the Court would not help their negligence.

DE Term. Sanctae Trin. Anno 1 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1685.
Dominus Rex versus Dangerfield.
THE Defendant was convicted of publishing a Libel wherein he had accused the
King (when Duke of York) that he had hired him to kill the late King Charles,
etc. And on Friday, June 20. He was brought to the Bar where he received this
Sentence, viz.

That he should pay the Fine of 500 l. That he should stand twice in the
Pillory, and go about the Hall with a Paper in his Har signifying his Crime;
That on Thursday next he should be whipped from Algate to Newgate; and on
Saturday following from Newgate to Tyburn, which Sentence was executed
accordingly; and as he was returning in a Coach on Saturday from Tyburn one Mr.
Robert Frances a Barrister of Greys-Inn asked him in a jeering manner, whether
he had run his Heat that day? who replied again to him in scurrilous words;
whereupon Mr. Frances run him into the Eye with a small Cane which he had then
in his Hand, of which wound the said Mr. Dangerfield died on the Monday
following.

Mr. Frances was indicted for this Murder, and upon Notguilty pleaded was tried
at the Old-Bayly, and found guilty, and executed at Tyburn on Friday, July the
24th. in the same year.

Mr. Baxter's Case.
HE was a Nonconformist Minister, against whom an Information was exhibited for
writing of a Book which he Entitled A Paraphrase upon the New Testament; and
the Crime alleged against him in the said Information was, That he intending
to bring the Protestant Religion into contempt, and likewise the Bishops,
(innuendo the Bishops of England) did publish the Libel in which was contained
such words, etc. setting forth the words. He was convicted: And Mr. Williams
moved in arrest of Judgment, that the words in the Information and the Bishops
therein mentioned were misapplied to the Protestant Religion and the Bishops of
England by such Innuendoes, which could not support this Charge against the
Defendant.

That the Distringas and Habeas Corpora were inter nos and Richardum Baxter,
which could not be, because the Information was exhibited in the name of the
Attorney General.

But the Court overruled these Exceptions, and said, that by the word Bishops
in this Information no other could be reasonably intended but the English
Bishops; thereupon the Court fined him 500 l. and ordered him to give Security
for his Good Behavior for seven years.

Procter versus Burdet.
AN Action of Covenant was brought by an Apprentice setting forth the
Indenture, by which the Defendant, In Covenant the Breach was generally
assigned, and held good.
his Master, had covenanted to find and allow the Plaintiff Meat, Drink,
Lodging and all other things necessary during such a time; and the Breach was
as general as the Covenant, viz. That he did not find hind him Meat, Drink,
Lodging, and alia necessaria.

The Plaintiff had Judgment by Nil dicit; and upon a Writ of Enquity brought
entire Damages were given against the Defendant: And in a Writ of Error upon
this Judgment the Error assigned was, that the Breach was too general, and that
entire Damages were given amongst other things for alia necessaria, and does
not say for what; 2 Cro. 436. Astel versus Mills.
and a Case was cited in the Point in Trinity-Term 16 Jacobi, where the
Judgment was reversed for this very reason.

The Council contra argued that that which is required in an Action of Covenant
is, that there may be such a certainty, as the Defendant may plead a former
Recovery in Bar if he be sued again; and therefore one need not be so
particular in assigning of the Breach upon a Covenant as upon a Bond; for in a
Bond for performance of Covenants where there is a Covenant to repiar; if it be
put in suit, it is not sufficient to say, That the House is out of repair, but
you must show how; but in a Covenant it is enough to say, That it was out of
repair.

If in this Case the Plaintiff had showed what necessaries were not provided
for him, Kelway 85.
it would have made the Record too long, and therefore it is sufficient for him
to say, that the Defendant did not find alia necessaria.

That Case in 2 Cro. 2 Cro. 304, 367. 1 Roll. Rep. 173. 3 Bulst. 31. 2 Saund.
373.
has since been adjudged not to be Law, for many contrary Judgments have
weakened the Authority of it, viz. That the Breach may be assigned as general
as the Covenant; as where a Man covenanted that he had a lawful Estate and
Right to let, etc. the Breach assigned was that he had no lawful Estate and
Right to let, etc. and does not show that the Lessor had not such Right, or
that he was evicted, yet it was held good.

Curia. In a Quantum meruit they formerly set out the Matter at length, but now
of late in that Action in general Words and also in Trover and Conversion pro
diversis aliis bonis has been held good, which is as general as this Case.

There are many instances where Breaches have been generally assigned and held
ill; that in Croke is so, but the later Opinions are otherwise: Affirmetur
Judicium.

Pie versus Brereton.
A Lease was made of Tithes for three years rendering Rent at Michaelmas and
Lady Day; and an Action of Debt was brought for Rent arrear for two years: Upon
Nil debet pleaded the Plaintiff had a Verdict, and it was now moved in Arrest
of Judgment that the Declaration was too general, for the Rent being reserved
at two Feasts, 2 Cro. 668.
the Plaintiff ought to have showed at which of those Feasts it was due.

But the Council for the Plaintiff said, That it appears by the Declaration
that two years of the three were expired; so there is but one to come which
makes it certain enough.

Curia. This is helped by the Verdict, but it had not been good upon a Demurrer.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 1 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1685.
MEmorandum, That in Trinity-Vacation last died Sir Francis North, Baron of
Guilford, and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, at his House in
Oxfordshire, being a Man of great Learning and Temperance. And Sir George
Jefferies, Baron of Wem, and Chief Justice of the King's Bench, had the Seal
delivered to him at Windsor, and was thereupon made Lord High Chancellor of
England. And Sir Edward Herbert, one of the Kings Council, succeeded him in the
Place of Chief Justice. There died also this Vacation, Sir Thomas Walcott, one
of the Justices of the King's Bench, and he was succeeded by Sir Robert Wright,
one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

Sir John Newton and al' versus Stubbs.
IN an Action on the Case for Words. Words laid to be spoke ad tenorem and
effectmu sequen 'not good.
The Plaintiffs declared that they were Justices of the Peace for the County of
Gloucester, etc. and that the Defendant spoke these scandalous Words of them.
Viz. Sir John Newton and Mr. Meredith make use of the Kings Commission to
worrie Men out of their Estates, and postea eodem die, etc. they spoke these
words, Viz. Sir John Newton and Mr. Meredith make use of the Kings Commission
to worrie me and Mr. Creswick out of our Estates. And afterward these words
were laid in Latin ( without an Anglice) ad tenorem and effectum sequen', etc.

There was a Verdict for the Plaintiffs, and entire damages, and now Mr.
Trindar moved in Arrest of Judgment.

1. That the words in the Declaration are laid in Latin, Roll. Abr. 74. pl. 2.
without an Anglice, and without an Averment that the hearers did understand
Latin.

2. It Is not expressly alleged, that the Defendant spoke those very words, for
being laid ad tenorem and effectum sequen', something may be omitted which may
alter the sense and meaning of them; Cro. Eliz. 857.
and for this very reason Judgment was stayed, though the Court held the words
to be actionable.

Rex versus Ayloff and al'.
THey were Outlawed for High Treason, Treason.
and on Tuesday the 27th day of October they were brought to the Bar, and a
Rule of Court was made for their Execution on Friday following.

The Chief Justice said, that there was no hardship in this proceeding to a
Sentence upon an Outlawry; because those Malefactors who wilfully fly from
Justice, and a new Crime to their former Offense, and therefore ought to have
no benefit of the Law; for though a Man is Guilty, yet if he put himself upon his
Trial, he may by his submissive Behavior and show of Repentance, incline the
King to mercy.

In Felonies which are of a lower nature than the Crimes for which these
persons are attainted, flight even for an Hour, is a forfeiture of the Goods of
the Criminal; so likewise a Challenge to three Iuries is a defiance to Justice,
and if that be so, then certainly flying from it, is both despising the mercy
of the King, and contemning the Justice of the Nation.

They were both Executed on Frday the 30th of October following.

Dominus Rex versus Colson and al'.
AN Information was exhibited against the Defendants, Information for a Riot
not good.
setting forth, that they, with others, did riotously assemble themselves
together, to divert a Watercourse, and that they set up a Bank in a certain
place, by which the Water was hindered from running to an ancient Mill in so
plentiful a manner as formerly, etc.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, it came to a Trial, and the Jury found that Quoad
factionem Ripae, the Defendants were Guilty, and quoad Riotum not Guilty.

And now Mr. Williams moved in arrest of Judgment, because that by this Verdict
the Defendants were acquitted of the charge in the Information, which was the
Riot; and as for the erecting of the Bank, an Action on the Case would lie, and
the Judgment was accordingly arrested.

Mason versus Beldham. Trin. 1 Jac. Rot. 408.
THE Plaintiff brings his Action against the Defendant, Quantum meruit will lie
for Rent.
and sets forth, That in consideration that he would suffer the Defendant to
enjoy a House and three Water-Mills, etc. he promised to pay so much yearly as
they were reasonably worth; and avers that they were worth so much: And upon a
Demurrer the Question was, whether this Action would lie for Rent.

It was argued for the Defendant that it would not lie, Cro. Eliz. 242. 786,
859. 2 Cro. 668.
because it was a real Contract.

It Is true, there is a Case which seems to be otherwise; it is between Acton and
Symonds, Cro. Car. 414.
which was in consideration that the Plaintiff would demise to the Defendant
certain Lands for three years, at the Rent of 25 l. by the year, he promised to
pay it; this was held to be a personal Promise, grounded upon a real Contract,
and by the Opinion of three Judges, the Action did lie, because there was an
express promise alleged, which must also be proved. But Justice Croke was of a
contrary Opinion.

Mr. Pollexfen contra. If a Lease be made for years, reserving a Sum in gross
for Rent, and which is made certain by the Lease; in such case an Action of
Debt will lie for the Rent in arrear: But if where no Sum certain is reserved,
as in this Case, a Quantum meruit will lie; and no reason can be given why a
Man may not have such an Action for the Rent of his Land, as well as for his
Horse or Chamber: And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Anonymus.
THere was a Libel in the Spiritual Court for scandalous Words, Prohibition for
words, where some are actionable, and others not.
Viz. She is Bitch, a Whore, an old Bawd. And a Prohibition was now prayed by
Mr. Pollexfen, because some of the words were actionable at Law, and some
punishable in the Spiritual Court; and therefore prayed that it might go Quoad
those words which were actionable at Law.

The Chief Justice granted it, because the words were an entire Sentence, and
spoken altogether at the same time, and therefore if a Prohibition should not
go, it would be a double vexation.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 1 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1685.
Earl of Yarmouth versus Darrel.
THE Plaintiff brought an Action on the Case, Grant of the King of sole
Printing, not good.
setting forth Letters Patents of King Charles the II. by which the Sole
Printing of Blank Writs, Bonds, and Indentures were granted to him, excepting
such Forms which belonged to the Custom-House, and which were formerly granted
to Sir Roger L'Estrange; that this Grant was to continue for the space of 30
Years, and that the Defendant had notice thereof, and had printed 500 Blank
Bonds, which he laid to his damage of the sum of 40 l.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury found a special Verdict, the substance of
which was, that the Defendant was a Stationer, and that the Company of
Stationers for the space of 40 years last past, before the granting of these
Letters Patents, had constantly printed Blank Bonds; and so made a general
conclusion.

Mr. Trindar argued for the Plaintiff, and the only Question was, Whether this
Patent did vest a sole Interest in the Plaintiff, exclusive to all others?

In his Argument he insisted on these Points.

1. That the King has a Prerogative in Printing, and may grant it Exclusive to
others.

2. That this Prerogative extends to the Case at the Bar.

That he has such a Prerogative, it is confirmed by constant Usage, for such
Grants have been made by the Kings of England ever since Printing was invented:
But to instance in a few, Viz.

The Patent for Printing of Law Books was granted to one More, on the 19th day
of January, in the 15th year of King James the I. And when that Patent was
expired, another was granted to Atkyns and others, on the 15th day of November,
in the 12th year of King Charles the II.

In 23. Eliz. a Patent was granted to the Company of Stationers, for the sole
Printing of Psalm-Books and Psalters, for the space of 30 years. And on the 8th
of August 31 Eliz. the like Patent was granted to Christopher Barker, for Life.
Another Patent to the Company of Stationers for printing of Corderius, etc.
These and many more of the like nature, show what the constant usage has been.

Now the Statute of Monopolies does not reach to this Case, because of the
Proviso therein to exempt all such Grants of sole Printing: and by the Statute
of King Charles the II. for regulating of the Press, 14 Car. 2. cap. 33.
it is Enacted, That no person shall Print any Copy which any other has or
shall be granted to him by Letters Patents, and whereof he has the sole Right
and Privilege to Print. And upon the breaches of these Statutes several
Judgments have been given.

Between Streater and Roper in this Court; Mich. 24 Car. 2. Rot. 237.
it is true, the Judgment was against the Plaintiff; but upon a Writ of Error
brought in Parliament that Judgment was reversed.

The same Term there was a Judgment given upon a special Verdict in the
Common Pleas for the Plaintiffs, Hill. 35 Car. 2. B. R. Rot. 99.
who were the Company of Stationers, against Seymour, for Printing of
Almanacks. And they obtained the like Judgment against Wright, for Printing of
Psalters and Psalm-Books.

Now to apply this to the principal Case; it is to be considered, that these
Books for which the sole Printing was so claimed, were of a public nature and
importance, relating to the good and benefit of the Subjects; and so likewise
are Blank Bonds, for there may be false and vicious Impressions, to the ruin
and destruction of many innocent people.

And as a farther Argument that the King has this Prerogative, it is likewise
to be considered, that where no individual person can claim a Property in a
thing there the King has a Right vested in him by Law; and it cannot be
pretended that any particular person has a Right to Print those Bonds,
therefore the finding that such were printed by the Company for above 40 years,
is immaterial; because there being an inherent Prerogative in the King,
whenever he exerts it, all other persons are bound up who were at liberty
before.

To prove which, the Judgment in the Case of the East India Company is express
in point; for before that Patent the subject had liberty to Trade to those
places prohibited by that Grant; but afterward they were restrained by that
Grant.

Neither is this in the nature of a Monopoly; 11 Co. 84.
it is not like that of the sole Grant of making Cards, which has been adjudged
void, and with great reason, because that Grant reached to prohibit a whole
Trade, and therefore differs from this Case; for the Defendant may print other
Instruments or Books, and exercise his Trade in some other lawful and
profitable Commodities; and so might the Merchants in the Case of the
East India Company, for they were restrained by the Patent as to particular
places, but might Trade to any other part of the World.

Neither will the Subjects in general receive any prejudice by this or such
like Grants; for if the Patentees make ill use of their Privileges, though it
cannot be properly called an Office, yet it is a Trust, and a Scire Facias will
lie to repeal their Grants.

It was argued by the Council for the Defendant, E contra.
That the Verdict having found that the Company of Stationers had used to print
those Bonds for above 40 years before the making of this Grant: the Question
will be, Whether they are now divested of a Right so long enjoyed?

And as to that, it is not a new thing to object, That notwithstanding such
Grants, yet other persons have insisted on a Right to Print, and have printed
accordingly.

Thus the sole Printing of Law Books was granted to one Atkyns, yet the Reports
of Justice Jones, and my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan were printed without the
direction of the Patentees.

Printing, as it is a manual Occupation, makes no alteration in this Case, for
the King has as great a Prerogative in Writing any thing that is of a public
Nature, as he has in Printing of it.

Now considering Printing as an Art exclusive from the thing printed, this
Patent is not good: For if a Man invent a new Art, and another should learn it
before the Inventor can obtain a Patent, if afterward granted it is void.

Then consider it in relation to the thing printed, 1 Roll. 4. 11 Co. 53. id.
which in this Case are Blank-Bonds; it is not a new Invention, because the
Company of Stationers have printed such above 40 years, and for that reason
this Patent is void; for where the Invention is not New, there Trade shall not
be restrained.

No Man can receive any prejudice by the printing of such Bonds, for they are
of no Use till filled up; it is only a bare Manufacture of setting of so many
Letters together: but filling up the Blanks makes them of another nature.

Grants of things of less moment have been adjudged Monopolies, 2 Roll. Abr.
215. pl. 5.
as a Patent for the sole making of all Bills, Pleas and Briefs in the Council
of York; for by the same reason a like Patent might be granted to make all
Declarations in the Courts of Westminster- Hall.

Curia. The King has a Prerogative to Grant the sole Printing to a particular
person; all the Cases cited for the Plaintiff do not reach the reason of this
Case; for there is a difference between things of a public Use and those which
are public in their Nature; even Almanacks have been used to ill purposes, as
to foretell future Events; yet they are of public Use to show the Feasts and
Fasts of the Church.

The Court inclined that the Patent was not good.

Jackson versus Warren.
A Motion was made in arrest of Judgment, Amendment.
for that the day when the Assizes were to be held, and the place where, were
left out of the Distringas, and so a mis-tryal: But the Court were of another
Opinion, 1 Roll. Abr. 201.
for if there had been no Distringas the Trial had been good; because they
Jurata is the Warrant to try the Cause, which was right, and therefore the
Distringas was ordered to be amended by the Roll.

Dominus Rex versus Sparks.
IT IS Enacted by the Statute of 1 Eliz. Where a Punishment is directed by a
Statute, the Judgment must be pursuant. 1 Eliz. cap. 2.13. and 14 Car. 2. cap.
4.
That every Minister shall use the Church Service in such Form as is mentioned
in the Book of Common Prayer, and if he shall be convicted to use any other
Form, he shall forfeit one whole Years profit of all his Spiritual Promotions,
and suffer six Months Imprisonment.

And by the Statute of King Charles the II. All Ministers are to use the
public Prayers, in such Order and Form as is mentioned in the
Common Prayer Book, with such Alterations as have been made therein by the
Convocation then sitting.

The Defendant was indicted at the Quarter Sessions in Devonshire, for using
alias Preces in the Church, and alio modo, than mentioned in the said Book, and
concludes contra formam Statuti: He was found Guilty, and fined 100 Marks; and
upon a Writ of Error brought Mr. Polexfen and Mr. Shower argued for the
Plaintiff in Error, that this Indictment was not warranted by any Law; and the
Verdict shall not help in the case of an Indictment, for all the Statutes of
Jeofails have left them as they were before.

Now the Fact, as it is said in this Indictment, may be no offense, because to
use Prayers alio modo than enjoined by the Book of Common Prayer, may be upon
an extraordinary occasion, and so no Crime.

But if this should not be allowed, the Justices of Peace have not power in
their Sessions to enquire into this matter, or if they had power, they could
not give such a Judgment, because the punishment is directed by the Statute;
and of this Opinion was the whole Court.

The Chief Justice said, that the Statute of the 23 Eliz. 23 Eliz. cap. 1.
could have no influence upon this Case, because another Form is now enjoined
by later Statutes; but admitted that Offenses against that Statute were
enquitable by the Justices.

The Indictment ought to have alleged that the Defendant used other Forms and
Prayers instead of those enjoined, which were neglected by him; for otherwise
every Parson may be indicted that uses prayers before his Sermon, other than
such which are required by the Book of Common Prayer.

Clerk versus Hoskins.
DEbt upon a Bond for the performance of Covenants in certain Articles of
Agreement, in which it was recited, That whereas the now Defendant had found
out a Mystery in coloring Stuffs, and had entered into a Partnership with the
Plaintiff for the term of seven Years; he did thereupon Covenant with him, that
he would not procure any person to obtain Letters Patents within that Term to
exercise that Mystery alone.

The Defendant pleaded that he did not procure any person to obtain Letters
Patents, etc.

The Plaintiff replied and assigned for breach, that the Defendant did within
that term procure Letters Patents for another person to use this Mystery alone,
for a certain time. Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam.

And upon a Demurrer to the Replication, these Exceptions were taken.

1. That the Plaintiff has not set forth what Term is contained in the Letters
Patents.

2. That he had pleaded both Record and Fact together; for the procuring is the
Fact, and the Letters Patents are the Record, and then he ought not to have
concluded to the Country; Prout patet per Recordum.

To which it was answered, That the Plaintiff was a Stranger to the Term
contained in the Letters Patents, and therefore could not possibly show it; but
if he has assigned a full breach, it is well enough.

Then as to the other Exception, viz. the pleading of the Letters Patents here,
is not matter of Record; here is a plain negative and affirmative upon which
the Issue is joined, and therefore ought to conclude, and hoc petit, etc.

Curia. There is a Covenant that the Defendant shall not procure Letters
Patents to hinder the Plaintiff within the seven Years of the Partnership: Now
this must be the matter upon which the breach arises, and not the Letters
Patents; so that it had been very improper to conclude prout patet per
Recordum. Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Rex versus Hethersal.
THE Defendant was Felo de se, Melius inquireddum not granted but for
misdemeanor of the Jury.
and the Coroners Inquest found him a Lunatic, and now Mr. Jones moved for a
Melius inquirendum, but it was denied, because there was no defect in the
Inquisition; but the Court told him, that if he could produce an Affidavit that
the Jury did not go according to their Evidence, or of any indirect Proceedings
of the Coroner, then they would grant it: But it was afterward quashed,
because they had omitted the year of the King.

Friend versus Bouchier. Trin. 34 Car. 2. Rot. 920.
EJectment upon the Demise of Henry Jones, What words in a Will make a general
Tail.
of certain Lands in Hampshire.

The Jury found this Special Verdict following, Viz. That William Holms was
seized in Fee of the Lands in question, who by his last Will, dated in the year
1633. devised it to Dorothy Hopkins for Life; Remainder to her first Son, and
to the Heirs of the Body of such first Son, etc. and for default of such Issue
to his Cousin W. with several Remainders over. And in default of such Issue, to
Anne Jones, and to her Heirs (who was the Lessor of the Plaintiff;) That before
the sealing and publishing of this Will, he made this Memorandum,

Viz. Memorandum that my Will and Meaning is, That Dorothy Hopkins shall not
alien or sell the Lands given to her from the Heirs Male of her Body lawfully
to be begotten, but to remain upon default of such Issue, to W. and the Heirs
Males of his Body to be begotten, according to the true intent and meaning of
this my Will.

Dorothy Hopkins had Issue Richard, who had Issue Henry, who had Issue a
Daughter, now the Defendant.

The Question was, Whether the Son of Dorothy did take an Estate Tail by this
Will, to him and to the Heirs of his Body in general, or an Estate in Tail Male.

This Case was argued in Michaelmas- Term 36 Car. II. And in the same Term a
year afterward, by Council on both sides.

Those who argued for the Plaintiff held, that the Son had an Estate in Tail
Male; and this seems plain by the intention of the Testator, that if Dorothy
had Issue Daughters, they should have no benefit, for no provision is made for
any such by the Will; and therefore the Daughter of her Son can have no Estate,
who is more remote to the Testator.

This is like the Case of Conveyances, Turnam verse. Cooper. 2 Cro. 476. Poph.
138. id. 25 Ass. pl. 14.
wherein the Habendum explains the generality of the precedent words; as if
Lands be given to Husband and Wife, and to their Heirs, habendum to them and
the Heirs of their Bodies, Remainder to them and the Survivor, to hold of the
chief Lord, with Waranty to them and their Heirs: this is an Estate Tail, with
a Fee expectant.

So it is here, though the first words in the Will extend to Heirs which is
general; yet in the Memorandum it is particular to Heirs Males, and the words
Heirs and Issues are of the same signification in a Will.

The Memorandum is a confirmation of the Will, Ex part Def.
and the construction which has been made of it, is not only inconsistent with
the Rules of Law, but contrary to the intent of the Testator, and against the
express words of his Will.

Cases upon Wills are different from those which arise upon Deeds, because in
Conveyances subsequent words may be explanatory of the former; but in Wills the
first words of the Testator do usually guide those which follow.

As if Land be devised for Life, Dyer 171 a. 1 And. 8. id. Golds. 16. Moor 593.
Remainder to F. and the Heirs Males of his Body, and if it happen that he dye
without Heirs ( not saying Males) the Remainder over in Tail; this was held not
to be a general Tail, but an Estate in Tail Male, therefore the Daughter of F.
could not inherit.

Now to construe this to be an Estate Tail Male, does not only alter the Estate
of the Sons of Dorothy, but of the Issue of W. and nothing is mentioned in this
Memorandum of the Limitation over to Jones; so that the whole Will is altered
by it.

But this Memorandum cannot enlarge the Estate of Dorothy, because it is
inconsistent with the intention of the Testator, who gave her only an Estate
for Life by the Will; but if she should have an Estate Tail, she might by Fine
and Recovery bar it, and so alien it contrary to his express words.

Besides, there is no Estate limited to Dorothy by this Memorandum, and she
having an express Estate for Life, devised to her by the Will, it shall never
be enlarged by such doubtful words which follow.

As where a Man had 100 Acres of Land, 2 Leon. 226. Moor 593.
called by a particular Name, and usually occupied with a House, which House he
let to S. with 40 Acres, parcel of that Land, and then devised the House and
all the Lands called by that particular Name, etc. to his Wife; Adjudged she
should only have the House and the 40 Acres, and that the Devise shall not be
extended by implication to the other sixty Acres.

So that to make the design of this Will and Memorandum to be consistent, the
latter words must be construed only to illustrate the meaning of the Testator
in the former Paragraph of the Will, and must be taken as a farther declaration
of his intention, Viz. that the Heirs Males mentioned in the Memorandum, is
only a description of the Persons named in the Will.

The Law does usually regard the intention of the Testator, and will not imply
any contradictions in his Bequests.

The Court was of Opinion that it was a plain Case; Judicium.
for in the Limitation it is clear that it is a general Tail; and it does not
follow that the Testator did not design any thing for his Grandaughters,
because no provision was made for Daughters: For where an Estate is entailed
upon the Heirs of a Man's Body, if he has a Son and a Daughter, and the Son
has Issue a Daughter, the Estate will go to her, and not to the Aunt.

Now this Memorandum does not come to make any alteration in the Limitation,
because it directs that the Estate shall go according to the true intent and
meaning of the Will, and is rather like a Proviso than an Habendum in a Deed.
And therefore Judgment was given accordingly for the Defendant.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 1 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1685.
Hicks versus Gore.
ON Tuesday the 17th day of November there was a Trial at the Bar by a
Somersetshire Jury in Ejectment: The Case was thus:

The Plaintiff claimed the Lands by virtue of the Statute of 4 and 5 Ph. and
Mar. cap. 8. by which it is enacted.

That it shall not be lawful for any person to take away any Maid or Woman
Child unmarried, and within the Age of sixteen years from the Parents or
Guardian in Soccage; and that if any Woman Child or Maiden being above the Age
of twelve years, and under the Age of sixteen, do at any time assent or agree
to such person that shall make any Contract of Matrimony (contrary to the Form
of the Act) that then the next of Kin of such Woman Child or Maid to whom the
Inheritance should descend, return or come after the decease of the same Woman
Child or Maid, shall from the time of such Assent and Agreement have, hold and
enjoy all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as the said Woman Child or
Maid had in Possession, Reversion or Remainder at the time of such Assent and
Agreement during the Life of such person that shall so contract Matrimony, and
after the decease of such person so contracting Matrimony, that then the said
Land, etc. shall descend, revert, remain and come to such person or persons as
they should have done in case this Act had never been made, other than him only
that so shall contract Matrimony.

Benjamin Tibboth being seized in Fee of the Lands in question to the value of
700 l. per annum had Issue a Son and four Daughters; the Son had Issue Ruth his
only Daughter, who was married to the Defendant Gore; her Father died in the
time of her Grandfather, and her Mother fearing that this Daughter might be
stolen from her, applies her self to my Lady Gore, and entreats her to take this
Daughter into her House, which she did accordingly.

My Lady had a Son then in France, she sent for him and married him to this
Ruth, she being then under the Age of sixteen years, without the Consent of her
Mother, who was her Guardian.

The Question was whether this was a Forfeiture of her Estate during Life.

It was proved at the Trial that the Mother had made a Bargain with the Lessor
of the Plaintiff, that in case he recovered she should have 1000 l. and the
Chirds of the Estate, and therefore she was not admitted to be a Witness.

The Plaintiff could not prove any thing to make a Forfeiture, and therefore
was nonsuited.

The Chief Justice said, that the Statute was made to prevent Children from
being seduced from their Parents or Guardians by flattering or enticing Words,
Promises or Gifts, and married in a secret way to their disparagement; but that
no such thing appeared in this Case, for Dr. Hascard proved the Marriage to be
at St. Clements Church in a Canonical Hour, and that many People were present,
and that the Church Doors were open whilst he married them.

Anonymus:
BY the Statute of 21 Jacobi it is Enacted, 21 Jac. c. 23.
That no Writ to remove a Suit out of an Inferior Court shall be obeyed unless
it be delivered to the Steward of the same Court before Issue or Demurrer
joined, so as the Issue or Demurrer be not joined within six Weeks next after
the Arrest or Appearance of the Defendant.

In this Case Issue was joined, and the Steward refused to allow the Habeas
Corpus, and the Cause was tried, but not before an Utter Barrister, as is
directed by the Statute.

Curia. The Steward ought to return the Habeas Corpus, and they having
proceeded to try the Cause no Utter Barister being Steward, let an Attachment
go.

Claxton versus Swift. Hill. 1 Jac. 2. Rot. 1163.
THE Plaintiff being a Merchant brought an Action upon a Bill of Exchange, If
the Plaintiff recover against the Drawer of a Bill he shall not afterward
recover against any of Endorsers.
setting forth the Custom of Merchants, etc. and that London and Worcester were
ancient Cities, and that there was a Custom amongst Merchants, that if any
person living in Worcester draw a Bill upon another in London, and if this Bill
be accepted and endorsed, the first Endorser is liable to the payment.

That one Hughes drew a Bill of 100 l. upon Mr. Pardoe paiable to the Defendant
or Order.

Mr. Swift endorsed this Bill to Allen or Order, and Allen endorsed it to
Claxton.

The Money not being paid Claxton brings his Action against Hughes, and
recovers, but did not take out Execution.

Afterward he sued Mr. Swift, who was the first Endorser, and he pleads the
first Recovery against Hughes in bar to this Action, and avers that it was for
the same Bill, and that they were the same Parties.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and the Defendant joined in the Demurrer.

Mr. Pollexfen argued that it was a good Bar, because the Plaintiff had his
Election to bring his Action against either of the Endorsers or against the
Drawer, but not against all; and that he had now determined his Election by
suing the Drawer, and shall not go back again though he never have Execution;
for this is not in the nature of a joint Action which may be brought against
all. It Is true that it may he made joint or several by the Plaintiff; but when
he has made his choice by suing of one he shall never sue the rest, because the
Action sounds in Damages, which are uncertain before the Judgment, but
afterward are made certain, and transeunt in rem judicatam, and is as
effectual in Law as a Release.

As in Trover the Defendant pleaded that at another time the Plaintiff had
recovered against another person for the same Goods so much Damages, 2 Cro. 73.
Yelv. 65. Brown versus Wootton.
and had the Defendant in Execution; and upon a Demurrer this was held a good
Plea; for though in that Case it was objected, that a Judgment and Execution
was no satisfaction unless the Money was paid, yet it was adjudged that the
cause of Action being against several, for which Damages were to be recovered;
and because a Sum certain was recovered against one, that is a good discharge
against all the other, but it is otherwise in Debt, because each is liable to
the entire Sum.

Chief Justice. If the Plaintiff had accepted of a Bond from the first Drawer
in satisfaction of this Money, it had been a good Bar to any Action which might
have been brought against the other Indorsers for the same; and as this Case is
the Drawer is still liable, and if he fail in payment, the first Endorser is
chargeable, because if he make Endorsement upon a bad Bill, it is Equity and
good Conscience that the Endorsee may resort to him to make it good: But the
other Justices being against the Opinion of the Chief Justice, Judgment was
given for the Defendant.

Pawley versus Ludlow.
DEBT upon a Bond. The Condition was, That if John Fletcher shall appear such a
day coram Justitiariis apud Westminster. etc. that then, etc.

The Defendant pleaded, that after the 25th day of November, and before the day
of the appearance, he did render himself to the Officer in discharge of this
Bond, and to this the Plaintiff demurred.

Darnel for the Defendant admitted that if a Scire Facias be brought against
the Bail upon a Writ of Error, 3 Bulstr. 191. 2 Cro. 402.
who plead that after the Recognizance, and before the Judgment against the
Principal affirmed, he rendered himself to the Marshal in discharge of his Bail,
that this is not a good Plea, but that the Sureties are still liable, 3 Jac.
cap. 8.
because by the Statute they are not only liable to render his Body but to pay
the Debt recovered.

But if a Judgment be had in this Court, 1 Roll. Abr. 334. pl. 11.
and a Writ of Error brought in the Exchequer-Chamber, and pending that Writ of
Error the Principal is rendered, the Bail in the Action are thereby discharged.

It was argued on the other side, E contra.
that this is not the like Case of Bail upon a Writ of Error, for the Condition
of a Recognizance and that of a Bond for Appearance are different in their
nature; the one is barely that the Party shall appear on such a day, the other
is that he shall not only appear and render his Body to Prison, but the Bail
likewise do undertake to pay the Debt, if Judgment should be against the
Principal.

Now where the Condition is only for an Appearance at a day if the Party render
himself either before or after the day, it is not good.

Chief Justice. If the Party render himself to the Officer before the day of
Appearance he is to see that he appear at the day, either by keeping of him in
Custody or letting of him to Bail, the end of the Arrest is to have his Body
here.

If he had not been bailed then he had still remained in Custody, and the
Plaintiff would have his proper remedy; but being once let to Bail, and not
appearing in Court according to the Condition of the Bond, that seems to be the
fault of the Defendant who had his Body before the day of Appearance.

Judgment for the Defendant.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 1 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1685.
Sergeant Hampson's Case.
BY the Statute of Queen Elizabeth it is Enacted, 5 Eliz. c. 23.
That if the person excommunicated have not a sufficient Addition, or if it is
not contained in the Significavit that the Excommunication proceeds for some
cause or contempt or of some original Matter of Heresy, refusing to have his
Child baptized, to receive the Sacrament, to come to Divine Service, or Errors
in Matters of Religion or Doctrine, Incontinency, Usury, Simony, Perjury in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or Idolatry, he shall not incurr the Penalties in the Act.

Sergeant Hampson was excommunicated for Alimony, and now Mr. Girdler moved
that he might be discharged, because none of the aforesaid Causes were
contained in the Significavit.

Curia. He may be discharged of the Forfeiture for that reason, but not of the
Excommunication.

Anonymus.
ONE who was outlawed for the Murder of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey now brought a
Writ of Error in his Hand to the Bar, praying that it might be read and allowed.

It was read by Mr. Astry, Clerk of the Crown.

The Errors assigned were; viz.

That it did not appear upon the Return of the Exigent in the first Exact' that
the Court was held pro Comitatu.

That the Outlawry being against him and two other persons, it is said in the
last Exact' that Non comperuit, but does not say, nec eorum aliquis comperuit.

For these Reasons the Outlawry was reversed, and he held up his Hand at the
Bar and pleaded Not-guilty to his Indictment, and was admitted to Bail, and
afterward he was brought to his Trial, and no Witness in behalf of the King
appearing against him he was acquitted.

The Mayor and Commonalty of Norwich versus Johnson.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given for the Plaintiff in
the Common Pleas in an Action of Waste. Waste lies against an Executor de son
tort of a Term.
The Declaration was, that the Plaintiff demised a Barn to one Took for a
certain Term, by virtue whereof he was possessed, and being so possessed died;
that the Defendant was his Executor, who entered and made Waste by pulling down
of the said Barn.

The Defendant pleaded that Took died intestate, and that he did not administer.

The Plaintiff replied, that he entered as Executor of his own Wrong; and to
this Plea the Defendant demurred, and the Plaintiff joined in the Demurrer.

This Case was argued by Mr. Appleton of Lincoln's Inn for the Plaintiff, who
said, That an Action of Waste would not lie against the Defendant, because the
Mayor and Commonalty, etc. had a remedy by an Assise to recover the Land upon
which the Barn stood, and a Trover to recover the Goods or Materials, and that
such an Action would not lie against him at the Common Law, because he neither
was Tenant by the Courtesy nor in Dower, against whom Waste only lay.

So that if the Plaintiff is entitled to this Action it must be by virtue of
the Statute of Gloucester; 6 Ed. 1. c. 5.
but it will not lie against the Defendant even by that Statute, because the
Action is thereby given against the Tenant by the Courtesy, in Dower, for Life
or Years, and treble Damages, etc.

But the Defendant is neither of those, and this being a penal Law, which not
only gives treble damages, but likewise the Recovery of the place wasted, ought
therefore not to be taken strictly, but according to Equity.

Tenants at sufferance, or at Will, by Elegit, or Tenants by Statute Staple, 11
H. 6. c. 5.
and also Pernors of Profits were never construed to be within this Statute,
and therefore a particular Act was made to give him in Reversion an Action of
Waste, where Tenant for life or years had granted over their Estates, and yet
took the Profits and committed Waste.

Then the Question will be, Co. Lit. 371.
what Estate this Executor de sontort has gained by his Entry.

And as to that he argued that he had got a Fee-simple by Disseisin, and that
for this reason the Plaintiff was barred from this Action; for if the Son
purchase Lands in Fee and is disseised by his Father, who makes a Feoffment in
Fee to another with Warranty and dies, the Son is for ever barred; for though
the Disseisin was not done with any intention to make such a Feoffment, 1 Roll.
Abr. 662.
yet he is bound by this Alienation.

So where a man made a Lease for life and died, and then his Heir suffered a
Recovery of the same Land without making an actual Entry, this is an absolute
Disseisin, because the Lessee had an Estate for life; but if he had been Tenant
at Will, it might be otherwise.

But admitting that the Defendant is not a Disseisor, then the Plaintiffs must
bring their Case to be within the Statute of Gloucester, as that he is either
Tenant for life or years.

If he is Tenant for Life, he must be so either by right or by wrong.

He cannot be so by right, because he had no lawful Conveyance made to him of
this Estate; besides it is quite contrary to the Pleading, which is that he
entered wrongfully.

Neither can he be so by wrong, for such particular Estates, 6 Co. 25.
as for life or years, cannot be gained by Disseisin, and so is Heliar's Case
in 6 Co.

Then if this should be construed an Estate for years, it must be gained either
by the Act of the Party or by the Act of the Law; but such an Estate cannot be
gained by either of those means.

First it cannot be gained by the Act of the Party, Moor 126. Kendrick versus
Burges.
because an Executor de son tort cannot have any interest in a Term, and for
this there is an express Authority in this Court, which was thus, viz. A Lease
in Reversion for years was granted to a man who died intestate, his Wife,
before she had administered, sold this Term to the Defendant, and afterward she
obtained Letters of Administration, and made a Conveiance of the same Term to
the Plaintiff, and Judgment was given for the last Vendee, because it was in
the case of a Reversion of a Term for years, upon which no Entry could be made,
and of which there could be no Executor de son tort, though it was admitted by
the Court, that such an Executor might make a good sale of the Goods before
Administration granted.

Neither can any Entry or Claim make the Defendant an Executor de son tort of a
Term for years, because a wrongful Entry can never gain any Estate but a
Fee-simple; for it is not to be satisfied with any particular or certain Estate,
as for life or years.

It cannot be gained by Act of Law, because that abhors all manner of wrong.

If it should be objected that though this Executor does not gain any Estate
for his own benefit; yet he in the Reversion may take him for a Disseisor, and
it shall be in his election, either to make him so, or a Tenant for years.

To this it may be answered, that the Defendant does not claim by color of any
Grant; if he did, then he might be a Disseisor at the Election of him in the
Reversion; and this was the very difference taken in the Case of Blunden and
Baugh. Cro. Car. 302. 1 Roll. Abr. 661. Jones 115. Latch. 53.


So likewise if it be objected that the Defendant is an Occupant, and therefore
punishable for Waste; but the reason is not the same, because the Entry of an
Occupant is lawful, and he gains an Estate for life, which is not this Case.

An Executor de son tort is not a person taken notice of in the Law in respect
to him in the Reversion, but in respect of the Creditors of the Intestate, and
therefore if what he does may be advantageous to them the Law will make a
Construction upon it for their benefit; but if such a person should be within
the intention or meaning of this Statute, then the natural Consequences will
be: 1. That the place wasted would be recovered. 2. That the Plaintiff would
also have treble damages.


Both which would be a manifest means to defeat the Creditors of their Debts,
for which reasons he prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff in the Errors.

It was argued by the Council on the other side, E contra.
That it is plain that the Defendant was Executor de son tort, for such must
that person be who intermeddles with the Intestates Estate, where there is no
rightful Executor or Administrator.

Now a Man may be Executor of his own wrong of a Term for years, as appears
even in that case cited out of Moor on the other side, and if so, the Defendant
must be liable to this Action.

The Statute may be expounded as well against a wrongful as a rightful
Executor, it is plain here is a Dissesin, and the Law is now settled, that it
shall be in the election of him in the Reversion to make it so.

This Defendant would justify one wrong by another, for he confesses that he
has committed a Disseisin, and therefore will not be answerable for committing
of Waste.

As to the Objection that an Executor de son tort is liable only in respect of
Creditors, and that if he should be punished for Waste it would be an injury to
them, because of the treble damages recovered against him.

Resp. Such damages must be answered out of his own Estate; for even in the
Case of a rightful Executor, if he commit Waste, 5 Co. Poulter's Case.
he will be chargeable in a Devastavit de bonis propriis.

This is not properly a penal, but a remedial Law, and as such may be construed
according to Equity.

It Is true, Tenants by Elegit or by Statute are not within this Statute,
because Waste by them committed is no wrong; for if they should fell the
Timber, it sinks the Debt, and the Cognizor may have a Scire Facias ad
computandum.

Curia. It would be an infinite trouble for him in the Reversion to seek his
remedy for Waste done, if the Law did oblige him to stay till there was a
rightful Administrator, and it is not to be doubted, but that there may be an
Executor de son tort of a Term for years.

This is a remedial and yet a penal Law, and therefore shall have a favorable
Construction: The Judgment was affirmed.

Bridgham versus Frontee.
DEBT upon a Bond for performance of Covenants in a Lease of a House for a
certain Term of years rendering Rent, etc. And the Breach assigned was, That
there was 66 l. Rent in arrear.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of H. 32 H. 8. c. 16.
8. That all Leases of Dwelling-Houses or Shops made to any Stranger or Alien
Artificer shall be void, and sets forth that the Defendant was a Vintner and an
Alien Artificer.

And upon a Demurrer Mr. Thompson for the Defendant said, that a Vintner was an
Artificer within the meaning of the Act, which was made to prevent a mischief
by Foreigners encroaching upon the Trades of the King's Subjects by which they
gained their Livelihood, and therefore shall be expounded largely and
beneficially for them.

A Mercer, a Draper or Grocer are not properly Artificers, yet they are within
the meaning of this Act.

Chief Justice. 1 R. 2. cap. 9.
This Statute refers to another of R. 2. Which prohibits Alien Artificers to
exercise any Handycraft in England, unless as a Servant to a Subject skilful in
the same Art, upon pain to forfeit his Goods; so that it is plain, that such who
used any Art or manual Occupation were restrained from using it here to the
prejudice of the King's Subjects.

Now the Mystery of a Vintner chiefly consists in mingling of Wines, and that
is not properly an Art, but a Cheat; so the Plaintiff had his Judgment.

Rex versus Plowright and others.
A Distress was taken for Chimny-Mony, and the Parties distrained apply
themselves to the two next Justices of the Peace, before whom it did appear
that Plowright let a Cottage to Hunt, which was not of the yearly value of 10
s. The Collectors of this Duty distrained upon the Landlord, which the said
Justices thought to be illegal, and therefore they ordered a Restitution: And a
Certiorari being brought to remove the Order into this Court. Mr. Attorney
prayed that it might be ^^^d.

But it was opposed by Mr. Pollexfen for that the Statute of King Charles II.
enacts, 16 Car. 2. c. 3.
That no person inhabiting an House which has more than two Chimnies shall be
exempted from the payment of the Duty, etc. and then these Words do follow,
viz. That if any question shall arise about the taking of any distress, the
same shall be heard and finally determined by one or more Justices of the Peace
near adjoining, etc.

Now here was Money levied by virtue of this Act, and a Controversy did arise
by reason of the Distress, and an Order was made by the Justices, which
according to the letter and meaning of the Act ought to be final; the intention
whereof was to prevent the charge and trouble of poor Men in Suits at Law about
small Matters, and therefore it gave the Justices power to determine particular
Offenses and Oppressions.

Mr. Attorney contra. If the Justices of Peace have power to determine, etc.
that is to make them Judges whether this Duty is payable or not; and so the
Courts of Westminster, who are the proper Judges of the Revenue of the King,
who by this means will be without an Appeal, will be excluded.

Curia. This Court may take Cognizance of this Matter as well as in Cases of
Bastardy; it is frequent to remove those Orders into this Court though the Act
says, That the two next Justices may take order as well for the punishment of
the Mother, as also for the relief of the Parish where it was born, except he
give Security to appear the next Quarter Sessions.

The Statute does not mention any Certiorari, which shows that the intention of
the Lawmakers was that a Certiorari might he brought, otherwise they would
have enacted, as they have done by several other Statutes that no Certiorari
shall lie.

Therefore the meaning of the Act must be, that the determination of the
Justices of the Peace shall be final in Matters of Fact only; as if a Collector
should affirm that a person has four Chimnies when he has but two, or when
the Goods distrained are sold under the value, and the Overplus not returned;
but the Right of the Duty arising by virtue of this Act was never intended to
be determined by them.

Then the Order was filed, and Mr. Pollexfen moved that it might be quashed;
for that by the Statute of 14 Car. 2. 14 Car. 2. c. 10.
the Occupier was only chargeable and the Landlord exempted. Now by the
Proviso in that Act such a Cottage as is expressed in this Order is likewise
exempted, because it is not of greater value than 20 s. by the year, and it is
not expressed that the person inhabiting the same has any Lands of his own of
the value of 20 s. per annum, nor any Lands or Goods to the value of 10 l.

Now there having been several abuses made of this Law to deceive the King of
this Duty, occasioned the making of this subsequent Act.

The abuses were these, viz.

The taking a great House and dividing it into several Tenements, and then
letting them to Tenants, who by reason of their poverty might pretend to be
exempted from this Duty.

The dividing Lands from Houses, so that the King was by these Practices
deceived, and therefore in such Cases the charge was laid upon the Landlord;
but nothing of this appearing upon the Order it was therefore quashed.

Brett versus Whitchot.
IN Replevin. Lands not exempted from repairing of the Highways by grant of
the King.
The Defendant avowed the taking of a Cup as a Fine, for a Distress toward the
repairing of the Highway.

The Plaintiff replied, and set forth a Grant from the King, by which the Lands
which were chargeable to send Men for the repairing, etc. were exempted from
that Duty. And upon a Demurrer the Question was, Whether the Kings Letters
Patents are sufficient to exempt Lands from the Charge of the repairing of the
Highways, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. c. 8.
which by the Statute of Philip and Mary and other subsequent Statutes are
chargeable to send Men for that purpose.

And it was argued, that such Letters Patents were not sufficient, because they
were granted in this Case before the making of the Statute, and so by
consequence before any cause of Action; and to prove this a Case was cited to
this purpose.

In 2 E. 2 Inst. 569.
3. an Action was brought against an Hundred for a Robbery upon the Statute of
13 E. 1. The Bishop of Litchfield pleaded a Charter of R. 1. by which that
Hundred, which was held in Right of his Church, was exempted, etc. But it was
held that this Charter could not discharge the Action, because no such Action
was given when the Letters Patents were made, but long afterward.

Judgment was given for the Avowant.

Upton versus Dawkin.
TRespass quare vi and armis liberam piscariam he did break and enter, and one
hundred Trouts ipsius Quer. Trespass for taking Fish ipsius querentis in libera
piscaria not good.
in the Fishery aforesaid did take and carry away.

Upon Not guilty pleaded, there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and this
Exception was taken in arrest of Judgment, viz.

For that the Plaintiff declared in Trespass for taking so many Fish ipsius
Quer. in libera piscaria, which cannot be, because he has not such a property
in libera piscaria to call the Fish his own.

Pollexfen contra. If there had not been a Verdict such a Construction might
have been made of this Declaration upon a Demurrer; but now it is helped, and
the rather because a Man may call them pisces ipsius in a free Fishery; for
they may be in a Trunk; so a Man may have a property though not in himself, as
in the Case of Iointenants, where it is not in one, but in both; yet if one
declare against the other, unless he plead the Iointenancy in Abatement the
Plaintiff shall recover.

But notwithstanding the Judgment was reversed.

Dominus Rex versus......
THE Defendant was indicted for Barretry; Barretry.
the Evidence against him was, that one G. was arrested at the Suit of C. in an
Action of 4000 l. and was brought before a Judge to give Bail to the Action;
and that the Defendant, who was a Barrister at Law, was then present, and did
solicit this Suit, when in truth at the same time C. was indebted to G. in
200 l. and that he did not owe the said C. one farthing.

The Chief Justice was first of Opinion, that this might be Maintenance, but
that it was not Barretry unless it appeared that the Defendant did know that C.
had no cause of Action after it was brought.

If a Man should be arrested for a trifling Cause, or for no Cause, this is no
Barretry, though it is a sign of a very ill Christian, it being against the
express Word of God.

But a Man may arrest another thinking he has a just cause so to do, when as
in truth he has none, for he may be mistaken especially where there has been
great dealings between the Parties.

But if the design was not to recover his own Right, but only to ruin and
oppress his Neighbor, that is Barretry.

A Man may lay out money in behalf of another in Suits at Law to recover a just
Right, and this may be done in respect of the Poverty of the Party; but if he
lend money to promote and stir up Suits then he is a Barretor.

Now it appearing upon the Evidence that the Defendant did entertain C. in his
House, and brought several Actions in his Name where nothing was due, that he
was therefore guilty of that Crime.

But if an Action be first brought, and then profecuted by another, he is no
Barretor though there is no cause of Action. The Defendant was found guilty.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 2 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1686.
Coram Edwardo Herbert Mil' Capital' Justic'. Francisco Wythens Mil',
Justiciariis. Richardo Holloway Mil', Justiciariis. Thoma Walcot Mil',
Justiciariis.
MEmorandum, That the First day of this Term, Sir Thomas Jones, Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas had his Quietus, and Sir Henry Beddingfield, one of the
Justices of the same Court succeeded him in that Office. Likewise the
Honorable William Mountagu, Esquire; Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer had his
Quietus, and Sir Edward Atkyns, one of the Barons of the same Court, succeeded
him. Sir Job Charleton, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas had his
Quietus, but was made Chief Justice of Chester; and Sir Edward Lutwich the
King's Sergeant, was made one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and Sergeant
Heath was made one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

Okel versus Hodgkinson.
THE Father and Son join in a Fine, in order to make a Settlement upon the
second Wife of the Father, who was only Tenant by the Courtesy, the Remainder
in Tail to his said Son. One of the Cognizors died after the Caption, and
before the Return of the Writ of Covenant; and now a Writ of Error was brought
to Reverse it, and this was assigned for Error.

Curia. If it had been in the Case of a Purchasor for a valuable Consideration,
the Court would have showed him some favor; but it being to do a wrong to a
young Man, they would leave it open to the Law.

THE first day of this Term, being the 22th day of April, there was a Call of
Sergeants, viz. Sir John Holt of Gray's Inn, Recorder of London, who was made
Kings Sergeant, Sir Ambrose Phillips, made also Kings Sergeant, Christopher
Milton, John Powell, John Tate, William Rawlinson, George Hutchins, William
Killingworth, Hugh Hodges, and Thomas Geers. They all appeared that day at the
Chancery-Bar, where having taken the Oaths, the Lord Chancellor Jefferies made
a short Speech to them; after which they delivered a Ring to him, praying him
to deliver it to the King. They went from the Inner-Temple-Hall to Westminster,
and Counted at the Common Pleas, and gave Rings, the Motto whereof was, DEUS,
REX, LEX.

Dominus Rex versus Saloway.
SAloway drowned himself in a Pond, and the Coroners Enquest found him Non
Compos Mentis, because it is more generally supposed that a Man in his Senses
will not be Felo de se.

The Kings Council moved for a Melius Inquirendum, and that the Inquisition
might be quashed, for that it sets forth, Quod pred. Defend. circa horam
octavam ante meridiem in quoddam stagnum se projecit and per abundantiam aquae
ibidem statim suffocat. and emergit' erat, which is insensible.

Pemberton Sergeant, contra. Here is no Exception taken to the substance of the
Inquisition, and the word suffocat. had been sufficient, if the word emergit'
had been left out.

The Court were of Opinion, that there being another word in this Inquisition,
which carries the sense; it is therefore sufficient, but if it had stood singly
upon this word Emergit' it had not been good.

And this Fact happening about the time of the general Pardon, the Court was of
Opinion that where an Interest is vested in the King, a Pardon of all
Forfeitures will not divest it, but that nothing was vested here before
Inquisition found.

2. It was objected, that this Inquisition ought to set forth that Saloway came
by his death by this means, Et nullo alio modo quocunque.

To which it was answered by Pemberton, that in matters of Form only, the
Judges have sent for the Coroner into Court, and ordered him to amend it.

Rodney versus Strode.
AN Action on the Case was brought against three Defendants, one of them
suffered Judgment to go by default, In a joint Action the Jury may sever the
Damages.
and the other two pleaded Not Guilty. The Cause was tried the last Assizes at
Exeter, and it was for imposing the Crime of Treason upon the Plaintiff, and
for assaulting and imprisoning of him; there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff
and 1000 l. damages against Mr. Strode, and 50 l. against the other Defendant,
who pleaded.

The Plaintiff entered a nolle prosequi against him, who let the Judgment go by
default; and against the other Defendant for the 50 l. damages, and took
judgment only against Mr. Strode.

Sergeant Pemberton moved for a new Trial, by reason of the excessive Damages,
which were not proportioned to the quality of the Plaintiff, he being a Man of
mean Fortune.

But it was opposed by the Plaintiff, for that the Defendant pursued him as a
Traitor, and when he was apprehended for that Crime, he caused him to be
arrested for 1000 l. at the Suit of another person, to whom he was not
indebted., so that upon consideration of the Circumstances of the Case, the
Court refused to grant a new Trial.

Then Sergeant Pemberton for the Defendants, moved in arrest of Judgment, and
for cause showed, that the Jury have found both guilty, and assessed several
Damages, which they cannot do, because this is a joint Action, to which the
Defendants have pleaded jointly, and being found guilty modo and forma, the
Jury cannot assess the damages severally, for the damage is the same by the one
as the other; Cro. Eliz. 860. Austen verse. Millard, and al'.
and therefore it has been adjudged, that where an Action of Battery was
brought against three, and one pleaded not guilty, and the other two Son
Assault demesne, and several damages found against them, it was held ill, for
that very reason, because it was a joint offense.

It Is true, where there are diverse Defendants and damages assessed severally,
the Plaintiff has his election to take execution de melioribus damnis but this
is when the Trials are at several times.

So it is where they plead several Pleas; Cro. Car. 239. Walsh versus Bishop.
as in an Action of Battery, one pleads not guiity, and the other justifies,
and both Issues are found for the Plaintiff; in such case he may enter a non
pros. against one, and take Judgment against the other, because their Pleas are
several; but where they plead jointly, the Jury cannot sever the Damages.

But Mr. 1 Bulst. 157. Sampson verse. Cramfield, and al'. Rast. Entr. 677. b.
Pollexfen for the Plaintiff insisted, that even in this case damages may be
assessed severally; for where two Defendants are sued for the same Battery, and
they plead the same Plea, yet damages may be assessed severally.

So was Trebarefoot and Greenway 's Case in this Court, which was an Action for
an Assault and Battery and false Imprisonment; one of the Defendants pleaded
not Guilty, and the other justified; Issue was joined, and there was a Verdict
for the Plaintiff, and damages assessed severally; the Plaintiff entered a nolle
prosequi as to one, and took judgment against the other, and upon this a Writ
of Error was brought in this Court, and the Judgment was affirmed.

So if an Action of Trespass be brought against two for taking of 100 l. the
one took 70 l. and the other 30 l. damages shall be assessed severally.

It was admitted that regularly the damages ought to be entire, especially
where the Action is joint; but where the Facts are several, damages may
likewise be so assessed; but in this Case the Jury has done what the Court
would do, had it been in a Criminal Cause.

Curia. This is all but one Fact which the Jury is to try: It Is true, when
several Persons are found Guilty criminally, then the damages may be severed in
proportion to their Guilt; but here all are equally guilty of the same offense;
and it seems to be a contradiction to say that the Plaintiff is injured by one
to the value of 50 l. and by the other to the value of 1000 l. when both are
equally Guilty.

Every Defendant ought to answer full as much as the Plaintiff is damnified;
now how is it possible he should be damnified so much by one and so little by
the other?

But notwithstanding this Opinion, Judgment was afterward given for the
Plaintiff.

Peak versus Meker.
IN an Action on the Case for Words, the Plaintiff declared that he was a
Merchant, and bred up in the Church of England, and that when the present King
came to the Crown, the said Plaintiff made a Bonfire at his Door in the City of
London, and that the Defendant then spoke of him these words for which he now
brought this Action, viz. He (innuendo the Plaintiff) is a Rogue, a Papist Dog,
and a pitiful Fellow, and never a Rogue in Town has a Bonfire before his Door
but he; The Plaintiff had a Verdict, and 500 l. Damages were given: A Writ of
Error was brought, but it was adjudged without argument, that the words were
actionable.

Joyner versus Pritchard.
AN Action was brought upon the Statute of R. II. Admiralty.
for prosecuting of a Cause in the Admiralty- Court, which did arise upon the
Land; it was tried before the Chief Justice in London, and a Verdict for the
Plaintiff.

Mr. Thompson moved in Arrest of Judgment, for that the Action was brought by
Original, in which it was set forth, that the Defendant prosecut. fuit and
adhuc prosequitur, etc. in Curia Admiralitat. now the prosequitur is subsequent
to the Original, and so they have recovered Damages for that which was done
after the Action brought.

Curia. These words adhuc prosequitur must refer to the time of suing forth
this Original; like the Case of a Covenant for quiet Enjoyment, and a breach
assigned, that the Defendant built a Shed, whereby he hindered the Plaintiff
that he could not enjoy it hucnsque which word must refer to the time of the
Action brought, and not afterward. Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Dominus Rex versus........
AN Information was brought against the Defendant for Forgery, Forgery.
setting forth, that the Defendant being a man of ill fame, etc. and contriving
to cheat one A. did forge quoddam scriptum, dated the 16th day of October, in
the year 1681. continens in se scriptum obligatorium per quod quidem scriptum
obligatorium praed. A. obligatus fuit praed. Defend. in quadraginta libris, etc.

He was found Guilty, and afterward this Exception was taken in arrest of
Judgment,

Viz. That the Fact alleged in the Information was a contradiction of it self,
for how could A. be Bound when the Bond was forged?

2. It is not set forth what that scriptum obligatorium was, whether it was
scriptum sigillatum, or not.

Curia. The Defendant is found Guilty of the forging of a Writing, in which was
contained quoddam scriptum obligatorium, and that may be a true Bond. Judgment
was arrested.

MEMORANDUM, On Tuesday, April the 27th. Sir Thomas Powes of Lincoln's Inn, was
made Solicitor General in the Place of Mr. Finch, and was called within the
Bar.

Hanchet versus Thelwal.
IN Ejectment a special Verdict was found, Devise. What words in a Will make an
Estate for Life, and what in Tail.
in which the Case did arise upon the construction of the words in a Will.

Viz. The Testator being seized in Fee, had Issue Two Sons and Four Daughters:
He made his Will, and devised his Estate, (being in Houses) by these words.
Viz. Irem, I give and bequeath to my Son Nicholas Price, my Houses in
Westminster, and if itplease God to take away my Son, then I give my Estate to
my four Daughters (naming them) share and share alike) and if it please God to
take away any of my said Daughters before Marriage, then I give her or their
part to the rest surviving. And if all my Sons and Daughters dye without Issue,
then I give my said Houses to my Sister Anne Warner, and her Heirs.

Nicholas Price entered and died without Issue, then the four Sisters entered,
and Margaret the eldest married Thellwel, and died, leaving Issue a Son, who
was the Lessor of the Plaintiff, who insisted upon his Title to a fourth part
of the Houses.

The Question was, what Estate the Daughters took by this Will, whether joint
Estates for Life, or several Remainders in Tail?

If only joint Estates for Life, then the Plaintiff, as Heir to his Mother,
will not be entitled to a fourth part; if several Remainders in Tail, then the
Father will have it during his Life, as Tenant by the Courtesy.

This Case was argued this Term by Mr. Pollexfen for the Plaintiff: And in
Hillary- Term following by Council for the Defendant.

The Plaintiffs Council insisted, that they took joint Estates for Life, and
this seemed to be the intent of the Testator, by the words in his Will, the
first Clause whereof was,

Viz. I give and bequeath my Houses in W. to Nicholas Price: Now by these words
an Estate for Life only passed to him, and not an Inheritance, for there was
nothing to be done, or any thing to be paid out of it.

2. The next Clause is, Viz. If it please God to take away my Son, then I give
my Estate to my four Daughters, share and share alike.

Now these words cannot give the Daughters a Fee-simple, by any intendment
whatsoever; but if any word in this Clause seems to admit of such a
Construction, it must be the word Estate, which sometimes signifies the Land it
self, and sometimes the Estate in the Land.

But here the word Estate cannot create a Fee-simple, because the Testator gave
his Daughters that Estate which he had given to his Son before, and that was
only for Lise.

Then follow the words share and share alike; and that only makes them Tenants
in Common.

3. The next Clause is, Viz. If it please God to take away any of my said
Daughters before Marriage, then I give her or their part to the rest surviving.

These words as they are penned can have no influence upon the Case.

4. Then follows the last Clause, Viz. And if all my Sons and Daughters dye
without Issue, then I give, etc.

These words create no Estate tail in the Daughters; for the Testator having
two Sons and four Daughters, it cannot be collected by these words, how they
shall take, and by consequence it cannot be an Estate Tail by implication.

Now suppose one of the Daughters should dye without Issue, it is uncertain who
shall have her part; and therefore there being no appointment in what order
this Estate shall go, it cannot be an Estate Tail, and to maintain this
Opinion, this Case was cited.

One Collier was seized in Fee of three Houses, 2 Cro. 655. Gilbert versus
Witty.
and had Issue three Sons, John, Robert and Richard, he devised to each of them
a House in Fee, Proviso, if all my Children dye without Issue of their Bodies
then the Houses to be to his Wife.

The two eldest Sons died without Issue, the younger had Issue a Daughter, who
married the Lessor of the Plaintiff.

The Question was, Whether by the death of the eldest Son without Issue, there
was a cross Remainder to Richard, and the Heirs of his Body, or whether the
Wife shall take immediately, or expect till after the Death of all the Sons
without Issue? And it was adjudged, that the Wife shall take immediately, and
that there were no cross Remainders, nor any Estate by implication, because it
was a devise to them severally by express limitation.

So that if no Estate tail arises to the Daughters in this Case by
implication, Cro. Eliz. Tailor versus Sawyer.
then it is no more than a devise to his Issue, which extends to them all, and
gives only an Estate for Life.

For the Defendant it was argued, Ex part Def.
that the Sons and Daughters have no Estate Tail by implication.

It was agreed that Nicholas had only an Estate for Life, and that the word
Estate in this case means the Houses, and not the Interest in them.

It Is true, there is no express Limitation of any Estate to them, but there is
an express determination of it.

Now if this be not an Estate Tail by implication, then the words dying without
Issue are void.

A devise to his Son, More 127.
and if he dye not having a Son, then it is devised over, This is an Estate tail
in Remainder.

It cannot be a doubt who shall take first; for the Daughters shall take it,
Dyer 333.
and after them, as it is most natural, the eldest Son; for where there is the
same proximity of Blood, the Estate shall go to the eldest.

As for instance, Hob. 33.
one Chapman being seized in Fee of two Houses, and having three Brothers,
devised the House which A. dwelt in to his said three Brothers, and the House
in which his Brother Thomas Chapman did dwell, he devised to the said Thomas,
paying so much, etc. or else to remain to the Family of the Testator, provided
that the Houses be not sold, but go to the next of the Males, and the blood of
the Males. Thomas died without Issue, the eldest of the two surviving Brothers
had Issue a Daughter, and died: the Question was, whether that Daughter or the
youngest Brother of the Testator should have the House? It was adjudged that
the Daughter should have it in tail. For the Proviso that the Houses be not
sold, etc. made it a tail; and the words viz. to remain to the Family must be
intended to the eldest.

If this be not an Estate tail, then the Devise over to Anne Warner is void.

As to the Case of Gilbert and Witty, that moves upon another reason; for there
every one took by a distinct and separate Limitation.

Curia. In that Case all the Estate was limited distinctly to the three Sons;
but in this it is otherwise, for the Testator had two Sons, and no Estate was
limited to one of them before; then he says, If all my Sons and Daughters dye
without Issue, then, etc. And thus the Cases differ, which creates the
difficulty.

But no reason can be given why this Court should not construe Wills according
to the Rules of Common Law, where an Estate by implication is so uncertain; for
when Men are sick and yet have a disposing power left they usually write
Nonsense, and the Judges must rack their Brains to find out what is intended.

This cannot be an Estate tail in the Daughters, and therefore the Heir must
come in for his fourth part.

Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Dixon versus Robinson.
THIS was a special Issue, directed out of Chancery, Wayhil Fair.
and tried this day at the Bar, by a Middlesex Jury.

The Question was, Whether Ballivus probi homines and Burgenses Burgi de
Andover in Hampshire, had power to keep a Fair at Wayehil in any one place
where they please; the Bill being Exhibited to confine the Fair to a particular
place; which Fair was granted to them by Charter from Queen Elizabeth.

They who would have it confined to a certain place, gave in Evidence, that the
Hospitaller of Ewelme in Oxfordshire, was seized in Fee of the Manor of
Rambridge, within which Manor the place was where the Fair was always kept, and
that the Parson of Andover had Glebe there.

That this place was called Wayehil, and that the profits did arise by Piccage
and Stallage, to the yearly value of 200 l.

That it was an ancient Fair held there by Prescription before the Town of
Andover had a Charter.

That upon the late Surrender of Charters, the Town of Andover did likewise
surrender and took a new Charter, in which liberty was given to them to keep
this Fair in what place they would.

That both the Hospitaller and Parson petitioned the King in Council, and
obtained an Order to Try where the Fair ought to be kept, which was tried
accordingly at the Exchequer Bar, and a Verdict for the Parson.

Chief Justice. If the Fair belongs to Andover, they may choose whether they
will keep it at any place; and that may create another Question, Whether they
may not forfeit this Franchise by disuser?

But certainly if the place be not limited by the King's Grant, they may keep
it where they please, or rather where they can most conveniently, and if it be
so limited, they may keep it in what part of such place they will.

Dawling versus Venman.
AN Action on the Case was brought against the Defendant, Action for a
Scandalous Affidavit in Chancery.
for making a Scandalous Affidavit in Chancery, in which were these words.

Viz. Mr. Dawling is a Rogue and a Knave, and I will make it out before my Lord
Chancellor, and I will have him in the Pillory.

Upon not Guilty pleaded, there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and damages
entire.

It was moved in arrest of Judgment, for that the truth of on Oath shall not be
liable to a Trial in an Action on the Case; for the Law intends every Oath to
be true.

Before the Statute of 3 and 11 H. Cro. Eliz. 521 2 Cro. 607. Sid. 50. Hutt. 11.
7. which gives power to examine Perjury; there was not any Punishment at the
Common Law for a false Oath made by any Witness, and therefore an Action will
not lie for a scandalous Affidavit. Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
NOta, An Action of Assault and Battery, Release of one Def. shall not
discharge the rest of a personal thing.
and false imprisonment was brought against four Defendants: the Plaintiff had
Judgment, and they brought a Writ of Error.

The Plaintiff in the Action pleaded the Release of one of them, and to this
Plea all four jointly demur.

The Opinion of the Court was, that Judgment might be given severally; for they
being compelled by Law to join in a Writ of Error, the release of one shall not
discharge the rest of a personal thing.

But where diverse are to recover in the personalty, 6 Co. Ruddock's Case.
the Release of one is a Bar to all; but it is not so in point of discharge.

If two Coparceners make a Lease of a House, and the Rent is in arrear, and one
of them brings the Action and recovers, the Judgment shall be arrested, because
one alone has recovered in Debt for a moiety, when both ought to join.

But it is agreed that if one Tenant in Common make a Lease rendering Rent,
which afterward is in arrear, Litt. Sect. 316.
they must join in an Action of Debt, because it savours of the Personalty: But
it is otherwise in case of the Realty.

DE Term. Sanct. Trin. Anno 2 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1686.
Herbert, Chief Justice. Wythens, Justices. Holloway, Justices. Wright.
Justices. Sawyer, Attorney General, Powis, Solicitor General.
Aldridge versus Duke.
ASsault, Trespass continued many years, and the Statute of Limitations
pleaded, the Jury gives Damages only for the last six years.
Battery, Wounding and Imprisoning of him, from the 10th of August, 24 Car. 2.
usque exhibitionem Billae.

The Defendant pleaded not Guilty, infra sex infra Annos.

The Plaintiff replied, that the Writ was sued out 2 Octobris 1 Jacobi 2. And
that the Defendant was Guilty within six years next before the Writ brought.

Upon this Issue was joined, and a Verdict was given for the Plaintiff, and
entire damages given.

Mr. Pollexfen moved two Exceptions in Arrest of Judgment.

1. That a Verdict cannot help what appears to be otherwise upon the face of
the Record.

Now here the Plaintiff declared that he was imprisoned the 10th of August 24
Car. 2. which is 13 years since, and being one entire Trespass the Issue is
found as laid in the Declaration, which cannot be for so many years between the
cause of Action and bringing of the Writ; for if a Trespass be continued
several years, the Plaintiff must sue only for the last six years, for which he
has a complete cause of Action; but when those are expired he is barred by the
Statute.

When the Plaintiff has any cause of Action, Sid. 25.
then the Statute of Limitations begins; as in an Action on the Case for words,
if they are actionable in themselves without alleging special damages, the
Plaintiff will recover Damages from the time of the speaking, and not according
to what loss may follow.

So in Trover and Conversion, when there is a cause of Action vested, and the
Goods continue in the same possession for seven years afterward; in such case
it is the first conversion which entitles the Plaintiff to an Action.

So in the Case at Bar, though this be a continued imprisonment, yet so much as
was before the Writ brought, is barred by the Statute.

Thompson contra. The Verdict is good, for the Jury reject the beginning of the
trespass and give Damages only for that which falls within the six years; and
this may be done because it is laid usque exhibitionem Billae.

If the Defendant had pleaded not Guilty generally, Cro. Car. 160, 381, 404.
then Damages must be for the 13 years, though the Plaintiff of his own showing
had brought his Action for a thing done beyond the time limited by the Statute;
but having pleaded not Guilty at any time within six years, if the Verdict find
him guilty within that time, it is against him.

As to the Objection, that the Cause of Action arises beyond six years, though
it does appear so in the Declaration, yet that does not exclude the Plaintiff,
for there might have been Process out before, or he might be disabled by an
Outlawry, which may be now reversed; or he might be in Prison and newly
discharged, from which time he has six years to begin his Action, for being
under either of these circumstances the Statute does not hurt him.

Curia. If an Action of false Imprisonment be brought for seven years, and the
Jury find the Defendant guilty but for two days, it is a Trespass within the
Declaration.

This Statute relates to a distinct and not to a continued Act, for after six
years it will be difficult to prove a Trespass, many accidents may happen
within that time, as the death or removal of Witnesses, etc.

Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Dobson versus Thornistone.
THE Plaintiff was a Husbandman, Words spoken of a Farmer actionable.
who brought an Action against the Defendant for these words, He owes more money
than he is worth, he is run away and is broke. He had a Verdict, and it was
moved now in Arrest of Judgment, that the Words being spoken of a Farmer, are
not actionable. To say that a Gentleman is a Cozener, Hill. 28 Eliz. B.R. Godb.
40.
a Bankrupt, and has got an Occupation to deceive Men; though he used to Buy
and Sell, yet being no Merchant, 'twas the better Opinion of the Court, that
the Words were not actionable.

So to say of a Farmer, Styles 420.
that he is a Whoreson Bankrupt Rogue, and it not appearing that he got his
living by Buying and Selling, or that the Words were spoken of him relating to
his Occupation, it is not actionable.

For it must not only appear that the Plaintiff has a Trade, Sid. 299. Hutt.
50.
but that he gets his Living by it, otherwise the Words spoken of him will not
bear an Action.

But the Court held the Words to be actionable: the like Judgment was given in
the Case of a Carpenter, Mich. 3 Jac. for Words, Viz. He is broke and run away.

Anonymus.
NOta, Misentry of a Writ of Enquiry amendable without paying Costs.
Judgment was given upon a Demurrer, and a Writ of Enquiry was awarded; and in
the Entry thereof upon the Roll the Words (per Sacramenum duodecim proborum and
legalium hominum) were left out, and now the Question was, Whether it shall be
amended?

It was said that a Capiatur for a Misericordia shall be amended upon the new
Statute of Jeofails, after a Verdict, but whether upon a Demurrer, it was
doubted.

In a Quo Warranto Judgment was entered by disclaimer, Cro. Car. 184.
by the consent of all Parties, and the Words virtute and praetextu literarum
patentium geren. dat. 17 Jacobi, were wrote in the Margin of the Paper Book by
the then Attorney General; but by reason of a stroke cross them the Clerk
omitted them in engrossing the Judgment: But upon a Motion the Court held this
amendable at the Common Law.

Curia. The Error is only a Misentry of the Writ of Enquiry and amendable
without paying of Costs.

Mr. Aston the Secondary said that Costs were never paid in this Court upon
such Amendments, nor in the Common Pleas until my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan's
time; but he altered the Practice and made that Rule, that if you amend after a
Writ of Error brought you must pay Costs.

Holcomb versus Petit.
A Devastavit was brought against an Administrator of a rightful Executor, who
pleaded an insufficient Plea; Administrator of a rightful full Executor is
liable to a Devastavit. 30 Car. 2. c. 7.
and upon a Demurrer the Question was upon the Statute of 30 Car. 2. The Title
whereof is, An Act to enable Creditors to recover Debts of Executors and
Administrators of Executors in their own wrong, which is introductory of a new
Law, and charges those who were not chargeable before at the Common Law; but it
enacts, That when Executors of persons who are Executors de son tort, or
Administrators, shall convert the Goods of any person deceased, that they shall
be liable as their Testator or Intestate would have been.

Gold held, that he shall not be charged, for where an Act of Parliament
charges an Executor, in such case an Administrator shall be likewise charged;
but if an Administrator be charged, that shall never extend to an Executor. The
Rule is, A majori ad minus valet Argumentum, sed non e contra; therefore the
rightful Executor shall not be charged by this Act, which only makes Executors
of Executors de son tort liable.

Pollexfen contra. There can be no reason given why the Act should make an
Administrator of an Administrator liable to a Devastavit, and not an
Administrator of an Executor de son tort for the mischief will be the same, and
therefore a rightful Executor who wastes the Testator's Goods ought to be
charged.

The Recital of this Act is large enough; the Preamble is general and the
enacting Clause expresses Executors and Administrators of Executors de son
tort; but then it also mentions Administrators, but not such who are their
Administrators de son tort.

Now the Word Administrator is in it self a general Word, and extends to any
one who meddles with the personal Estate, so that the Preamble being general
and the Act remedial it is within the same mischief.

Curia. The Word Administrator is very comprehensive, for when an Executor
pleads he says Plene administravit.

If a rightful Executor waste the Goods, he is a kind of an Administrator de
son tort for abusing of the Trust.

There is no Superiority between an Executor or an Administrator, for by this
Act they are both equal in power as to the Goods of the deceased.

Judgment was given that the Administrator of the rightful Executor shall be
liable.

Jenings versus Hankeys.
IT IS enacted by the Statute of 13 Car. Where an Informer shall be a Witness,
though he has part of the Penalty. 13 Car. 2. c. 10.
2. That they who kill, course, hunt or take away Red or Fallow Deer in any
Ground where Deer are kept, etc. or are aiding therein, if such are convicted
by Confession or Oath of one Witness before one Justice of the Peace within six
Months after the Offense done, shall forfeit 20 l. one Moiety to the Informer,
the other to the Owner of the Deer, to be levied by Distress by Warrant under
the Justice's Hand.

The Defendant was convicted by the Oath of the Informer; and Mr. Shower moved
that it might be quashed, because the Informer is not to be admitted as a
Witness, he being to have a Moiety of the Forfeiture.

The Party to an usurious Contract shall not be admitted as an Evidence to
prove the Usury, 12 Co. 68. 2 Roll. Abr. 685
because he is Testis in propria causa, and by their Oath may avoid their own
Bonds.

Mr. Pollexfen contra. The Statute gives power to convict by the Oath of a
credible Witness, and such is the Informer.

It Is not a material Objection to say, That the Informer shall not be a Witness
because he has a Moiety of the Forfeiture, for in Cases of the like nature the
Informer is always a good Witness.

As upon the Statute for suppressing of Conventicles the Informer is a good
Witness, and yet he has part of the Penalty; for otherwise that Act would be
of little force, for if who sees the People met together be not a good Witness
no Body else can.

Curia. In the Statute of Robberies a Man swears for himself; because there can
be no other Witness, he is a good Witness.

Harman versus Harman.
DEBT upon a Bond against an Administrator, Notice of a Debt must be given to
an Administrator.
who pleaded Fully administered, and that he had not notice of this Bond before
such a day.

In this Case a special Verdict was found; upon which the Question was, Whether
Notice was necessary to be given of Debts of an inferior nature.

The Court gave no Opinion; but they agreed that a Judgment upon a simple
Contract may be pleaded in Bar to an Action of Debt upon a Bond; and that it is
no Devastavit in an Executor to pay a Debt upon such a Contract before a Bond
Debt, Vaughan 94.
of which he had no Notice.

So where an Obligor did afterward enter into a Recognizance in the nature of
a Statute, 2 Anders. 159. 1 Mod. 157.
and Judgment was against him upon the Bond, and then he dyed; his Executrix
paid the Creditor upon the Statute, and the Obligee brought a Scire Facias upon
the Judgment on the Bond Debt, and she pleaded payment of the Recognizance;
this was held a good Plea, for she is not bound to take Notice of the Judgments
against the Testator without being acquainted therewith by his Creditors, for
she is in no wise privy to his Acts.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 2 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1686.
Anonymus.
AN Information was exhibited against the Defendant for Perjury, Perjury in a
Deposition taken before Commissioners in Chancery.
setting forth that a Bill in Chancery was exhibited by one A. B. and the
Proceedings thereon.

The Perjury was assigned in a Deposition made by the Defendant 30 Julii, 1683.
and taken in that Cause before Commissioners in the Country.

It was tried this day at the Bar; and the Question was, Whether the Return of
the Commissioners that the Defendant made Oath before them shall be a
sufficient Evidence to convict him of Perjury without their being present in
Court to prove him the very same person.

Sergeant Pemberton for the Defendant, admitted an Information will lie in this
Case against him, but the Commissioners must be here, or some other person, to
prove that he was the person who made Oath before them.

The Commissioners sign the Depositions, and they ought to produce them so
signed to the Court and prove it, for Depositions are often suppressed by Order
of the Court.

If a true Copy of an Affidavit made before the Chief Justice of this Court be
produced at a Trial it is not sufficient to convict a Man of Perjury.

This is not like the Case of Perjury assigned in an Answer in Chancery taken
in the Country, for that is under the Parties Hand, but here is nothing under
the Defendant's Hand, and therefore the Commissioners ought to be in the Court
to prove him to be the Man.

The Court were equally divided: The Chief Justice and Wythens Justice were of
Opinion that it was not Evidence to convict the Defendant of Perjury; it might
have been otherwise upon the Return of a Master of Chancery, for he is upon his
Oath, and is therefore presumed to make a good Return; but Commissioners are
not upon Oath, they pen the Depositions according to the best of their skill,
and a man may call himself by another name before them without any offense.

The Commissioners cannot be mistaken in the Oath, though they may not know the
person; for this Court may be so mistaken in those who make Affidavits here,
but not in the Oath; if the Commissioners or the Clerk to the Commission had
been here, they would have been good Evidence.

If an Affidavit be made before a Justice of the Peace of a Robbery as enjoined
by the Statute, if you will convict the person of Perjury you must prove the
swearing of the Affidavit.

The Attorney General perceiving the Opinion of the Court, rather than the
Plaintiff should be nonsuit, because no Evidence could be given, offered to
enter a Nolle prosequi, which the Court said could not be done, because the
Jury were sworn; but he insisted upon it and said he would cause it to be
entered.

Sir John Knight's Case.
AN Information was exhibited against him by the Attorney General upon the
Statute of 2 E. 3. Information upon the Statute for going armed. 2 E. 3. c. 3.
Which prohibits all persons from coming with Force and Arms before the King's
Justices, etc. and from going or riding armed in affray of Peace on pain to
forfeit his Armor, and suffer Imprisonment at the King's Pleasure.

This Statute is confirmed by that of R. 2. 20 R. 2.1.
with an Addition of a farther punishment, which is to make a Fine to the King.

The Information sets forth that the Defendant did walk about the Streets armed
with Guns, and that he went into the Church of St. Michael in Bristol in the
time of Divine Service with a Gun to terrify the King's Subjects contra formam
Statuti.

This Case was tried at the Bar, and the Defendant was acquitted.

The Chief Justice said that the meaning of the Statute of Ed. 3. was to punish
People who go armed to terrify the Kings Subjects.

It Is likewise a great Offense at the Common Law, as if the King was not able
or willing to protect his Subjects; and therefore this Act is but an affirmance
of that Law, and it having appointed a Penalty this Court can inflict no other
Punishment than what is therein directed.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 2 and 3 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1686/7.
Kingston versus Herbert.
A Common Recovery was suffered Anno 22 Jacobi primi, Where a Scire Facias must
go to the Tertenants before Judgment be reversed.
and a Writ of Error was brought about five years since to reverse it, and
Judgment was given for the Reversal; and it was now moved to set aside that
Reversal, because there was no Scire Facias against the Tertenants.

Mr. Williams, who argued for the Reversal, said that the want of a Scire
Facias must be either in Law or in Fact; it cannot be Error in Law, for that
must appear upon the Record it self which it does not here.

It cannot be Error in Fact, because there is no necessity of such a Writ, it is
only discretionary in the Court, and not ex necessitate juris.

But on the other side it was insisted, that the Court cannot proceed to
examine Errors before a Scire Facias is awarded to the Tertenants, Dyer 320,
331.
for they may have a Matter to plead in Bar to the Writ, as a Release, etc.
and the Party cannot be restored to all which he has lost by the suffering of
the Recovery, unless the Defendant be brought in upon the Scire Facias.

Curia. The only Question is whether this Judgment be well given without a
Scire Facias.

The Secondary has reported that the Practice is so.

Then as to the Ojection, that such a Scire Facias is not ex necessitate juris
but only discretionary; it is quite otherwise, for it is not only a cautionary
Writ as all other Scire Facias, but it is a legal caution which in a manner
makes it necessary.

It Is true, if there had been a Judgment corruptly obtained this Court might
have set it aside; but if Erronice it is a doubt whether it may be vacated but
according to the Forms and Methods of Law. Adjornatur.

Baldwin versus Flower.
BAron and Feme brought an Action on the Case for Words spoken of the Wife:
Words, where actionable without special damage.
The Declaration was, that the Defendant having some discourse with another
person called, the Wife Whore, and that she was his Whore, and concluded ad
dampnum ipsorum, etc.

The Plaintiff had a Verdict, and it was now moved in arrest of Judgment, for
that the Words were not actionable without alleging special damage.

But it was answered, Roll. Abr. 35. placit. 7.
that the Action was well brought. To say, A Man is rotted with the Pox is
actionable without alleging special damage, because the person by such means
will lose the Communication and Society of his Neighbors.

As to the Conclusion ad dampnum ipsorum it is good, for if she survive the
Husband the Damages will go to her, and so are all the Presidents.

Curia. The Words are actionable: And three Justices were of Opinion that the
Conclusion of the Declaration was as it ought to be, which Justice Wythens
denied; for if an Innkeepers Wife be called a Cheat, and the House loses the
Trade, the Husband has an injury by the Words spoken of his Wife, but the
Declaration must not conclude ad dampnum ipsorum.

Sir Thomas Grantham's Case.
HE bought a Monster in the Indies, which was a Man of that Country, who had
the perfect Shape of a Child growing out of his Breast as an Excrescency, all
but the Head.

This Man he brought hither and exposed to the sight of the People for Profit.

The Indian turns Christian and was baptized, and was detained from his Master,
who brought a Homine Repleg'; the Sheriff returned that he had replevied the
Body, but does not say, the Body in which Sir Thomas claimed a Property;
whereupon he was ordered to amend his Return, and then the Court of
Common Pleas bailed him.

Banson versus Offley.
AN Appeal of Murder was tried in Cambridgshire against three persons, An
Appeal of a Murder was tried, not where the Stroke was given, but where the
Party died.
and the Count was that Offley did assault the Husband of the Appellant and
wounded him in Huntingtonshire, of which Wound he did languish and dye in
Cambridgeshire, and that Lippon and Martin were assisting.

The Jury found a special Verdict in which the Fact appeared to be, that Lippon
gave the Wound, and that Martin and Offley were assisting.

The first Exception to this Verdict was, that the Count and the Matter therein
alleged must be certain, and so likewise must the Verdict, otherwise no
Judgment can be given; but here the Verdict finding that another person gave
the Stroke, and not that person against whom the Appellant had declared, it is
directly against her own showing.

2. This Fact was tried by a Jury of Cambridgshire when it ought to have been
tried by a Jury of both Counties.

The Court answered to the first Exception, that it was of no force, and that
the same Objection may be made to an Indictment, where in an Indictment if one
gives the Stroke and another is abetting, they are both principally and equally
guilty; and an Indictment ought to be as certain as a Count in an Appeal.

As to the second Exception, it is a good Trial by a Jury of Cambridgshire
alone, and this upon the Statute of 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 24.
the Words of which Statute are, viz. Where any person, etc. shall hereafter be
feloniously stricken in one County, and dye of the same Stroke in another
County, that then an Indictment thereof found by the Jurors of the County where
the death shall happen whether it be found before the Coroner upon the sight of
the Body or before the Justices of the Peace, or other Justices or
Commissioners, who shall have Authority to enquire of such Offenses, shall be
as good and effectual in the Law as if the Stroke had been in the same County,
where the Party shall dye or where such Indictment shall be found.

It Is true, 4 Inst. 49
that at the Common Law if a Man had received a mortal Wound in one County, and
died in another, the Wife or next Heir had their Election to bring an Appeal in
either County, but the Trial must be by a Jury of both Counties.

But now that mischief is remedied by this Statute, which does not only provide
that an Appeal shall be brought in the County where the Party dyed, but that it
shall be prosecuted, which must be to the end of the Suit. Adjornatur.

Dominus Rex versus Hinton and Brown.
AN Indictment was brought against the Defendants setting forth, Subornation of
Perjury.
that a Conventicle was held at a certain place, and that they movebant,
persuadebant and subornaverunt a certain person to swear that several Men were
then present, who really were at that time at another place.

They were found guilty, and a Writ of Error was brought to reverse the
Judgment; the Error assigned was, that the Indictment does not set forth, that
any Oath was made, so it could not be Subornation.

There is a difference between the persuading of a man to swear falsely and
Subornation it self, for an Indictment for Subornation always concludes contra
formam Statuti.

Curia. It Is not enough to say a Man suborned another to commit a Perjury, but
he must show what Perjury it is, which cannot be without an Oath; for an
Indictment cannot be framed for such an Offense unless it appear that the thing
was false which he was persuaded to swear.

The Question therefore is, If the person had sworn what the Defendants had
persuaded him to do, whether that had been Perjury.

There is a difference when a Man swears a thing which is true in Fact, and yet
he does not know it to be so, and to swear a thing to be true which is really
false; the first is Perjury before God, and the other is an Offense of which
the Law takes notice.

But the Indictment was quashed, because the Words Per Sacramentum duodecim
proborum and legalium hominum were left out.

They held that if the Return had been right upon the File, the Record should
be amended by it.

Blaxton versus Stone.
THE Case was this. viz. A Man seized in Fee, etc. What words make an Estate
Tail in a Will.
had Issue two Sons; he devised all his Land to his eldest Son, and if he die
without Heirs Males then to his other Son in like manner.

The Question was, Whether this was an Estate Tail in the eldest Son.

Curia. It Is plain the Word Body, which properly creates an Estate Tail is left
out; but the intent of the Testator may be collected out of his Will that he
designed an Estate Tail; for without this Devise it would have gone to his
second Son, if the first had died without Issue. It Is therefore an Estate Tail.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 3 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1687.
Herbert Chief Justice. Wythens Justices. Holloway Justices. Powel Justices.
Dominus Rex versus William Beal.
MEmorandum, A Soldier executed not in the County where he was condemned.
That on Saturday April 15. Mr. Attorney moved that this Court would award
Execution upon the Defendant, who was a Soldier, for deserting of his Colors,
and was condemned for the same at the Affizes at Reading in Berks and
reprieved, and that he might be executed at Plymouth where the Garrison then
was.

The Chief Justice in some heat said, that the Motion was irregular, for the
Prisoner was never before the Court.

Mr. Attorney then moved for a Habeas Corpus, and on Tuesday April the 18th. the
Soldier was brought to the Bar, and Mr. Attorney moved it again.

But it was affirmed by the Chief Justice and Justice Wythens that it could not
be done by Law, for the Prisoner being condemned in Berks, and reprieved by the
Judge to know the Kings Pleasure, and now brought hither cannot be sent into
another County to be executed; it may be done in Middlesex by the Prerogative
of this Court which sits in that County, but no where else but in the proper
County where the Trial and Conviction was; so the Prisoner was committed to the
Kings Bench, and the Record of his Conviction was not filed.

But it was the King's Will that this Man should be executed at Plymouth where
the Garrison was, that by this Example other Soldiers might be deterred from
running from their Colors.

SIR Robert Wright, who was made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the room
of Sir Henry Beddingfield, who died the last Term (as he was receiving of the
Sacrament,) was on Friday following, being the 21st of April, made Chief
Justice of this Court in the place of Sir Edward Herbert, who was removed into
the Common Pleas, and made Chief Justice there; and Sir Francis Wythens had his
Quietus the Night before.

The same 21st day of April after this Removal the Soldier was brought again
to the Bar, and upon the Motion of Mr. Attorney was ordered by the new Chief
Justice to be executed at Plymouth, which was done accordingly.

Wright Chief Justice. Holloway, Justices. Powel, Justices. Allibon, Justices.
Monday, May 2d.
NOTA. A Writ of Error was brought upon a Judgment given in this Court
returnable in Parliament, which was Prorogued from the 28th day of April to the
22d. day of November following.

Sir George Treby moved, that it might be discharged; for it could not be a
Supersedeas to this Execution, because there was a whole Term, which intervened
between the Test and Return of the Writ of Error, viz. Trinity-Term.

On the other side, it was said that the Proclamation was no Record, it only
shows the present Intention of the King, which he may recall at any time.

But the Court made no Rule.

DE Term. Sanct. Trin. Anno 2 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1686.
Wright, Chief Justice. Holloway, Justices. Powel, Justices. Allibon, Justices.
Sawyer, Attorney General, Powis, Solicitor General.
The Company of Merchant Adventurers versus Rebow.
IN a special Action on the Case, Whether the King has a Prerogative to
restrain Trade to a particular number of Men.
the Plaintiffs declared, that in the Reign of H. 4. there was a Society of
Merchants Adventurers in England, and that afterward Queen Elizabeth did by
her Letters Patents incorporate them by the Name of the Governor and Company
of the Merchants Adventurers, etc. and gave them Privilege to trade into
Holland, Zealand, Flanders, Brabant, the Country belonging to the Duke of
Lunenburgh, and Hamburgh, prohibiting all others not free of that Company; by
virtue whereof they did trade into those parts, and had thereby great
Privileges and Advantages; that the Defendant not being free of the said
Company did trade into those Parts without their authority, and imported Goods
from thence into this Kingdom ad damnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded as to Hamburgh Not-guilty, 15 E. 3. c. 3.
and as to the other places he pleaded the Statute of Ed. 3. That the Seas
shall be open to all Merchants to pass with their Merchandise whither they
please.

The Plaintiff demurred, and the Defendant joined in Demurrer.

This Case was now argued by Council on both sides.

The Council for the Plaintiff in their Arguments made these Points.

1. What Power the King had by his Prerogative to restrain his Subjects from
trading to particular places.

2. Admitting he had such a Prerogative, whether an Action on the Case will lie.

As to the first Point it was said, Magna Charta cap. 30. 2 Inst. 57.
that all Trades must be under some Regulation, and that the Subject has not
an absolute power to trade without the leave of the King; for it is said in our
Books Omnes Mercatores nisi public prohibiti fuerint habeant salvum and
securum conductum, which is meant of Merchant Strangers in Amity with us, and
nisi public prohibiti must be by the King.

Now if Merchants Strangers may be prohibited from coming into England, by the
same reason the Kings Subjects may be restrained to go out of the Kingdom; and
for that purpose the Writ of Ne exeat Regnum was framed, F. N. B. 85. 3 Inst.
179.
which is grounded upon the Common Law, and not given by any particular Statute.

The Kings Prerogative in this and such like Cases is so much favored by Law,
1 Leon. 9. More 172.
that he may by his Privy Seal command any of his Subjects to return out of a
Foreign Nation or seize their Lands.

The first Statute which regulates Trade is, 27 E. 3. cap. 1.
that which confined the Staple to certain places that persons might not go
about in Companies to trade without the King's License; and from thence came
Markets; and if such were kept without the King's Grant a Quo Warranto would
lie against them who continued it, and the People, who frequented those Markets
were punishable by Fine.

The Law is plain, F. N. B. 125. 2 Roll. Abr. 140.
that the King is sole Judge of the place where Markets shall be kept; for if
he grant one to be kept in such a place which may not be convenient for the
Country, yet the Subjects can go to no other, and if they do, the Owner of the
Soil, where they meet, is liable to an Action at the Suit of the Grantee of the
Market.

A Custom to restrain a Man from the exercising of his Trade in a particular
place has been adjudged good; Sir G. Farmer's Case cired in 8 Co. 127.
as to have a Bakehouse in such a Manor and that no other should use that
Trade there.

And as a Man may be restrained by Custom so he may restrain himself from using
of a Trade in a certain place; 2 Cro. Brown versus Joliffe.
as if he promise upon a valuable consideration not to use the Trade of a
Mercer in such a place.

And it is very necessary that Trade should in some measure be restrained so as
to be managed only by Freemen, because it is of more advantage to the King that
it should be carried on by a Company (especially in London) who may manage it
with Order and Government, that is, by some power to restrain particular
persons from that Liberty which otherwise they would use; and therefore such
Companies have always power to make By Laws to regulate Trade, which is the
chief End of their Incorporation.

And if such Corporations have power to judge and determine who are fit persons
to exercise Trades within their Jurisdiction, the King has certainly a greater
Prerogative to determine which of his Subjects are fit to trade to particular
places exclusive from the Rest.

That the Governors of Corporations have taken upon them such Authority appears
in Townsend's Case, Sid. 107.
who served an Apprentiship to a Tailor in Oxford, and was refused by the Mayor
to be made a Freeman of that City, which shows that if a person be not
qualified he may be excluded.

This is a very ancient Company, for Cloth was first brought into this Realm in
the Reign of Ed. 3. and was always under some Government.

My Lord Rolls quoting the Parliament Roll of H. 1 H. 5. no. 41. 2 Abr. Roll.
174. placit. 39.
5. wherein the Commons pray that all Merchants might import or export their
Goods to any place (except such as were of the Staple) paying the Customs,
takes notice that this Prayer was made against the Companies which prohibited
such Trading.

This shows that even in those days Trade was under a Regulation.

King Ed. 34 E. 3. c. 18. 38 E. 3. c. 11.
3. gave License to all Merchants Denizens, who were not Artificers to go into
Gascoigne for Wines, and that Aliens might bring Wines into this Realm, and
that all Merchandises might be carried into Ireland, and exported from thence,
which shows that without such leave persons could not trade thither, and
Denizens could not import Wines from those parts.

The Case of sole Printing is a Manufacture, and so not in the power of the
King to restrain, for it is a piece of Art and Skill; but when once it becomes
of public concernment then the Prerogative interposeth.

It Is a vain Objection to say, that every Subject has a Right to trade, which
Right is grounded upon the Common Law; for that Law can give no such Authority
against any King's Prohibition; For suppose a foreign Prince should forbid the
Subjects of England to trade within his Dominions, what Right can the Common
Law give them so to do?

Or suppose any Foreign Prince should restrain Trade to a peculiar number of
Men exclusive from the rest, how would the Common Law help them? So that if
this Trade depend upon the Will of a Foreign Prince, why may not the King of
England prohibit his Subjects from using of it?

He who has the sole power of making Leagues and Treaties is the foundation of
Trade, and can that Right which the Subject has at the Common Law be
independent on this?

The Question now is about the Regulation of a Trade by Letters Patents which
the King has power to do.

1. By his Prerogative, 27 E. 3. c. 1. 43 E. 3. c. 1. 47 E. 3. 1 H. 5. number. 40.
for the appointment of the Staple is not by virtue of any Act of Parliament,
but it is the effect of Leagues and Treaties.

2. By Acts of Parliament which have allowed such Grants, and from other Acts
which take notice of the Kings Prerogative.

In 12 H. 7. 12 H. 7. c. 6.
a Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers in London made an Order to restrain all
persons to sell at such a Mart without their consent.

The Statute of 3 Jacobi recites Letters Patents of the Incorporation to
certain Merchants to trade into Spain; and 4 Jac. 3 Jac. c. 6. Cap. 9.
recites the like Letters Patents granted to the Merchants of Exeter by the
Queen.

The next thing to be considered is, what Acts of Parliament have either taken
away or abridged the King's Prerogative.

The first is Magna Charta, viz. That all Merchants shall stay here nisi
public antea prohibiti, the meaning of which has been already explained.

The second Statute is, that which the Defendant has pleaded. In answer to
which it is to be observed that a Preamble of any Statute Law is the best
Expositor of it, because it usually mentions the occasion of its making; and
this Act amongst other Things and Petitions recites, that the King had granted
to the Men of Flanders that the Staple of Wool should be at Bruges, which Town
had ordered that no Wool should be sold to Strangers, which was much to the
damage of trading Merchants.

Now what is the Remedy in this Case? Why the King grants that they may buy
Wool at such prizes as they can agree, and carry it where they please, let the
Seas be open, etc. So that this Act had only a prospect to remedy the abuse of
the Staple, which has in no sort abridged the King's Prerogative.

If there should be no Regulation of Trade by the Power and Prerogative of the
King, what would become of the Turkey Company, when it might be in the power of
one Man to ruin all the Effects of our English Merchants there by a
Misdemeanour? Therefore it ought to be looked after very strictly.

All Arguments which may be deduced from Monopolies will have no influence upon
this Case, because this Grant does not bar the Subject of any precedent Right.

2. As to the second Point it is not to be doubted, but that since they are
abridged in Interest an Action on the Case will lie.

Mr. E contra.
Pollexfen contra. These Letters Patents extend to a great part of Europe, and
the consequence of this Judgment (if for the Plaintiffs) must be, that all
Merchants trading thither must be of this Company, or excluded from Trade in
those Parts.

Now supposing that several Men may be of this Company, it is impossible that
all Merchants, who trade into those parts of Europe, should be Members thereof;
for where should they meet to make Bylaws? Neither is it probable that other
Merchants who live remote from London will adventure their Stock and Estates
with the Citizens. What will become of the Clothiers, must they sell their
Cloth at the Rate imposed by this Company?

The Question is not whether the King may restrain his Subjects from trading to
particular places, or that the Trade of the People is not under the Government
of the King, nor whether he may make Leagues and Treaties, for it is certainly
his Prerogative; nor how the Staple was formerly, which has been long since
discontinued and not easy to find out; nothing will follow from either of
these considerations which may be of any use in this Case.

But the Question is whether the King can make such a Grant excluding all
others from trading; for it is expressly provided by the Statute of H. 7. 12 H.
7. c 6.
that no Englishman shall take of another any Fine or Imposition, for his
Liberty to buy and sell.

The Case of the East India Company is not like this, for they who argued then
did admit, that if the Grant to that Company had restrained the Subjects from
trading to Christian Countries it had been void; but it only prohibiting a
Trade with Infidels with whom we should have no Communication without the
King's License lest we should forsake the Catholic Faith and turn Infidels,
for that reason it was held good.

And such a License was seen by my Lord Coke, 2 Brownl. 296.
as he tells us in Michelburn's Case, which was granted in the Reign of Ed. 3.

But a Patent to exclude all others is void both by the Common Law and the
Statute Law.

As to the Argument that the Common Law gives no Privilege to Trade against
the King's Prohibition, because Foreign Princes may restrain the Trade to a
particular number of Men; can any Inference be made from thence that the Kings
of England may therefore restrain Trade to a like number of Men?

All Patents prohibiting Trade are void. 1 Roll. Rep. 4. 13 H. 4.14.
If a Man would give give Lands in Mortmain, or would have a new Way by taking
in the Common Highway, this may be done with the King's License, and the
Escheator or Sheriff is to examine the Fact and if it be ad dampnum alterius
such a License is void as being prejudicial to the Subject, F. N. B. 222.
and if it is void a fortiori a Grant to restrain Trade must be so.

All Engrossing and Monopolizing are void by the Common Law, the one is a
Species of the other; it is defined by my Lord Coke to be an allowance by the
King's Grant to any person for the sole buying or selling of any thing
restraining all others of that Liberty which they had before the making of such
a Grant; 3 Inst. 181.
and this he tells us is against the ancient and fundamental Rights of this
Kingdom.

This Patent agrees exactly with that Definition, 9 E. 3. cap. 1. 18 E. 3. c.
3. 25 E. 3. c. 2. Roll. Abr. 180. 2 R. 2. c. 1. 11 R. 2. c. 7.
and therefore it must be against Law; it is against an Act of Parliament which
gives Liberty to Merchants to buy and to sell in this Realm without
disturbance; and it is expressly against the Statute of 21 Jac. cap. 3. which
declares all such Letters Patents to be void.

That which may give some color to make such Grants good, 2 Inst. 540. 11 Rep.
is a pretense of Order and Government in Trade; but my Lord Coke was of
Opinion, that it was a hinderance to both, and in the end it produced
Monopolies.

There is a great difference between the King's Grant and his Prohibition; for
the one vests an Interest, which is not done by the other, and all Prohibitions
determine by the King's death; but Grants still remain in force. Adjornatur.

Langford versus Webber.
IN Trespass for the taking of a Horse; Justification upon a bare possession
good against a wrong doer.
the Defendant justified, for that Joseph Ash was possessed of a Close, etc.
and that the Defendant as his Servant took the Horse in that Close Damage
fesant.

And upon a Demurrer to this Plea, for that the Defendant did not show what
Title Ash had to this Close. The Council for the Defendant insisted, that it
being in Trespass, it is sufficent to say that Ash was possessed, because in
this Case possession is a good Title against all others. But it might have been
otherwise in Replevin.

The Title of the Close is not in question, Cro. Car. 138. Yelv. 74. Cro. Car.
571. pl. 10.
the possession is only an inducement to the Plea, and not the substance
thereof, which is the taking of the Horse; and the Law is plain, that where the
interest of the Land is not in question, a Man may justify upon his own
possession against a wrong-doer.

Mr. Pollexfen on the other side alleged that damage fesant would bring the
Title of the Land in question: But the Court gave Judgment for the Defendant.

Perkins versus Titus.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment given in the Common Pleas,
Fine upon an Admittance where it must be certain.
in Replevin for taking of the Plaintiff's Sheep.

The Defendant avowed the taking damage fesant.

The Plaintiff replied, that the Lands where, etc. were Copyhold, held of the
Manor of Bushy in Com. Hertf. the Custom whereof was, that every Tenant of the
said Manor qui admissus foret to any Copyhold Estate should pay a years Value
of the Land for a Fine as the said Land is worth tempore Admissionis; And upon
a Demurrer, the Question was, 1. Whether this be a good Plea or not, as it is
pleaded?

2. If it be good as pleaded, then whether such a Custom may be supported by
Law?

1. It was for the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error now, and in Michaelmas Term
following argued that it was not a good Custom.

The substance of whose Arguments were, that Fines are either certain or
uncertain; those which are uncertain are arbitrary, and therefore cannot be due
of Common Right, nor by Custom; for there can be no Custom for an uncertain
Fine, and such is this Fine; for the value of the Land cannot be known, because
as this Custom is pleaded, it does not appear whether it shall be a years value
past or to come, at the time of the admittance of the Tenant.

A Custom to assess rationabilem denariorum summam for a Fine upon an
admittance, that is to say, 13 Rep. 1.
being two years Rent of a Tenant of the yearly value of 53 s. 4 d. is no good
Custom.

A Lease is made for so many years as a third person shall name; this is
altogether uncertain; 13 Edw. 3. Fitz. Abr. 273.
but when the Term is named then it is a good Lease, but this can be done but
once.

How can this Fine be assessed? It cannot be by Jury, for then it stands in
need of the Common Law, and will be therefore void; for a Custom must have
nothing to support it but usage.

1. Neither can this be a good Custom as it is pleaded, because all Customs are
made up of repeated Acts and Vsages, and therefore in pleading them, it must be
laid time out of mind, which is not done here; for admissus foret has a
respect to future admissions, and are not to those which are past.

2. Here is no time laid when this Fine shall be paid; for it is said Quilibet
tenens qui admissus foret, etc. solvet tantam denariorum summam quantum terra
valebat per Annum tempore admissionis, etc. which last words must be taken to
relate to the value of the Land, and not to the time when the Fine shall be
paid; so that if there be such a Custom, which is Lex loci, and not fully set
forth and expressed, the Common Law will not help it by any Construction.

2. Point. Whether such a Custom can be good by Law?

And they argued that it cannot.

Where the Fine is certain the Lord may refuse to admit without a tender of it,
upon the prayer of the person to be admitted; 4 Rep. 27. b.
but where it is uncertain, the Lord is first to admit the Tenant, and then to
set the Fine, the reasonableness whereof is to be determined by Judges before
whom the Case shall depend, or upon Demurrer, or by a Jury upon proofs of the
yearly value of the Land; but for non payment of an unreasonable Fine the Lord
cannot enter. Cro. Eliz. 779. Cro. Car. 196.


The Law admits of no Custom to be good, but such as is very certain; for
incertainty in a Custom as well as in a Grant makes both void; and therefore
it is held a void Custom for an Infant to make a Feoffment when he can measure
an Ell of Cloth. Roll. Abr. 565. 6 Rep. 60. Davies Rep. 37.


It may be objected, that certum est quod certum reddi potest; the meaning of
which saying must be quod certum reddi potest by something which is certain;
for if this Rule should be taken to be an answer to incertainties, it would
destroy all the Books, which say a Custom must be certain.

The Law is very clear, Fitz. Bar. 177. 2 Roll. Abr. 264.
that a Custom is void for the incertainty; therefore this Custom must be void,
for the value of Land is the most uncertain thing in nature, and therefore
Perjury will not lie for swearing to the value.

Sergeant Fuller and Mr. Finch contra.

The chief Objection is the incertainty of this Custom; now if a Custom as
uncertain as this, has been held good in this Court, it is a good Authority to
support this Custom.

And as to that it was said that a Custom for a person (whom a Copy holder
should name) to have his Land after his death, and that he should pay a Fine
for his admitance; And if the Lord and Tenant cannot agree about the Fine, that
then the rest of the Tenants should assess it: 1 Roll. Rep. 48. 2 Cro. 368. 4
Leon. 238. Noy 3. 2 Brownl. 85.
this was adjudged a good Custom by the Court of Common Pleas, and affirmed
upon a Writ of Error in this Court,: It was the Case of Crab and Bevis, cited
in Warn and Sawyers Case. Adjornatur.

Afterward the first Judgment was affirmed, and all the Court held the Custom
to be a good Custom.

Hacket versus Herne.
JVdgment was had in Debt upon a Bond against Father and Son, Where the
Defendants in the Action must join in a Writ of Error.
and afterward the Father alone brought a Writ of Error, and the Error
assingned was, that his Son was under Age; but because the Son did not join in
the Errors, the Court ordered the Writ to be abated.

If a Quare impedit be brought against a Bishop and others, and Judgment be
against them all, they must likewise all join in a Writ of Error, unless it be
where the Bishop claims only as Ordinary.

It Is true, Roll. Abr. 929. pl. 30.
this is against the Opinion of my Lord Rolls in his Abridgment, who puts the
Case, that where a Scire Facias was brought against four Executors, who pleaded
plene administraverunt, the Jury find Assets in the Hands of two of them, and
that the other eant inde sine die; two bring a Writ of Error, and although at the
opening of the Case it was held that the Writ should abate for that reason,
because brought only by two, yet he says the Judgment was afterward affirmed,
and the Writ held good.

But there is a difference where a Writ of Error is brought by the Plaintiffs
in the original Action, 5 Co. 25. a Ruddock's Case.
and when by the Defendants; for if two Plaintiffs are barred by an erroneous
Judgment, and afterward bring a Writ of Error, the Release of one shall bar
the other, because they are both actors in a personal thing to charge another,
and it shall be presumed a Folly in him to join with another, who might release
all.

But where the Defendants bring a Writ of Error it is otherwise; for it being
brought to discharge themselves of a Judgment, the Release of one cannot bar
the other, because they have not a joint Interest but a joint burden, and by
Law are compelled to join in Errors.

Moss versus Archer.
COvenant by an Assignee of an Assignee of Lands which were exchanged; the
Breach assigned was, Breach not well assigned.
that a Stranger habens jus and titulum, did enter, etc.

There was a Uerdict for the Plaintiff, and it was now moved in Arrest of
Judgment, that the Plaintiff had not showed a sufficient breach, for he sets
forth the Entry of a Stranger, habens jus and titulum, but does not show what
Title, and it may be he had a Title under the Plaintiff himself, 2 Cro. 315.
Hob. 35.
after the Exchange made; and to prove this, the Case of Kirby and Hansaker was
cited in point, and of that Opinion was all the Court.

Nota, It was said in this Case, that an Exchange ought to be executed by
either Party in their Lifetime, or else it is void.

Tailor versus Brindley.
THE Original in Trespass was quare Clausum fregit, Variance between the
Original and Declaration, where it is no Error.
and the Plaintiff declared quare Clausum and Domum fregit, and had Judgment in
the Common Pleas, and a Writ of Error was brought in this Court, and the
variance between the Original and Declaration was assigned for Error, and that
one was not warranted by the other.

But Sergeant Levinz argued, that because the Original was certified three
Terms since, 2 Cro. 674. 1 Roll. Abr. 790. n. 7. Cro. Car. 272. 18 Eliz. cap.
and no Continuances between it and the Declaration, therefore that could not
be the Original to this Action, and that the Court might for that reason intend
a Verdict without an Original, which is helped by the Statute of Jeofails. But
he argued that where the Original varies from the Declaration, and is not
warranted by it, it is not aided by this Statute: Judgment was affrmed.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 3 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1687.
Wright, Chief Justice. Holloway, Justices. Powel, Justices. Allibon, Justices.
Sawyer, Attorney General, Powis, Solicitor General.
Mathews versus Carry, Pasch. 3 Jac. Rot. 320.
TRespass for entering of his House and taking of a Silver Tankard. Where the
Defendant justifies by way of excuse, he must set forth the Warrant, and that
he took the Goods virtute Warranti.


The Defendant made conusance as Bailiff of the Dean and Chapter of
Westminster, for that the place where, etc. was within the Jurisdiction of the
Leet of the said Dean, who was seized of a Court Leet which was held there such
a day, etc. And that the Jury did present the Plaintiff (being a
Tallow-Chandler) for melting of stinking Tallow, to the annoyance of the
Neighbors, for which he was amerced, and that the Amerciament was affered to 5
l. which not being paid, the Defendant by a Mandate of the said Dean and
Chapter, distreined the Tankard, etc.

The Plaintiff replied de injuria sua propria absque hoc that he did melt
Tallow to the annoyance of the Neighbors, etc. And upon a Demurrer to this
Replication, it was argued this Term by Mr. Pollexfen for the Defendant, and
Tremaine for the Plaintiff: and afterward in Michaelmas- Term 1 Will. and
Mariae, by Mr. Bonithan and Sergeant Thompson for the Defendant.

It was said for the Defendant, that a Presentment in a Court Leet which
concerns the person (as in this Case) and not the Free hold, 5 H. 7.3. Fitz.
Bar. 271. Bro. Abr. tit. Travers sans ceo. pl. 183. Presentment in Court, pl.
15.
was not traversable, and that the Amerciament was a Duty vested in the Lord
for which he may distrain, or bring an Action of Debt. Co. Entr. 572.

But on the other side it was said, that if such a Presentment is not
traversable, the party has no remedy; it is contrary to the Opinion of
Fitzherbert in Dyer, Dyer 13. b.
who affimed the Law to be that it was traversable, and that if upon such a
Presentment a Fine should be imposed erroniously, 11 Co. 42. 1 Roll. Rep. 79.
it may be avoided by Plea, and this agrees with the second Resolution in
Godfrey 's Case.

2. It was objected to the Plea, that it was not good, for it sets forth, that
the Plaintiff was amerced, and that it was affered at the Court, and so he has
confounded the Office of the Jurors and Affearers together, which he ought not
to do, for he should be amerced to a certain Sum, Hob. 129. Roll. Abr. 542.
and not in general, which Sum may be mitigated or affered by others.

If it had been a Fine, 8 Co. 38. 1 Leon. 142.
it need not be affered, because that is imposed by the Court; but this is an
Amerciament which is the act of the Jury, and therefore it must be affered.

3. The chiefest Exception was to the matter of the Warrant, viz. the Defendant
sets forth that he seized by virtue of a Precept from the Dean and Chapter;
whereas he ought to show it was directed to him from the Steward of the Court,
and then to set forth the Warrant, without which he cannot justify to distrain
for an Amerciament.

And of this Opinion was the whole Court, and therefore Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff, in Michaelmas- Term, Primo Will. and Mariae.

If it had been in Replevin where the Defendant made cognizance in the right of
the Lord, it might be well enough as here pleaded; but where it is to justify
by way of excuse, there you must averr the Fact and allege it to be done, and
set forth the Warrant it self, 3 Cro. 698.748. 1 Leon. 242.
and the taking virtute Warranti; for a Bailiff of a Liberty cannot distrain
for an Amerciament by virtue of his Office, but he must have a Warrant from the
Steward or Lord of the Leet for so doing.

The other Exception that the Amerciament ought to be to a Sum, Rast. Ent. 606.
Co. Ent. 665.
the Presidents are otherwise; for an Amerciament per duodecim probos and
legales homines adtunc and ibidem jurat. ad 40 s. afferat' is well enough, but
the Warrant is always set forth.

Dominus Rex versus Darby.
THE Defendant was indicted for speaking of scandalous words of Sir J.K. a
Justice of the Peace. Viz. Sir J.K. Indictment for Scandalous words.
is a buffle-headed Fellow, and does not understand Law; he is not fit to talk
Law with me, I have bafled him, and he has not done my Clyent Justice.

Mr. Pollexfen for the Defendant said that an Indictment would not lie for
these words, because not spoken to the Party in the exceution of his Office,
but behind his back; it will not lie for irreverent words, but for Libels and
Writings, because such are public, but words are private offenses.

But the Court being of Opinion that an Indictment would lie where an Action
would not, because it respects the public Peace: and that an Action would not
lie in this Case, unless the party had a particular loss, Sid. 65. 2 Cio. 5 8.
and therefore it has been held not to be actionable to call a Justice of
Peace Fool, Ass, Coxcomb.

He then took Exceptions to the Form of the Indictment.

1. There is no place of Abode laid where the Defendant did inhabit, which is
expressly required by the Statute of H. 5. Viz. 1 H. 5. cap. 5
That in Indictments there shall be addition of the Estate, Degree, etc. and of
the Towns, Hamlets, Places and Counties where the Defendants dwell. And by the
Statute of H. 6. 8 H. 6. cap. 12
which gives the Judges power to amend Records in affirmations of Judgments,
such defects which are named in the Statute of H. 5. are excepted; and
therefore where a Writ of Error was brought to reverse an Outlawry upon the
Statute of 5 Eliz. for Perjury; 2 Cro. 167.
the Defendant was Indicted by the Name of Nicholas Leech de Parochia de
Aldgate, and did not show in what County Aldgate was; and for this cause it was
reversed.

2. The Caption is coram Justiciariis ad pacem dicti Domini Regis conservand',
and the word (nunc) is left out. It was the Opinion of Justice Twisden, that it
ought to be nunc conservand', Sid. 422.
for otherwise it may be the Peace of King Stephen.

The Council on the other side said, that it was a new Doctrine, that the King
shall not have the same Remedy by an Indictment which the Subject may have by
an Action; What is the meaning of the words of all Commissions, de
propalationibus verborum?

As to the first Exception, they said that the Indictment was certain enough,
for the Defendant is laid to be de Almondbury in the West Riding of Yorkshire.

To the second Exception, they said that ad pacem conservand' without nunc is
well enough, for it cannot be intended upon this Indictment that they were
Justices to preserve the Peace in any other Kings Reign, and what was quoted
out of Siderfin, is but the Opinion of one single Judge.

This is a Scandal upon the Government, and it is as much as to say that the
King has appointed an ignorant Man to be a Justice of Peace, for which an
Indictment will lie.

And of that Opinion was the whole Court, and gave Judgment accordingly.

Ball versus Cock.
A Writ of Covenant did bear Test the first day of Trinity- Term, Error to
reverse a Fine, where the Cognisor died after the Caption, and before it passed
the King's Silver.
retornable tres Trinitatis, and it was taken by Dedimus 30 Julii.

A Writ of Error was brought to reverse this Fine, and the Error assigned was,
that the Cognizor died after the Caption, and before the Enrolment at the
King's Silver Office.

It was argued by the Council for the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, that a
Fine Sur Cognizance de droit, etc. is said to be levied when the Writ of
Covenant is returned, and the Concord and King's Silver (which is an ancient
Revenue of the Crown pro licencia concordandi) duly entered; for though the
Cognisor dies afterward, Dyer 220. b. 5 Co. 37. Cro. Eliz. 469.
the Fine is good, and the Land passes; but if the King's Silver be not
entered, the Fine may be reversed by Writ of Error; for it is an Action, and
Judgment, and the death of either Party abates it.

If it should be objected that this cannot be assigned for Error, because it is
against the Record, which is Placita terrae irrotulat. de Termino Sanctae
Trinitatis anno primo Jacobi, etc.

It Is true, an Error cannot be assigned against the very essence of a Record,
but in the matter of time it may, and so it is in this Case.

It Is like Syer's Case 32 Eliz. 3 Inst. 230. 4 Co. Hind's Case. 10 H. 7.24.
who was indicted for a Burglary supposed to be done primo Augusti, and upon
the Evidence it appeared to be done primo Septembris, and though he was
acquitted of the Indictment for that reason, viz. because the Judgment relates
to the day of the Indictment, yet it was resolved by all the Judges of England,
that the very day needs not be set down in the Indictment; for be it before or
after the Offense, the Jury ought to find according to the truth of the Case
upon the Evidence, for they are sworn ad veritatem dicendam, etc.

This must be assigned for Error, for if the contrary be said it is against the
Record, the Custos Brevium having returned that the Fine was taken 30 July,
which could not be in Trinity- Term, for that ended 8 July, otherwise it is
repugnant to it self.

Econtra. It was argued, that this is not assignable for Error; Dyer 220. b. 12
Co. 124.
it is true, if the Party had died before the Entry of the King's Silver, it had
been Error, but if afterward it is not so. Thus was the Case of Warnecomb and
Carril, which was, Husband and Wife levied a Fine of the Lands of the Wife, and
this was by Dedimus in the Lent Vacation, she being then but 19 years of Age;
the King's Silver was entered in Hillary- Term before, and she died in the
Easter- week; and upon a Motion made the first day of Easter- Term to stay the
engrossing of the Fine, it was denied by the Court, for they held it to be a
good Fine.

Another reason why this is not assignable for Error, 2 Cro. 11. Yelv. 33.
is because it is directly against the Record, which is of Trinity- Term, and
can be of no other Term; and to prove this he cited Arundel's Case, where a
Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Fine taken before Roger Manwood Esquire; in
his Circuit, he being then one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and the
Dedimus was returned per Rogerum Manwood Militem, for he was Knighted and made
Chief Baron the Eerm following; the Fine passed and this was afterward
assigned for Trror, that he who took the Caption was not a Knight, but it being
directly against the Record, they would not intend him to be the same person to
whom the Writ was directed. Adjurnatur. Afterward the Fine was affirmed.

Lock versus Norborne.
UPon a Trial at Bar in Ejectment for Lands in Wiltshire, Verdict shall only be
given in Evidence amongst privies.
the Case was thus. Viz. Mary Philpot in the year 1678. made a Settlement by
Lease and Release to her self for Life, then to Trustees to support contingent
Remainders, then to her first, second and third Son, in Tail Male, etc. then to
Thomas Arundel in Tail Male, with diverse Remainders over.

It was objected at the Trial, that she had no power to make such Settlement,
because in the year 1676. her Husband had settled the Lands in question upon her
for Life, and upon the Issue of his Body, etc. and for want of such Issue, then
upon George Philpot in Tail Male, with several Remainders over, the Remainder
to Mary Philpot in Fee, Proviso that upon the tender of a Guinea to George
Philpot, by the said Mary, the Limitations as to him should be void.

George Philpot having afterward made a Lease of this Land, to try the Title,
the Trustees brought an Ejectment; but because the tender of the Guinea could
not be proved, there was a Verdict for the Defendant.

And now Mr. Philpot would have given that Verdict in Evidence at this Trial,
but was not suffered by the Court, for if one Man has a Title to several
Lands, and if he should bring Ejectments against several Defendants, and
recover against one, he shall not give that Verdict in Evidence against the
rest, because the Party against whom that Verdict was had may be relieved
against it, if it is not good, but the rest cannot, though they claim under the
same Title, and all make the same defense.

So if two Tenants will defend a Title in Ejectment, and a Verdict should be
had against one of them, it shall not be read against the other, unless by Rule
of Court.

But if an Ancestor has a Verdict, the Heir may give it in Evidence, because
he is privy to it; for he who produces a Verdict must be either party or privy
to it, and it shall never be received against different persons, if it does not
appear that they are united in Interest.

Therefore a Verdict against A. shall never be read against B. for it may
happen that one did not make a good defense, which the other may do.

The tender of the Guinea was now proved.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 3 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1687/8.
Wright Chief Justice. Holloway Justices. Powel Justices. Allibon Justices.
Powis, Attorney General. Wm. Williams, Solicitor General.
THIS Vacation Sir Robert Sawyer had his Quietus, and Sir Thomas Powis was made
Attorney General, and Sir William Williams of Greys-Inn, was made Solicitor
General.

Rex versus Lenthal.
AN Inquifition was taken in the second year of this King, under the Great Seal
of England, by which it was found that the Office of Marshal of the King's Bench
did concern the Administration of Justice, and that Mr. Lenthal was seized
thereof in Fee, and that upon his Marriage he had settled the said Office upon
Sir Edward Norris and Mr. Coghill, and their Heirs in Truff that they should
permit him to execute the same during his Life, etc.

That the said Trustees had neglected to give their attendance, or to execute
the said Office themselves, that this Canveyance was made by Mr. Lenthal
without the notice of this Court; that he received the Profits, and afterward
granted the said Office to Cooling for Life.

That Cross and his Wife had obtained a Judgment in this Court against Bromley,
and had sued forth Erecution for the Debt and Damages, for which he was
committed to the custody of the said Cooling, and being so in Execution did go
at large.

They find that Cooling had not sufficient to answer Cross and his Wise for the
said Debt, etc. whereupon they impleaded Mr. Lenthal in the Common Pleas, for
121 l. 2 s. 4 d. to answer as superior; that at the Trial Mr. Lenthal gave this
secret Deed of Settlement in Evidence, whereupon the Plaintiffs in that Action
were nonsuited ad dampnum, etc.

They find that Cooling went out of the said Office, and the Trustees
neglecting the execution thereof, Mr. Lenthal granted the same to Glover for
Life; that during the time he executed this Office, one Wordal was convicted of
Forgery, and committed to his Custody, and that he permitted him voluntarily to
Escape, by which the said Office was forfeited to the King.

The King had granted the Office to the Lord Hunsdon.

Sir Edward Norris and Mr. Coghill come in and plead that Mr. Lenthal was
seized in Fee, and that he made a Settlement of the Office upon his Marriage
with Mrs. Lucy Dunch ( with whom he had 5000 l. Portion) viz. upon them and
their Heirs in trust, prout in the Inquisition, and that he did execute the
Office by-their permission.

Mr Lenthal pleads and admits the Grant to Sir Edward Norris and the other
Trustee, bearing date such a day, etc. but says, that the next day afterward,
viz. the 10th day of August a Trust of the said Office was declared by another
Deed, viz. to himself for Life, with Remainders over, and that by virtue
thereof, and the consent of the Trustees, he took upon him the execution of the
said Office, and was thereof possessed either by himself or his Deputy, until
the time of the Inquisition taken; then he traversed that the Escapes were
voluntary (but did not answer the concealing of the Grant) and concludes, viz.
per quod petit, that the King Hands may be amoved, etc.

The Attorney General demurred to the Plea of the Trustees, he likewise demurred
to the Plea of Mr. Lenthal, and took issue that the Escapes were voluntary.

It was argued this Term and Trinity following, by Council on both sides, and
as to the matter of Law, they made these Points.

1. That this Office cannot be granted in Trust.

2. The Escapes found in the Inquisition, and not answered by the Trustees, are
sufficient causes of Forfeiture of this Offce.

3. Another Point was raised, whether the assignment of this Office to Trustees
(admitting it could be so granted) and their declaration of the Trust, did
create an Estate at will in Mr. Lenthal.

If it was a Tenancy at will.

1. Then whether Mr. Lenthal had done any thing to determine his will?

2. Whether he can by Law make a Deputy?

3. Whether the assigning of this Trust without giving notice thereof to this
Court, be a Forfeiture?

1. This Office cannot be granted in Trust, Jones 128.
because it is a personal Inheritance, and will not pass by such Conveyances as
are used to convey Lands; so is my Lord of Oxford 's Case, in which it was held
that a Covenant to stand seized of an Office, is void; neither can Mr. Lenthal
take upon him the execution of this Office by the consent of the Trustees, for
that cannot be without Deed.

If the Law should be otherwise this inconvenience would follow, viz. Mr.
Lenthal might grant the Office to another, without leave of the Court, and the
Grantee might suffer voluntary Escapes, having no valuable Interest to answer
the parties injured, who must then sue Mr. Lenthal and he has no Estate in
him, for he has conveyed the Inheritance to the Trustees, and if they should
be likewise sued, no recovery could be against them, because they are only
nominal?

It Is almost like the Grant of an Office of chief Prothonotary of the Court of
Common Pleas, to two persons for Life, 18 Ed. 4. f. 7.
which cannot be good, because the Rolls of the Court cannot be in the keeping
of two persons at one time.

It has been adjudged that this very Office cannot be granted for years, Cro.
Car. 587. Jones 437.
because it is an Office of Trust and daily Attendance: and such a termor for
years may dye intestate, and then it would be in suspense 'till Administration
is committed, which is the act of another Court.

2. Point; That the Escapes found in the Inquisition and the non-attendance of
the Trustees, are sufficient cause of Forfeiture.

It Is true, at the Common Law Debt upon an Escape will not lie against the
Jailer, that Action was afterward given by the Statute of W. 2. For before
that Act, the only remedy against the Jailer was to bring an Action on the Case
against him, founded upon a wrong done: Dyer 273.
But now Debt will lie, and if the party is not sufficient at the time of the
Escape, 2 Inst. 382.
respondeat superior.

The Marshal who executes this Office, be it by right or wrong, is answerable
to the King and his People for Escapes: If they are voluntary, it is a
Forfeiture of his Office, nay, if a Deputy suffer such Escapes, it is a
Forfeiture by the Principal, unless such Deputation be made for Life, and then
the Grantee for Life only forfeits the Office.

As to the non-attendance of the Trustees, if Mr. 39 H. 6.32.
Lenthal be Tenant at will, and has granted this Office to another for Life,
this is a determination of the Tenancy at will, and a Forfeiture as to him.

Now this Grantee for Life cannot be said to be a Deputy, for such a Grantee
himself cannot make a Deputy, and therefore a fortiori, a Tenant at will cannot
do it.

But admitting he should be Deputy, yet a Forfeiture by him is a Forfeiture by
his Superior; and therefore Mr. Lenthal 's tenancy at will being gone, the
Trustees ought to attend, and their non-attendance ought to be a Forfeiture.

The non-attendance of an Officer, Cro. Car. 491.
who was only a Searcher in a Port Town, was adjudged a Forfeiture; much
greater is the Fault of that Officer who has the administration of Justice, if
he do not give his attendance.

Besides, 39 H. 6.34. a. 9 Co. 46. Dyer 198. Sid. 81. Dyer 150, 151.
if they do not attend, by consequence they cannot act in the Office, and
non-feazance is as sufficient a cause of Forfeiture as any other mis-behaviour
whatsoever.

But if the Trustees had given attendance, they are persons inexperient, and
therefore incapable to execute this Office, for which they may be lawfully
refused by this Court.

Mr. Pollexfen chiefly insisted upon the point of Pleading, that the matter
found by the Inquisition was not answered by the Plea.

First, he excepted that the Defendant had not by his Plea entitled himself to
any Estate in this Office, 1 Leon. 202. 2 Inst. 695. Stamf. 62, 64. 2 Leon. 123.
and therefore he could not traverse the Title of the King, without making a
Title to himself, for why should he desire that the Kings Hands may be amoved,
and he restored to his Office, if he has not shown a Title to it?

His pleading of this Deed of Trust by which he is permitted to receive the
Profits, etc. during Life cannot create such an Estate in him, as will be
executed by the Statute of Uses; therefore he can have no Estate for Life; for
if a Man is seized in Fee of an Estate, and makes a Declaration thereof in
Trust for J. S. this is no color to make an Estate for Life in J. S.

The Defendant has therefore no more than a Trust in this Office, which is
nothing in the Eye of the Law, and for which there is no remedy but by Subpoena
in Chancery, so that being only a Cestui que trust, he has neither jus in re,
nor ad rem.

He cannot be Tenant at will, for he is not made so by the Deed of Trust.

There is a great deal of difference between Evidence and Pleading; for this
very Deed may be an Evidence of an Estate at will, but it is not so in pleading;
therefore he ought to have pleaded that coram praetextu he was possessed of the
Office, and took the Profits, etc. but he having otherwise pleaded, and not
entitled himself to any Estate therein, he ought to be laid aside as an
incompetent person.

The Plea of Sir Edward Norris is likewise insufficient; for it sets forth the
Deed of Settlement, etc. coram praetextu (the Defendant) juxta fiduciam in eo
positam, was possessed of the Office ad eorum voluntatem.

Now an Office is a thing which lies in Grant, 1 Leon. 219.
and cannot be transferred from one to another without Deed, and here is no
Deed pleaded; and as no Estate at will can be granted of an Office without
Deed, so likewise there cannot be a deputation of such Offce without it.

If then there can be no Tenant at Will of an Office, but by Deed, and no such
Deed is pleaded, then Mr. Lenthal had no power to make a Deputation to Cooling;
but neither Tenant at will, nor Tenant for Life can make a Deputy, if in the
very Grant made to them, there is not an express Clause for the execution of
the Office per se vel sufficientem Deputatum suum.

The substance of all which is, viz. First, here is no Tenant at will: But
admitting him to be so, he has no authority to make a Deputy, and if he should
appoint a Deputy, he executes the Office without Authority, and may suffer
Escapes.

Lastly, by pleading of this Deed, he has alleged that the Estate was in the
Trustees, and that they permitted him to enjoy the Office coram praetextu, he
did execute it, and receive the Profits; now this is too general, and an issue
cannot be taken upon such a Plea; he should have pleaded positively, that it
was demised to him at will, and that he made a Deputy; and then also the
authority in rolls is against him, where it is held, 2 Roll. Ab^
that the Marshal of the King's Bench may grant the Office for Life, but cannot
give power to such grantee to make a Deputy.

Now if a Tenant for Life cannot make a Deputy, certainly a Tenant at will has
no power so to do.

But suppose a Deputy might be made, his neglect in the execution of the
Office, shall make a Forfeiture of the Estate of the Grantee for Life.

It cannot be reasonably objected in this Case, Roll. Abr. 155.
that it is any hardship for Mr. Lenthal to lose this Office for any defect in
Pleading; for admitting the Plea to be good; yet there is a cause of
Forfeiture, because the Marshal of the King's Bench being a ministerial
Officer, is required by Law to be a person of such Ability as to answer all
Escapes, that so Men may have the benefit of their Suits, for otherwise he
having nothing to answer they may lose their Debts. Now here by a secret Grant
Mr. Lenthal has conveyed the Estate out of himself, and yet still continues
Officer in possession, by which means the People are deprived of the Remedy
which the Law provides for them, and this is a sufficient cause of Forfeiture.

Then as to the Trustees, they have not said any thing of the Escapes; it is
true, Mr. Lenthal has traversed those which are alleged to be voluntary, but
that signifies nothing to them, because they cannot take any benefit by the
Plea of another, for every one must stand and fall by his own Plea.

If therefore their non-attendance be a Forfeiture, the entruders shall not
help them, because they come in without any color of Right.

But the Council on the other side argued this last Point first, E contra.
which was thus.

Viz. A Man seized of the Inheritance of the Office of Marshal of this Court,
conveys it in Trust, the cestui que trust enjoys it and receives the Profits;
the Question now is, whether the nonattendance of the Trustees, being never
required by the Court, be a Forfeiture of this Office?

And as incident to this Question, it was debated whether Mr. Lenthal was
Tenant at will?

It Is no Forfeiture, for they are not bound to attend.

It cannot be denied but that this Office does concern the Administration of
Justice, but it is to be considered what Estate Mr. Lenthal has in it.

He had once an Estate in Fee, but if it had been for Life or in Tail, it may
be settled as this is done, but not for years, because it may then come to an
Administrator.

If Mr. Lenthal be the cestui que use, Co. Lit. 404. Godb. 64.
then he has an Estate of which the Law takes notice, for he may be a Iuror at
the Common Law.

It Is plain that he has an Estate created by operatian of the Law, for he is
Tenant at Will, and for that reason the attendance of the Trustees is not
necessary; but if the Estate had been directly granted to them, then the Office
had been forfeited for Non-attendance.

It cannot be denied, but that this Office may be granted at Will, for so is
Sir George Reynell's Case; 9 Co. 98.
now if it may be granted at Will by the Possessor, it may likewise be so
granted by him who has an Estate created by the Law, for fortior est
dispositio legis quam hominis; and in this Case no Inconveniency would happen;
for if the Will be determined then the Grantor is the Officer.

When Mr. Lenthal had assigned this Office to the Trustees, and they by a
subsequent Deed had declared it to be in trust for him, and that he should take
the Profits during life, he has thereby a legal Estate at Will; for a Cestuy
que Trust by Deed is a Tenant at Will.

It has been objected, that a Tenancy at Will of an Office is void, and to
prove this a Case in Jones's Rep. was cited, Jones 128.
but the reason of that Case is guided by the particular nature of that Office
which could not be aliened without the consent of the King.

If this Office is not alienable in its nature then Mr. Lenthal has still the
Fee-simple, but that will not be admitted.

But this is not only a bare Estate at Will, but a Trust for Life, and such a
Trust which has a legal construction; Godbolt 6^
for if a Feoffment be made in Trust that he should convey the Estate to
another which the Feoffee afterward refused to do, the Cestuy que Trust may
bring an Action against him; so if he should be returned on a Jury it is no
Exception to say that he has not liberum tenementum, and therefore he is not
an incompetent person to have the charge of Prisons if he may be impannelled on
a Jury to try men for their Lives.

1. Then as to the first Question upon the last point, whether Mr. Lenthal had
done any thing to determine his Tenancy at Will.

The Grant of this Office by him to Cooling will not amount to a determination
of his Will, because it is a void Grant.

It Is true, this is denied by my Lord Coke in his Comment upon Littleton, Sect.
71.
where he says, If Tenant at Will grant over his Estate, and the Grantee
enters, he is a Disseisor, for though the Grant be void, yet it amounts to a
determination of his Will.

What ground he had for such an Opinion is not known; the Year Books quoted in
the Margent will not warrant it, for they are in no sort parallel.

That Case in the 27th of H. 27 H. 6.3.
6. is no more than Tenant at Will cannot grant over his Estate, because he
has no certain or fixed Interest in it; and much to the same purpose is the
Book of 22 E. 22 E. 4.5.
4. there cited.

But suppose this to be a void Grant, and to amount to a determination of the
Tenancy at Will, yet if the Trustees had no notice of it, that shall not
determine their Estates.

A Devise to an Executor that he shall have the oversight of the Testators
Estate till his Daughter should come of Age; Yelv. 73.
the Executor made a Lease at Will rendering Rent; before the year expired the
Daughter came of age, to whom the Tenant at Will attorned; the Executor brought
an Action of Debt against him for the Rent arrear, it was held that this
Attornment to the Daughter was no determination of his Will, for it would be of
ill consequence to the Lessor if such a Tenant should determine his Will a day
or two before the end of the year, who had enjoyed all the Profits of the Land.

2. Whether he may make a Deputy?

It Is true, a judicial Officer cannot make a Deputy unless he has a Clause in
his Patent to enable him, because his Judgment is relied on in matters relating
to his Office, which might be the reason of the making of the Grant to him;
neither can a Ministerial Officer depute one in his stead, if the Office be to
be performed by him in person, but when nothing is required but a
Superintendency in the Office he may make a Deputy.

This appears more evident in the common Case of a Sheriff, who is an Officer
made by the Kings Letters Patents, and it is not said that he shall execute his
Office per se vel sufficientem Deputatum suum, Roll. Rep. 274. 1 Leon. 146. 3
Leon. 99. Cro. Eliz. 173.
yet he may make a Deputy, which is the Undersheriff, against whom Actions may
be brought by the Parties grieved.

And such a Deputy may be made without a Deed, for he claims no Interest in the
Office but as a Servant, Cro. Eliz. 67. 10 Co. 192. a.
and therefore where an Action on the Case was brought against the Deputy of a
Sheriff for an Escape, who pleaded that the Sheriff made him his Deputy to take
Bail of Prisoners, and that he took Bond, etc. and showed no Deed of
Deputation, yet the Plea was held good upon a Demurrer.

3. Whether the Assignment of this Trust without giving notice to this Court be
a Forfeiture?

Tenant in Fee simple may do it, for he has a power so to do by reason of the
Dignity of his Estate.

He who grants this Office without acquainting of this Court therewith must
remain an Officer still, and is subject to all Duties and Attendance till the
Court has notice of the Grant.

But there is no occasion of acquainting the Court in this Case, for upon the
Grant made to the Trustees by Mr. Lenthal he is still the Officer though he
has not the same Estate.

It was objected that Sir Edward Norris, etc. has not said any thing to the
Escapes; but that does neither concern Mr. Lenthal or the Trustees; 2 Cro. 17.
for if he be Tenant at Will they are not answerable for his neglect, for it is
a personal Tort in him.

If Tenant for years makes a Feoffment it is a Forfeiture of his Estate; but if
he makes a Lease and Release, though it is of the same operation, yet it will
not amount to a Forfeiture.

Now if any Escapes should happen there is a plain remedy for the Parties
agrieved; for if Tenant at Will remains in possession of an Office, and
suffers voluntary Escapes, his Office shall be seized into the Hands of this
Court, then he in the Reversion must make his Claim, and when that is done, he
is an Officer nolens volens, and this was the Duke of Norfolk's Case.

Now though these Escapes are found by the Inquisition to be voluntary, yet
they are answered in the Plea, for that part of the Inquisition is traversed,
and that they were vi and armis, and this being not yet tried the Court cannot
give Judgment thereon.

If there be many negligent Escapes these shall not amount to a Forfeiture; as
if a Rebel should break Prison or the Prison should be on Fire, those are
negligent, but the Officer should not be so much as fined.

But if it should be a Forfeiture the Neglect must be particularly alleged,
for the Word Neglect is too general. Adjornatur. 5 E. 4.27. Dyer 66.


Anonymus.
A Man was indicted for using of a Trade not being an Apprentice, An Indictment
quashed for misreciting of a Statute.
against the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 4. And now a Motion was made to quash it,
because the Act gives power to two Justices of the Peace, Quorum unus, to hear
and determine Offenses committed against any branch thereof, either by
Indictment or Information before them in their Sessions; and it is not said that
one of the Justices, before whom this Indictment was taken, was of the Quorum.

This Objection was answered by the Court that the Sessions cannot be kept
without one Justice of the Quorum.

The Act says, That it shall not be lawful to any person other than such who
did then lawfully use any Art, Mystery or Manual Occupation, to set up any
Trade used within this Realm except he had been an Apprentice for seven years,
etc. and it is not averred that the Trade mentioned in the Indictment was a
Trade used before the making of the Act.

This seemed to be a material Objection, but the Indictment was quashed for
misreciting of the Statute.

Price versus Davies.
ERror to reverse a Fine taken by Commission, and the Error assigned was, that
the Cognizor died before the return of the Writ of Covenant.

But this Point was not argued, because Justice Allybon was of Opinion that the
Plaintiff in the Errors had not well entitled himself by the Writ; for it was
brought by him ut Consanguineus and Haeres scilicet Filius, etc. but does not
show how he was of Kindred.

To this Objection Sir William Williams the Solicitor General, replied, that if
a Descent be from twenty Ancestors it is not necessary to say, that he was Son
and Heir of such a one, who was Son and Heir of such a one, and so to the
twentieth Ancestor.

Agreeable to this are all the Presidents; in Formedons it is only said that Jus
descendit. Adjornatur.

The Countess of Plymouth versus Throgmorton.
ERror to reverse a Judgment in the Common Pleas in an Action of Debt upon a
Mutuatus brought by Mr. Contract, where it is entire shall not be separated in
an Action of Debt.
Throgmorton as Executor to Sir Edward Biggs, against the Countess as
Administratrix of the Earl of Plymouth, wherein the Plaintiff sets forth a
Writing by which the Earl had given power to Sir Edward to be the Collector and
Receiver of his Money and Rents, and that he promised to allow him 100 l. per
Annum for his pains, and in default of payment thereof that Sir Edward should
detein the same, which Writing was in these Words following, viz.

I do direct and appoint Sir Edward Biggs to take and receive to his own use
100 l. of lawful Money of England out of the first Money which he shall receive
of mine.

The Action was brought for 75 l. being his Salary for three quarters of a
year, and Judgment by Nil dicit.

It was argued this Term, and in Easter Term by Council on both sides.

It was agreed on all sides, that the Earl left sufficient Assets to satisfy
all his Bond Creditors, but not enough to pay Debts upon simple Contract.

First it was said for the Plaintiff in the Errors, that no Action of Debt will
lie against an Executor upon a Mutuatus, 11 Co. Godfreys Case.
because the Testator might have waged his Law, but this was not much insisted
on.

2. That admitting an Action would lie, yet this is an erroneous Judgment,
because the Suit was for 75 l. for three quarters Salary, when by the Writing
Sir Edward was to serve the Earl a whole year, and this being an entire
Contract shall not be separated.

Therefore he cannot be well entitled to the Actionn unless his Testator had
served a year, and he had averred it so in his Declaration.

As where a Covenant was to pay 2 s. Yelv. 133. 7 Co. 10. Allen 9.
for copying every Quire of Paper, and the Breach assigned that he copyed 4
Quire and 3 sheets, for which 8 s. and 3 d. was due to the Plaintiff; it is
true, he had Judgment, but it was reversed because it was an entire Covenant of
which no apportionment could be made pro rata.

3. That which was chiefly insisted on was, to make these words amount to an
Obligation, that so it might be satisfied amongst the Bond Creditors.

But those who argued for the Plaintiff in the Errors said, that it cannot be
an Obligation, for it was only a bare Letter of Attorney, and an Authority and
no more; for there were no words to oblige the Earl, or which can make a
Warranty, and therefore if the Money was not received, the Party to whom the
Note was given could not resort back to him, who made it, had they been both
living, neither shall the Plaintiff now to his Administratrix.

Like the common Cases of the assigning of Judgment, if the Assignee does not
receive the Money he cannot have an Action against the Assignor, who only
directs and appoints him so to do.

But on the other side, Ex part Def.
the second Objection was thus answered, viz. That this being only an Executory
thing the Plaintiff may now bring an Action for so long time as his Testator
served, and this may be apportioned secundum ratam; if the Law should be
otherwise, the Case of all Servants would be bad, for they are generally hired
for a year and not usually serve so long.

In an Assumpsit to pay for a years board, Sid. 225.
and the Plaintiff had declared only for three quarters of a year, but yet had
Judgment because (as the Book says) if there be any variance in the Agreement
it is for the advantage of the Defendant.

The 3d. Vaughan 92, 93. Pl. Com. 182. Dyer 21.
Objection answered, viz.

When a Man is indebted to another by simple Contract, which is aknowledged by
Deed, an Action of Debt will lie against his Executor, for any thing which is
under Hand and Seal will amount to an Obligation especially where the Debt is
confessed.

Now there are words in this Deed to show that Money was due, and that makes it
a Bond.

But the Court was of Opinion, that this was an entire Agreement, and therefore
the Action not well brought for three quarters Salary, and for this reason the
Judgment was reversed, Nisi, etc.

Chapman versus Lamphire.
AN Action on the Case was brought for scandalous words spoken of the
Plaintiff, Words spoken of a Carpenter, where actionable.
who declared that he was a Carpenter, and a Freeman of the City of London, and
that he got great Sums of Money by buying of Timber and Materials, and by
building of Houses, and that the Defendant having discourse of him and of his
Trade spoke these words, viz. He is broken and run away, and will never return
again.

There was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and a Motion was now made in arrest of
Judgment, for that a Carpenter was not a Trade within the Statute of Bankrupts;
and a day being given to speak to it again,

Mr. Pollexfen argued, that before the Statutes made against Bankrupts words
spoken reflecting upon a man in his Trade were actionable even at the Common
Law, because it might be the occasion of the loss of his Livelihood; 1 Roll.
Abr. 59. pl. 6. Hutton 60.
and therefore it was actionable to say of a Scrivener, that he is broken and
run away, and dares not show his Face; and yet a Scrivener was not within the
Statutes of Bankrupcy before the Act of 21 Jac. therefore the Action must lie
at the Common Law, because words disparage him in his Trade.

But the Council for the Defendant said, that these words were not actionable,
for they do not tend to his disparagement, he may be broke and yet as good a
Carpenter as before.

The Case of one Hill in 2 Car. Latch. 114.
in this Court was much stronger than this; the words spoken of him were, viz.
Hill is a base broken Rascal, and has broken twice already, and I will make
him break the third time; the Plaintiff had Judgment, but it was arrested.

A Carpenter builds upon the Credit of other men, and so long as the words do
not touch him in the skill and knowledge of his Profession they cannot injure
him.

Chief Justice. The Credit which the Defendant has in the World may be a means
to support his skill, for he may not have an opportunity to show his
Workmanship without those Materials, for which he is entrusted.

The Judges were divided in Opinion, two against two, and so the Plaintiff had
his Judgment, there being no Rule made to stay it, so that he had his Judgment
upon his general Rule for Judgment; but if it had been upon a Demurrer or
Special Verdict, then it would have been adjourned to the Exchequer Chamber.

Goring versus Deering.
IN an Appeal for the Murder of Henry Goring Esquire; Auterfoits convict of
Manslaughter no good Plea in an Appeal for Murder.
brought by his Widow.

The Defendant pleaded that he was indicted for the said Murder at the
Sessions House in the Old Bailey in Middlesex, that he was found guilty of
Manslaughter, and not of Murder, prout patet per Recordum, that he was Clericus
and paratus fuit legere ut Clericus, if the Court would have admitted him, and
that he is the same person, etc.

To this Plea the Appellant demurred.

The truth of this Case was, that after the Conviction and before the Sentence
an Appeal was brought, so that the Defendant had not an opportunity to pray his
Book.

It was argued by Mr. Pollexfen for the Appellant, and by Sir George Treby for
the Appellee.

If the Statute of 3 H. 3 H. 7. c. 1.
7. was not in the way, this Plea might be a good Bar to the Appeal, because
before the making of that Law, Auterfoits convict, etc. had been a good Plea,
but now that Statute deprives the Defendant of that benefit; for it is enacted,
That if any man be acquitted of Murder at the King's Suit, or the Principal
attainted, the Wife or next Heir to him so slain, may take and have their
Appeal of the Murder within a year and a day after the said Murder done,
against the said persons so acquitted or attainted if they be alive, and the
Benefit of * Nota, At this time Clergy was allowed for Murder, but now taken
away by the Statute of 23 H. 8. c. 1. Hales Pl. Cor. 232.
Clergy before not had.

Now though the Party be neither acquitted or attainted, but is only convicted
of Manslaughter, yet the word Attaint in this Statute signifies the same with
Convict, and this appears by the penning of the Act in that Clause which
mentions the benefit of Clergy, viz.

That if any man be attainted of Murder the Heir shall have an Appeal if the
benefit of Clergy be not had.

Now an Attainder supposes a Conviction, for one is the consequence of the
other, and if it should not signify the same thing in this place, then that
Clause would be in vain, because if it should be taken for the Judgment given
upon the Conviction, then it is too late for the Party to have any benefit of
his Clergy.

Thus it was held in the second Resolution of Wrote and Wigg's Case that the
word Attaint in this very Act shall not be intended only of a person, who has
Judgment of Life, 4 Co. 46. a.
but also of one Convict by Confession or Verdict. It Is true, 2 Anders. 68.
it is said in that case and so likewise in Holecroft's Case that Auterfoits
convict of Manslaughter upon an Indictment of Murder is a good Bar to an Appeal
at the Common Law, as well as if the Clergy had been allowed; the reason may be
because in both those Cases the Judgments were by Confession, so that the Court
ought to have granted the Clergy; but this is a Conviction by Verdict which
alters the Case.

E contra. Auterfoits convict is a good Plea at the Common Law in all other
Cases (Treason only excepted) at this day.

it appears by the Statute of H. 7. that the year and day which was the time
allowed for the Appeal, and in which time the Kings Indictment could not be
tried was an usage, but not a Law, therefore that Act provides that the King
shall proceed upon the Indictment within the year and a day, and not stay for
the Appeal of the Party.

If the Party be attainted or acquitted, the Wife or next Heir shall have an
Appeal, but not if he be convicted.

But now admitting that the word Attaint has the same signification with the
word Convict, yet this is a good Plea both within the Words and the Equity of
the Statute.

This appears upon the Construction of that Law, which must be expounded
according to the vulgar Sense and signification of the words, and therefore
where the Statute says, That an Appeal lies where the benefit of Clergy is not
had ( is that it is not had de Jure) but the Clergy in this Case was de Jure,
and the Defendant was ready to read if he had been admitted thereunto by the
Court.

Thus is the Statute of Malbridge about the taking away of Wards, viz. Si
parents conqueruntur, that is, if they had cause to complain.

2. This Statute has been expounded according to Equity, for though it gives
an Appeal to the Wife or next Heir of him slain, yet if a Woman be killed, her
next of Kin shall bring an Appeal.

Therefore by the same Equity these words, viz. (The benefit of Clergy not had)
shall be construed had by the Grant of the Court; Co. Ent. 355.
for if a Man be indicted without the addition of Clerk, he cannot demand his
Clergy unless the Court ask him; but if he be indicted with that addition then
he may demand it, because it is supposed by the Court that he can read.

That this Appeal was not well brought these Exceptions were taken grounded
upon the Statute of Gloucester by which seven things are required in an Appeal
of Murder. 6 E. 1. ca. 9.


That the Appellor declare the Fact, the Year, the Day, the Hour, the Year of
the King, the Town where the Fact was done, and with what Weapon the Party was
slain.

Now in this Case there is a defect in two of the things required by that
Statute.

1. That of the Hour which is laid too general, for it is circa horam octavam,
which is not certain enough.

2. They have laid no Vill, for it is that the Defendant did assault the Husband
of the Appellant in Parochia Sancti Martini in Campis; now though that word
Parochia has crept into Fines and Recoveries and likewise into Indictments, it
must not be allowed in Appeals.

There may be several Vills in one Parish, and though this is ruled good in
Indictments it ought not to be so here, because of the difference between an
Indictment and an Appeal; Stamf. 80. b. Doct. and Stud. 48.
for in Indictments you need not mention the Hour, but it must be done in
Appeals.

A Parish is an Ecclesiastical Division, and though such may be a Vill, it is
not necessary Ex vi termini that it should be so.

But afterward in Trinity-Term 4 Jac. the Chief Justice delivered the Opinion
of all the Judges (except Justice Street) who were assembled for that purpose
at Serjeants-Inn, that this was no good Plea, and that the Court ought not to
ask the Prisoner what he had to say, and so to let him into the benefit of his
Clergy: Tamen quaere, for it is otherwise resolved.

The Company of Horners versus Barlow.
DEBT upon a By-Law wherein the Company set forth, A By-Law restrained to
London and not to extend farther.
that they were incorporated by Letters Patents of King Charles I. and were
thereby empowred to make Bylaws for the better Government of their
Corporation, and that the Master, Warden and Assistants of the Company made a
Law, viz. That two Men appointed by them should buy rough Horns for the
Company, and bring them to the Hall there to be distributed every Month by the
said Master, etc. for the use of the Company; and that no Member of the Company
should buy rough Horn within four and twenty miles of London but of those two
Men so appointed, under a Penalty to be imposed by the said Master, Warden,
etc. That the Defendant did buy a quantity of rough Horn contrary to the said
Law, etc.

There was Judgment in this Case by default.

And for the Defendant it was argued that this was not a good By-Law.

1. Because it does restrain Trade, 11 Co. 54. Hob. 210.
for the Company are to use no Horns but such as those two Men shall buy, and
if they should have occasion for more than those Men should buy, then it is
plain that Trade is thereby restrained.

2. The Master, etc. has reserved a power which they may use to oppress the
Poor, because they may make what Agreements they will amongst themselves, and
set unreasonable prices upon those Commodities, and let the younger sort of
Tradesmen have what quantity and at what rates they please.

To which it was answered by Sergeant Thompson.

First, This By-Law is for the encouragement of Trade, because the Horns are
equally to be distributed when brought to the Hall for the benefit of the whole
Company.

But the material Objection was, that this being a Company incorporated within
the City of London, they have not Jurisdiction elsewhere, but are restrained to
the City, and by consequence cannot make a By-Law which shall bind at the
distance of four and twenty miles; for if they could make a Law so extensive
they might by the same reason enlarge it all over England, and so make it as
binding as an Act of Parliament, and for this reason it was adjudged no good
By-Law.

Sir John Wytham versus Sir Richard Dutton.
ASsault and False Imprisonment, 14 October. 36 Car. 2. etc.

The Defendant as to the Assault before the 6th day of November pleads
Not-Guilty, and as to the False Imprisonment on the said 6th day of November in
the same year he made a special Justification, viz.

That 28 October. 32 Car. 2. etc. the King by his Letters Patents did appoint the
Defendant to be Captain general and Chief Governor of Barbados, and so sets
forth the Grant at large, by which he appoints twelve Men to be of the King's
Council during pleasure, of which the Plaintiff Wytham was one; that the
Defendant had also power by the advice of that Council to appoint and establish
Courts, Judges and Justices, and that the Copies of such Establishments must be
sent hither for the King's Assent, with power also to establish a
Deputy Governor; that by virtue of these Letters Patents the Defendant had
appointed Sir John Wytham to be Deputy Governor of the said Island in his
absence, and that he being so constituted did male and arbitrarie execute the
said Office.

That when the Defendant returned to Barbados, viz. 6 November. 35 Car. 2. he
called a Council, before whom the Plaintiff was charged with male
Administration in the absence of the Defendant, viz. That he did not take the
usual Oath for observing of Trade and Navigation; that he assumed the Title of
Lieutenant Governor, and that Decrees made in Court were altered by him in his
Chamber: Upon which it was then ordered that he should be committed to the
Provost Marshal, until discharged by Law, which was done accordingly; in whose
Custody he remained from the 6th day of November to the 20th of December
following which is the same Imprisonment, etc.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and the Defendant joined in Demurrer.

Mr. Pollexfen argued for the Plaintiff, and Sergeant Thompson for the
Defendant.

1. It was said for the Plaintiff, that the Causes of his Commitment (if any)
yet were such which they ought not meddle withal, because they relate to his
Mis-behaviour in his Government, for which he is answerable to the King alone.

But supposing they might have some cause for the committing of him, this ought
to be set forth in the Plea that the Plaintiff might answer it; for to say he
did not take the Oath of Deputy Governor in what concerned Trade and
Navigation is no cause of Commitment, because there was no Body to administer
that Oath to him, for he was Governor himself.

Then to allege that he did alter in his Chamber some Decrees made in the
Court of Chancery, that can be no cause of Commitment for the Governor is
Chancellor there.

Besides the Defendant does not show that any Body was injured by such
alterations, neither does he mention any particular Order but only in general,
so it is impossible to give an Answer to it.

2. He does not allege that the Plaintiff had made or done any of these
things, but that he was charged to have done it, and non constat whether upon
Oath or not.

The Governor has a large power given by these Letters Patents to make Laws
such as he by consent of a general Council shall enact. Ex part Def.


The Fact is set forth in the Plea, the Plaintiff was committed by virtue of an
Order of Council, until he was brought to a general Court of Oyer and Terminer
by which Court he was again committed.

That the Court had power to commit him is not denied, for the King is not
restrained by the Laws of England to govern that Island by any particular Law
whatsoever, and therefore not by the Common Law, but by what Law he pleases.

For those Islands were gotten by Conquest or by some of his Subjects going in
search of some prize and planting themselves there. Calvin 's Case.


The Plaintiff being then committed by an Order of Council till he should be
discharged by due course of Law, this Court will presume that his Commitment
was legal.

The Court were all of Opinion that the Plea was not good, so Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff; but afterward 5 Willielmi and Mariae this Judgment
was reversed by the House of Peers.

Sir Robert Jefferies versus Watkins.
THIS was an Action brought for a Duty to be paid for weighing of Goods at the
Common Beam of London, Verdict cures a defective Declaration.
setting forth that the Lord Mayor, etc. time out of mind kept a common Beam
and Weights, and Servants to attend the weighing of Goods. That the Defendant
bought Goods, etc. but did not bring them to the Beam to be weighed per quod
proficuum amisit.

Upon Not-Guilty pleaded there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and it was
moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Plaintiff had not brought himself within
the Prescription, for he does not say that the Defendant sold the Goods by
Weight, and this is a fault which is not helped by a Verdict.

This had been certainly naught upon a Demurrer, and being substance is not
aided by this Verdict.

This is Substance, for the Duty appears to be wholly in respect of the Weights
which are kept; now Weighing being the Principal, and it being no where
alleged that the Goods were weighed elsewhere, or that they were such which
are usually sold by Weight, then there is no need of bringing of them to the
Beam.

If one prescribes to a Common, and does not say for Cattle Levant and
Couchant, the Prescription is not good.

This being the consideration of the Duty it ought to be precisely alleged, as
in an Assumpsit, where the Plaintiff declared that in consideration that the
Defendant owed him 40 l. he promised to pay it ante inceptionem proximi
itineris to London, Yelv. 175. 2 Cro. 245.
and alleged that such a day incepit iter suum ad London', but for omitting
the Word proxime Judgment was arrested after Verdict, because the Duty did
arise upon the commencement of his next Journey.

The true reason why any thing is helped by Verdict is for that the thing shall
be presumed to be given in Evidence at the Trial.

Mr. E contra.
Pollexfen contra. Here is enough set forth in the Plea to show that the Goods
were not weighed, and it must be given in Evidence at the Trial that they were
sold contrary to the Custom, which is the only Offense to be proved.

The want of Averment that the Goods sold by the Defendant were not weighed
shall not vitiate this Declaration after a Verdict.

To prove this some Authorities were cited, Cro. Eliz. 458. 2 Cro. 44. Siderfin
218. Palmer 360. Cro. Car. 497.
as where in Trespass the Defendant justified for Common by Prescription for
Beasts Levant and Couchant, and that he put in his Beasts utendo Communia;
Issue was taken upon the Prescription and found for the Defendant; now though
he did not averr that the Cattle were Levant and Couchant, yet it was held that
it was cured by a Verdict.

And of this Opinion were three Judges now; but Justice Allybon differed, for
says he if this Declaration should be good after a Verdict then a Verdict will
cure any fault in Pleading.

Judgment for the Plaintiff.

Prowse versus Wilcox.
AN Action on the Case for scandalous Words. Words spoken of a Justice of the
Peace where actionable.
The Plaintiff declared that he was a Justice of the Peace for the County of
Somerset; that there was a Rebellion in the West by the Duke of Monmouth and
others, that search was made for the Defendant, being suspected to be concerned
in that Rebellion, and that the Defendant thereupon spoke these words of the
Plaintiff, viz.

John Prowse is a Knave, and a busy Knave for searching after me and other
honest Men of my sort, and I will make him give me satisfaction for plundering
me.

There was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and the Judgment being stayed till the
Return of the Postea,

Mr. Pollexfen moved that the Plaintiff might have his Judgment, because the
Words are actionable, 1 Roll. Abr. 59. pl. 3.
for they touched him in his Office of a Justice of a Peace.

It was objected (to stay the Judgment) that the Words were improper, and
therefore could not be actionable.

But admitting them so to be, yet if they in any wise reflect upon a Man in a
public Office they will bear an Action.

Shore contra. The Plaintiff does not lay any Colloquium of him as a Justice of
the Peace, or that the words were spoken of him relating to his Office, or the
Execution thereof, and therefore an Action will not lie though, an * Vid. antea
Rex versus Darby. 2 Cro. 315.
Information might have been proper against him.

If a Man should call another Lewd Fellow; and that he set upon him in the
Highway, and took his Purse from him, an Action will not lie, because he does
not directly charge him with Felony or Robbery.

The Court were divided in Opinion, two against two, so the Plaintiff had his
Judgment.

Boil versus Boil.
A Libel was in the Spiritual Court against a Woman causa jactitationis
Maritagii. Prohibition granted.


The Woman suggests that this person was indicted at the Sessions in the
Old-Bayly for marrying of her (he then having a Wife living) contra formam
Statuti; Godb. Rep. Can. 507. Hales 121. 1 Jac. cap. 11. Sid. 171.
that he was thereupon convicted and had Judgment to be burned in the Hand, so
that being tried by a Jury and a Court which had a Jurisdiction of the cause
and the Marriage found, a Prohibition was prayed.

Sergeant Levinz moved for a Consultation, because no Court, but the
Ecclesiastical Court, can examine a Marriage; for in the Dower Writ is always
directed to the Bishop to certify the lawfulness of the Marriage; and if this
Woman should bury this Husband and bring a Writ of Dower, and the Heir plead Ne
unques accouple, etc. this Verdict and Conviction shall not be given in
Evidence to prove the illegality of the Marriage, but the Writ must go to the
Bishop.

This is proved by the Case of Emerton and Hide in this Court. The Man was
married in fact, and his Wife being detained from him (she being in the Custody
of Sir Robert Viner) brought an Habeas Corpus; she came into the Court, but my
Lord Hales would not deliver the Body, but directed an Ejectment upon the
Demise of John Emerton and Bridget his Wife, that the Marriage might come in
question. It was found a Marriage; and afterward at an Hearing before the
Delegates, this Verdict was not allowed to be given in Evidence, because in
this Court one Jury may find a Marriage and another otherwise; so that it
cannot be tried whether they are legally married by a Temporal Court. It Is
true, this Court may control the Ecclesiastical Courts, but it must be eodem
genere.

E contra. E contra.
It was said that if a Prohibition should not go then the Authority of those
two Courts would interfere, which might be a thing of ill consequence: If the
lawfulness of this Marriage had been first tried in the Court Christian the
other Court at the Old-Bayly would have given Credit to their Sentence.

But that Court has been prohibited in a Case of the like nature, 2 Cro. 535.
for a Suit was there commenced for saying, That he had a Bastard.

The Defendant alleged that the Plaintiff was adjudged the reputed Father of a
Bastard by two Justices of the Peace according to the Statute, and so justified
the speaking of the words, and this being refused there, a Prohibition was
granted, and so it was in this Case by the Opinion of three Judges.

Dr. Hedges a Civilian, being present in the Court said, that Marriage or no
Marriage never came in question in their Court upon a Libel for Jactitation,
unless the Party replies a lawful Marriage, and that the Spiritual Court ought
not to be silenced by a Proof of a Marriage de facto in a Temporal Court; for
all Marriages ought to be de jure, of which their Courts had the proper
Jurisdiction.

Sir John Newton versus Francis Creswick.
IN an Action on the Case, Plea, where it amounts to the general Issue.
wherein the Plaintiff declared that the Defendant exhibited a Peittion against
him, and Sir R. H. before the King in Council, by reason whereof he was
compelled to appear at his great Expense, and that he was afterward discharged
of the matter alleged against him, which was the erecting of Cottages in
Kingswood Chase in the County of Gloucester.

This Action was first laid in Gloucestershire, and the Defendant moved that it
might be laid in Middlesex where the Petition was exhibited.

But it was insisted for the Plaintiff, that where a cause of Action arises in
two places he has his Election to lay it in either.

The Court held that the exhibiting of the Petition was the ground of the
Action, and though it contained matter done in another place, yet it shall be
tried in the County where the Petition was delivered; for suppose the Petition
had contained Matter done beyond Sea, etc.

Now in this Case the Action being brought in Middlesex the Defendant pleaded
that the Chase was injured by the erecting the said Cottages, by the digging of
Pits, and by the making of a Warren by Sir John Newton, and that the other
person Sir R. H. being then a Justice of the Peace for the County of Gloucester
upon Complaint to him made did not impose Penalties upon the Offenders, but did
abet the said Plaintiff, by reason whereof the Deer were decreased from 1000
head to 400.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred.

Mr. Pollexfen argued against the Plea, first that it charged Sir R. H. with no
particular Crime, but enlarges the Matter upon the Plaintiff, and amounts to
no more than the general Issue; for the Question is whether the Defendant has
fasly prosecuted the Plaintiff before the King in Council, which is only matter
of fact, and which is charged upon the Defendant, and therefore he ought to
have pleaded Not-Guilty.

It Is true, where the Defense consists in matters of Law there the Defendant
may plead specially, but where it is purely fact the general Issue must be
pleaded.

E contra. E contra.
It was insisted upon that what is alleged in this Plea might be given in
Evidence upon the general Issue, but the Defendant may likewise plead it
specially, and not trust the Matter to the Lay-gents.

As in Conspiracy for procuring of the Plaintiff to be falsely and maliciously
indicted of a Robbery; Cro. Eliz. 871, 900. 21 E. 3.17. 27 Ass. 12. Kelway 81.
Moor 600. Rast. Ent. 123. Sed nota, This Defense was matter of Law.
the Defendants plead that they were robbed, and suspecting the Plaintiff to be
guilty procured a Warrant in order to have the Plaintiff examined before a
Justice of the Peace, of which he had notice, and absented himself, but was
afterward committed to the Gaol by a Judge of this Court who advised them to
prefer a Bill of Indictment, etc. quae est eadem conspiratio; this was
adjudged a good Plea, though it amounted to no more than the general Issue, and
all this matter might have been given in Evidence at the Trial.

The Court, except Justice Allybon, advised the Plaintiff to waive his
Demurrer, and the Defendant to plead the general Issue.

But Justice Allybon took an Exception to the Declaration for that the
Plaintiff had not alleged any damnification, but only that he was compelled to
appear, and does not show how, either by the Petition of the Defendant, or by
Summons, etc.

He ought to set forth that he was summoned to appear before the King in Order
to his discharge, but to say coactus fuit comparere is uncertain, for that
might be in the vindication of his Honor or Reputation.

He complains of a Petition exhibited against him which the Defendant has
answered by showing to the Court sufficient matter which might reasonably
induce him so to to; and for that reason he held the Plea to be good. Sed
adjornatur.

Rex versus Hockenhul.
AN Information was exhibited against him for a Riot, Misprision of a Clerk
amended.
of which he was found guilty, and this Exception was taken in arrest of
Judgment.

Memorandum quod ad general' quarterial' Session' Pacis tent' etc. die Sabbati
prox' post quindenam Sancti Martini praesentat' existit quod the Defendant 27
die Januarii in such a year vi and armis etc. So the Fact is laid after the
Indictment, which was exhibited against the Defendant at the Michaelmas
Sessions, and the Fact is laid to be in January following in the same year.

But the Attorney General said this was only a Misprision of the Clerk in
titling the Record, viz. in the Memorandum, 8 Co. 156. 4 H. 6.16. 10 Ass. 26.
Cro. Car. 144.
and there was no fault in the Body of the Information, and that it was
amendable at the Common Law: He cited some Cases to prove where amendments have
been in the Cases of Subjects of greater Mistakes than here, a fortiori it
ought to be amended in the King's Case.

It Is not only amendable at the Common Law; 4 H. 6. c. 3. 8 H. 6. c. 12. Jones
421.
but by several Statutes which extend to all Misprisions of Clerks, except
Treason, Felony and Outlawry, wherefore this mistake of Quinden' Martini was
amended and made Quinden' Hillarii.

Rex versus Sellars.
THE Defendant was indicted at the Sessions in London for not attending at the
Wardmote Inquest being chosen of the Jury for such a year. Indictment quashed.


To this Indictment he pleaded the King's Grant to the Company of Cooks, of
which he was a Member, by which Grant that Company is exempted from being put
or summoned upon a Jury or Inquest before the Mayor or Sheriffs or Coroner of
London, etc.

And upon a Demurrer the Question was, whether the Cooks are discharged by this
Grant from their Attendance at the said Wardmote Inquest.

And for the King it was argued that they are not discharged.

Before the Judgment upon the Quo Warranto brought against the City of London
these Courts there were like the Hundred Courts in the County; for as these
were derived out of the County, 4 Inst. 249.
so those were derived from the Lord Mayor's Court, which is a Court of Record,
and erected for the better Government of the City, and the Aldermen of every
Ward had right to hold Leets there.

1. But now the words of this Grant do not extend to this Case, for the Cooks
are thereby discharged only from being of a Jury before the Mayor, Sheriffs or
Coroner, etc. but the Court of Wardmote is held before neither, for it is held
before the Alderman of the Ward.

2. Dyer 269.
The words in this Grant ought to be taken strictly, viz. that Cooks shall be
exempted if there be other sufficient Men in the Ward to serve besides, and if
this does not appear the Grant is void; but this is not alleged.

E contra. E contra.
As to the first Exception it was said that the Wardmote Court was held before
the Mayor, for the Iuries there are not to try any Matter, but only to make
Presentiments which are carried before the Mayor.

Exceptions were taken against the Indictment, which was for not serving at a
Wardmote Inquest for such a year.

1. Because it is a thing not known at the Common Law that a Man should be of a
Jury for a whole year.

The Indictment was that the Defendant was an Inhabitant of such a place, and
elected a Jury Man.

2. But does not say that he ought to hold the Office to which he was elected.

It was quashed.

Calthrop versus Axtel.
THE Husband being seized in Fee had Issue two Daughters, Ejectment upon the
Statute of Ph. and Mar. for marrying under 16 without the Parents Consent.
Antea Hicks versus Gore.
and dyed, his Wife survived, who was then by Law Guardian in Socage to her
Children; one of which under the Age of sixteen years married one Mr. B.
without her Mother's Consent, by reason whereof her Estate became forfeited
during life to her Sister by virtue of the Statute of 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. who
now brought an Ejectment which was tried at the Bar.

The Mother was produced as a Witness at this Trial against the married
Daughter, but it was objected against her that she was Tenant in Possession of
the Lands in question under her other Daughter, that some part of the Estate
was in Houses, and that she had made Leases thereof to several Tenants for 99
years, etc. and covenanted with the Lessees, that she together with the
Infants, when of Age, shall and will join to do any ^^^rther Act for the quiet
enjoyment thereof; therefore this is like the Case of a Bailiff or Steward, who
if they put themselves under such Covenants shall never be admitted as
Witnesses in any Cause where the Title of such Lands shall come in question.

The Proofs that the Mother did not consent were, That she made Affidavit of
the whole matter, and got the Lord Chief Iustice's Warrant to search Mr. B's.
Houss for her Daughter, and upon application made to my Lord Chancellor she
obtained a Writ of Ne exeat Regnum, and got a Homine replegiando, and gave
notice of the Fact in the Gazett, and exhibited an Information in the Crown
Office against Mr. B. and his Father and his Maid.

Attorney General contra. E contra.
The Preamble of this Act will be a Guide in this Case, which is, For that
Maids of great Substance in Goods, etc. or having Lands in Fee have by Rewards
and Gifts been allowed to contract Matrimony with unthrifty persons, and
thereupon have been conveied from their Parents by sleight or force, etc.

Then it enacts, That no person shall convey away a Maid under 16 years without
her Parents Consent; which Assent is not necessary within the meaning of this
Act, unless the Child be taken away either by sleight or force, which must be
proved.

The Mother was no good Guardian to these Children, for she did set up one G.
to be a Curator for her Daughter in the Spiritual Court to call her self to an
account for the personal Estate of which her Husband died possessed, she having
given Security to exhibit a true Inventory.

This Account was stated in the Prerogative Court between her and the Curator
to 300 l. only, for which she gave Bond, when in truth the Personal Estate was
worth more, and afterward obtained a Decree in Chancery, thinking thereby to
bind the interest of the Infants.

In this Case it was said, that there must be a continued refusal of the
Mother, for if she once agree, though afterward she disassent, yet it is an
assent within the Statute: There must likewise be proof of the stealing away.

Obrian versus Ram. Mich. 3 Jac. 2. Rot. 192.
Angl' ss. Entry of a Writ of Error out of Ireland.
DOminus Rex mandavit praedilecto and fideli Conciliario suo Willielmo Davis
Militi Capitali Justic. suo ad placita in Curia ipsius Domini Regis coram ipso
Rege in Regno suo Hiberniae tenend' assign' Breve suum Clausum in haec verba.
ss. Jacobus secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex
Fidei defensor etc. pradilecto and fideli Conciliario nostro Willielmo Davis
Militi Capital' Justic' nostro ad placita in Curia nostra coram nobis in Regno
nostro Hiberniae tenend' assign' salutem Quia in Recordo and Processu acetiam
in redditione Judicii loquelae quae fuit in Curia nostra coram nobis in praed.
Regno nostro Hiberniae per Billam inter Abel Ram Mil. nuper dict. Abel Ram de
Civitate Dublin Alderman' and Elizabetham Gray de Civitate Dublin Viduam de
quodam debito quod idem Abel a praefat' Elizabetha exigebat Quae quidem
Elizabetha postea cepit Donnough Obrian Armigerum in virum suum and obiit
Necnon in adjudications executions ejusdem Judicij super Breve nr^um de Scire
Fac^ extra eandem Curiam nostram coram nobis emanen' versus ipsum praed. In
adjudicatione Executionis super Scire Fac.
Donnogh in loquela praed. ut dicitur Error intervenit manifestus ad grave
dampnum ipsius Donnogh sicut ex querela sua accepimus Nos Error si quis fuerit
modo debito corrigi and partibus praed. plenam and celerem justiciam fieri
volentes in hac part vobis mandamus qd' si judicium in loquela praed' reddit'
ac adjudicationem executionis judicii praed. super breve nostrum de Scire fac^
praed. adjudicat^ tunc record' and process. tam loquel' quam adjudicationis
executionis judicii praed' cum omnibus ea tangen' nobis sub sigillo vestro
distinct and aperte mittatis and hoc Breve ita qd' ea habeamus in Crastino
Ascentionis Domini ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Angl' Ut inspect' record' and
process. praed' ulterius inde pro Errore illo corrigendo Fieri fac' quod de
jure fuerit faciend' Et Scire fac. praefat' Abel qd' tunc sit ibi ad procedend'
in loquela praed' and faciend' ulterius and recipiend' quod dicta Curia
consideraverit in praemissis Test meipso apud Westminster. xxii Januarii Anno Regni
nostri secundo.

Price.

Record' and Process. The Return.
loquelae unde infra fir mentio cum omnibus ea tangen' coram Dno. Rege
ubicunque etc. ad diem and locum infracontent' mitto in quodam Record' huic
Brevi annex' and Scire feci Abel Ram qd' tunc sit ibi ad procedend' in loquela
praed. prout interius mihi praecipitur.

Respons' W. Davis.

Placita coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts de Termino Sanctae Trinitatis
Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and
Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensoris etc. vicesimo nono Test Johanne Povey Mil.
Savage and Rives.

Com. Civitat. Dublin ss. Memorandum quod die Veneris prox. Declaration in Debt
upon a Bond.
post Crastinum Sanctae Trinitatis isto eodem Termino coram Domino Rege apud
the Kings Courts ven' Abel Ram de Civitate Dublin Alderman' per Faustin'
Cuppaidge Attornatum suum Et protulit hic in Cur' dict' Domini Regis tunc
ibidem quadam Billam suam versus Elizabetham Gray de Civitate Dublin Viduam in
Custod. Maresc. etc. de placito debiti Et sunt pleg' de prosequend' Johannes
Do and Richardus Roe quae quidem Billa se quitur in haec verba ss. Com.
Civitat. Dublin ss. Abel Ram de Civitate Dublin Aldermannus queritur de
Elizabetha Gray de Civitate Dublin Vidua in Custodia Maresc. Marescal. Domini
Regis coram ipso Rege existen' de placito qd' reddat ei octingent. libras bonae
and legalis monetae Angliae quas ei debet and injuste detinet pro eo videlicet
qd' cum praed' Elizabetha vicesimo tertio die Junij Anno Domini millesimo
sexcentisimo septuagesimo sexto Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi vicesimo
octavo apud Civitat' Dublin praedict. in Parochia Sancti Michaelis Archangeli
in Warda Sancti Michaelis in Comitatu ejusdem Civitatis per quoddam scriptum
suum obligatorium sigillo ipsius Elizabethae sigillat' Curiaeque dicti Domini
Regis nunc hic ostens' cujus dat' est eisdem die and anno cogn' se teneri and
firmiter obligari praefat. Abel in praed. octingent. libris sterling' solvend'
eidem Abel cum inde requisit' fuisset Praedicta tamen Elizabetha licet saepius
requisit' praedict. octingent. libras sterling' eidem Abel nondum solvit sed
ill. ei hucusque solvere recusavit and adhuc recusat ad dampnum ipsius Abel
centum libr. sterling' Et inde producit sectam etc.

Et praedicta Elizabetha per Walterum Chamberlain Attornatum suum venit and
defendit vim and injuriam quando etc. Judgment by Cognovit actionem.
Et dicit qd' ipsa non potest dedicere actionem praed. Abel praedict. nec quin
scriptum praed. sit factum suum nec quin ipsa debet praefat' Abel praedict.
octingent. libras modo and forma prout praed. Abel superius versus eam queritur
Ideo considerat' est quoth. praed. Abel recuperet versus praefat. Elizbaetham
debitum suum praed. nec non tres libras undecim solid. and sex denar. sterling'
pro dampnis suis quae sustin' tam occasion detentionis debiti illius quam pro
mis. and custag' suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' eidem
Abel per Curiam dicti Domini Regis nunc hic ex assensu suo adjudicata Et praed.
Tisdale.
Elizabetha in misericordia etc.

Placita coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts de Termino Paschae Anno Regni
Domini nostri Jacobi Secundi Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hyberniae
Regis Fidei defensoris etc. secundo Test. Willielmo Davis Mil. Savage and Rives.

Dominus Rex mandavit Vic' Com. The Scire Fac. against Baron after the
Marriage, and death of his Wife.
Civitat. Dublin Breve suum Clasum in haec verba ss. Jacobus Secundus Dei
gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei defensor etc. Vic. Com.
Civitat. Dublin salutem Cum Abel Ram de Civitat. Dublin Aldermannus nuper
scilicet Termino Sanctae Trinitatis Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi Dei gratia
nuper Regis Angliae etc. Fratris nostro praecharissimi vicesimo nono in Cur.
ipsius nuper Regis coram ipso nuper Rege apud the Kings Courts per Billam sine
Brevi dicti nuper Domini Regis ac per Judicium ejusdem Curiae recuperasset
versus Elizabetham Gray de Civitat. Dublin Vidua tam quoddam debitum octingent.
libr. bonae and legalis monetae Angliae quam tres libras undecim solid. and sex
denar. consmilis monetae pro dampnis suis quae sustin' tam occasion
detentionis debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag' suis per ipsum circa sectam
suam in hac part apposit' unde convict' est sicut nobis constat de Recordo ac
post recuperationem Judicij praed. praed. Elizabetha cepit in virum suum
quendam Donatum Obrian Armigerum ac postea scilicet Termino Sanctae Trinitatis
Anno Regni dci. Domini nuper Regis tricesimo primo in Curia ipsius Dni. Regis
coram ipso nuper Rege per considerationem ejusdem Curiae adjudicat' fuisset quoth.
praed. Abel Ram haberet executionem suam versus praefat' Donatum Obrian and
Elizabetham uxorem ejus de debito and dampnis praed. juxta vim formam and
effectum recuperationis and adjudicationis praedict. Executio tamen tam Judicij
praed. quam adjudicationis praed. adhuc restat faciend. ac post adjudicationem
praed. praed. Elizabetha obiit and praed. Donat' Orbian eam supervixit prout ex
insinuatione ipsius Abel qui post recuperationem and adjudicationem praed.
ordin' Militis super se suscepit in Curia nostra coram nobis accepimus unde
idem Abel nobis supplicavit sibi de remedio congruo in hac part adhiberi and
nos eidem Abel in hac part fieri volentes quod est justum vobis praecipimus
quoth. Ordinem Militis suscepit.
per probos and legales homines de Balliva vestra Scire fac. praefat. Donat.
Obrian qd' sit coram nobis apud the Kings Courts die Mercurii prox. post
Quinden' Paschae ostens' si quid pro se habeat vel dicere sciat quare praed.
Abel Ram executionem suam versus eum de debito and dampnis mis. and custag.
praed. habere non debeat juxta vim formam and effectum recuperation' and
adjudication' praed. si sibi viderit expedir. and ulterius factur' and receptur
quod Curia nostra coram nobis de eo adtunc and ibidem cons. in hac part and
habeatis ibi nomina eorum per quos ei Scire Fac. and hoc Breve Test Willielmo
Davis Milite apud le Kings Courts duodecimo die Februarij Anno Regni nostri
secundo.

Ad quem diem coram dicto Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts, The Return of the
Sheriff.
ven. praed. Abel Ram in propria persona sua and Vic' videlt. Richardus French
and Edwardus Rose Ar. retorn' quoth. praed. Donatus Obrian nihil habet in balliva
sua per quod ei Scire fac. potuissent nec fuit invent. in eadem and praed.
Donatus Obrian non venit Ideo sicut prius praecept. est eisdem Vic. pd. Alias
Sci. fa. awarded.
per probos etc. Scire fac. praefati Donato Obrian quoth. sit coram Domino Rege
apud le Kings Courts die Mercurij prox' post quinque septimanas Paschae ad
ostend. in forma praed. si etc. Ulterius etc. Idem dies dat. est praefat. Abel
Ram ibidem etc.

Ad quem diem coram dicto Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts ven. praed.
Sheriffs Return.
Abel per Faustinum Cuppaidge Attornatum suum and praefat. Vic. ut prius
retorn. quoth. praefat. Donatus Obrian nihil habet in balliva sua per quod ei
scire facere potuissent nec est invent. in eadem super quo praed. Donat. The
Defendant appears and pleads another Sci. fa. against himself and Wife.
Obrian per Johannem Morris Attornatum suum ven. and defend. vim and injuriam
quando, etc. Et dicit quoth. praed. Abel Ram executionem suam versus eum de debito
and dampnis praed. habere non debet quia dicit quoth. praed. Abel Ram alias super
recuperationem and adjudicationem praed. tulit breve Domini Caroli Secundi
nuper Regis Angliae, etc. tunc Vic. dicti nuper Regis Com. Civit. Dublin
direct. ad praemuniend' ipsum Donat. Obrian and dictam Elizabetham tunc Uxorem
ejus ad essend' coram ipso nuper Rege apud le Kings Courts die Sabbati prox.
post Quinden. Sancti Martini tunc dicti nuper Regis tricesimo sexto ad ostend'
si quid ipsi idem Donat. and Elizabetha tunc Uxor ejus pro se haberent aut
dicere scirent quare praed. Abel Ram executionem suam versus eos de debito and
dampnis praed. non haberet juxta vim and formam recuperationis praed. si sibi
vidissent expedir' Et ad diem ill' coram ipso nuper Rege apud the Kings Courts,
praed. ven. praed. Abel Ram in propria persona sua and praed. Donat. Obrian and
Elizabetha Uxor ejus solempnit. exact' non ven. and Johannes Coin and Samuel
Walton Ar' tunc Vic. Com. Retorn' vic.
Civit. praed. super breve praed. eis per nomen Vic Com. Civitat. Dublin
direct' retornaver' quoth. praed. Donat. Obrian and Elizabetha tunc Uxor ejus
nihil habuer' in balliva sua super quo eis Scire fac. potuissent neque fuer'
invent. Alias Sci fa.
in eadem balliva and ideo sicut alias praecept. fuit eisdem. Vic. quoth. per
probos and legales homines etc. Scire Fac. praefat. Donat. Obrian. and
Elizabethae quoth. essent coram dicto nuper Rege apud le Kings Courts praed. die
Mercurij prox' post Octab. Sancti Hillarij tunc prox' futur. ad ostend. si quid
pro se haberent vel dice scirent quare praed. Abel executionem suam versus eos
de debito and dampnis praed. non haberet in forma praed. and idem dies dat.
fuit praefat. Abel Ram ibidem, etc. Et eodem die ill' coram dicto nuper Rege
apud the Kings Courts praed. ven. praed. Abel per praed' Fustinum Cuppaidge
Attornatum suum and praefat. tunc Vic. retornaver. super breve de al. Scire
fac. eis in forma praed. direct. quoth. praed. Donat. and Elizabetha nihil habuer.
in balliva sua per quod eis Scire fac. potuissent neque fuer' invent. in eadem
and praed. Abel Ram obtulit se quarto die placiti versus praefat. The Baron and
Feme appear and plead that Execution was levied upon the Judgment by a Fieri.
fac.
Donat. and Elizabetham and super hoc iidem Donat. and Elizabetha per Henr.
Daniel tunc eorum Attorn. ven. and dixer. quoth. praefat. Abel Ram executionem
suam versus eos de debito and dampnis praed. habere non debuit quia dixer. quoth.
praedict. Abel Ram infra unum Annum post recuperationem and adjudicationem
praed. prosecut. fuit breve Domini tunc Regis tunc Vic. Com. Civit. Dublin
direct. de Fire. fac. de bonis and catallis ipsorum Donat. and Elizabethe
debitum and dampna praed. and ill habere coram dicto nuper Rege die Mercurij
prox. post Quinden. Pasch' prox. post. recuperationem and adjudicium praedict.
ad reddend. praefat. Abel Ram pro debito and dampnis praed. and dixer. quoth.
iidem tunc Vic. virtute ejusdem brevis apud Civit. Dublin in Paroch. Sancti
Michaelis in Com. ejusdem Civitat. levaver. debitum and dampna praed. de bonis
and catallis ipsorum Donat. and Elizabethe etc. Et ideo petier. judicionem si
praed. Abel executionem suam de debito and dampnis praed. versus eos iterum
habere deberet. Et postea scilicet die Sabbati prox' post Crastin' Ascentionis
Domini tunc prox' futur. coram dicto tunc Rege apud le Kings Courts, Relicta
verificatione placiti.
praed. vener. prates praed. per Attorn. suos praed. and super hoc iidem
Donatus and Elizabetha per Henr. Daniel Attornatum suum praed. reliquer'
verificationem placiti sui praed. Judgment thereupon.
and ideo adtunc and ibidem cons. fuit quoth. praed. Abel haberet executionem suam
versus prefat. Donat. and Elizabetham de debito and dampnis praed. juxta vim
formam and effectum recuperationis and adjudicationis praedict. and super hoc
idem Abel obtinuit executionem ill. versus ipsos Donat. and Elizabetham and
praed. Donat. in facto dic. qd' praed. debitum and dampna praed. de quibus sic
adjudicat. fuit quoth. praed. Abel haberet executionem suam praed. in forma praed.
sunt eadem debitum and dampna mentionat. in dict. brevibus de Scire fac. versus
ipsum Donat. nunc latis and non alia neque diversa and quoth. dict' recuperatio
eadem quam sic adjudicat fuit est eadem recuperatio and adjudicatio mentionat.
in dict' Brevibus de Scire fac. versus ipsum Donat. in forma praed. latis and
non alia neque diversa and hoc idem Donatus parat. est verificare unde ex quo
nulla fit mentio considerationis and adjudicationis praedict. in dict' Brevibus
de Scire fac. idem Donatus Obrian pet. Judicium si Cur' hic al. executionem
super recuperationem and adjudicationem praed. in dict' nunc Brevibus de Scire
fac. mentionat. adjudicari debeat, etc.

Et praed. Abel Ram dic' quoth. praed. placitum praed. Donat. Demurrer.
Obrian superius placitat, materiaque in eodem content. minus sufficiens in
lege existit ad ipsum Abel Ram ab executione sua praed. versus ipsum Donat.
habend precludend' quodque ipse ad placitum ill' necesse non habet nec per
legem terrae tenetur respondere and hoc parat. est verificare unde pet.
judicium and executionem suam de debito and dampnis praed. versus ipsum Donat.
sibi adjudicari and pro causa moration. in lege super placitum ill. idem Abel
ostend. and Cur. hic monstrat causam subsequen. videlicet eo quoth. dict' Donat.
in placito praed. allegat quoth. praed. Abel per cons. Special Causes.
Cur. Domine Regis hic obtinuit executionem versus praefat. Donat. and
Elizabetham de debito and dampnis praed. and non dicit se illud probatur. per
Record' prout dicere debuit.

Et praed. Donatus Obrian per Attorn. suum praed. dic' quoth. Joynder in Demurrer.
placitum praed. materiaque ineodem content. bon' and sufficien' in lege
existunt a ipsum Abel ad exedutionem suam versus ipsum Donat. habend. precludi
quamquidem materiam praed. Abel non dedicit nec ad eam a liqualit. respond. Et
hoc pat. est verificare unde ut prius praed. Donatus petit judicium and quoth.
praed. Continuances.
Abel ab executione sua praed. versus ipsum Donat. habend' precludatur etc. Et
quia Cur. Domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super praemissis reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat. est partibus praed. coram dicto Domino Rege
apud the Kings Courts, usque diem Veneris prox' post Crastin. Sanctae Trinitat.
extunc prox' sequen' de Judicio suo de and super premissis audiend', etc. Eo
quoth. Cur. dicti Domini Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram dicto
Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts, ven' parts praed. per Attorn. suos praed.
Et quia Cur. dicti Domini Regis de Judicio suo de and super praemissis reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat. est partibus praed. coram dicto Domino Rege
apud le Kings Courts usque diem Sabbati prox' post Crastin' Animarum extunc.
prox' sequen' de Judicio de and super praemissis audiend' etc. eo quoth. Cur.
Domini Regis hic inde nondum, etc. Ad quem diem coram dicto Domino Rege apud le
Kings Courts ven. parts praed. per Attorn' suos praed. Et quia Cur. dicti
Domini Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super prmissis reddend' nondum advisatur
dies inde dat. est partibus praed. coram dicto Domino Rege apud le Kings Courts
usque diem Lunae prox' post Octab. Sancti Hillarij extunc prox' sequen' de
Judicio suo de and super praemissis audiend' eo quoth. Cur' dicti Domini Regis hic
inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem coram dicto Domino Rege apud le Kings Courts
vener' parts praed. per Attorn' suos praed. super pro visis and per Cur' dicti
Domini Regis hic plen. Judgment quoth. habeat executionem.
intellectis omnibus and singulis praemiss. maturaque deliberatione inde habita
videtur Cur' dicti Domini Regis hic quoth. placitum praed. praedicti Donat. modo
and forma praed. placitat. and materia in eodem content. minus sufficien' in
lege existunt ad ipsum Abel Ram ab executione sua praed. versus ipsum Donat.
habend' praecludend' Ideo cons. est quoth. praed. Abel Ram habeat executionem suam
versus praefat' Donat. de debito and dampnis praed. juxta vim formam and
effectum recuperationis and adjudicationis praed. etc.

ss. Error assigned.
Postea scilicet die Lunae prox' post tres septimanas Sancti Michaelis isto
eodem Termino coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven' praed. Donat. Obrian per
Johannem Hancock Attorn' suum Et dic' pd. in Record' and Process. praed.
acetiam in adjudicatione execution. Judicij praed. manifest. est errat. in hoc
videlt' quod per Recordum praed' apparet quoth. adjudicatio executionis in Record'
praed. in forma praed. reddit. reddit. fuit pro praefat' Abel versus eundem
Donat. ubi per legem Hiberniae praed. nulla adjudicatio execution. Judicij
illius reddi debuisset pro praefat' Abel versus eundem Donat. ideo in eo
manifest. est Errat. Errat. est etiam in his quoth. Diminution alleged.
per Record' praed. tunc. hic missum duminut. existist in non certificando duo
Brevia dicti Domini Caroli Secundi nuper Regis Angli etc. Vic. dicti nuper
Regis Com. Civit. Dublin direct. ad praemuniend' praed. Donat. Obrian and
praed. Elizabetham Uxor. ejus ad essend. coram ipso nuper Rege apud le Kings
Courts Dublin praed. ad ostend. causam quare praefat. Abel executionem versus
eos de debito and dampnis praed. non haberet aceciam in non certificando
process. and Judic. superinde quia in adjudicatione executionis superinde
adjudicatio ill. reddit. fuit pro praefat. Abel versus praed. Donat. and
Elizabetham Uxorem ejus ubi per legem Hiberniae nulla adjudicatio execution'
Judicij praed. reddi debuisset pro preaefat' Abel versus ipsos Donatum and
Elizabetham Uxorem ejus aceciam in non certificando causam vel rationem super
Recordnm allegat quare Brevia praed. emanarent versus praefat. Donatum and
Elizabetham Et in his manifest. est erratum Et pet. idem Donat. breve Domini
Regis praedilecto and fideli Consiliario dicti Domini Regis Thome Nugent Ar. A
Cerciorari prayed.
Capital' Justic. dicti Domini Regis ad placita in Cur. ipsius Domini Regis
coram ipso Rege in Regno suo Hiberniae tenend. And granted.
Assign' dirigend' ad certificand' dicto Domino Regi nunc before inde
viritatem Et ei conceditur etc. quod quidem Breve dictus Dominus Rex mandavit
praedilecto and fideli Consiliario suo Thomae Nugent Armigero Capitali
Justiciario suo ad placita in Cur. The Cerciorari to certify the Dimunition.
ipsius Domini Regis coram ipso Rege in Regno suo Hiberniae tenend' Assign'
Breve suum clausum in hec verba ss. Jacobus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae
Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei Defensor, etc. Praedilecto and fideli
Consiliario nostro Thomae Nugent Ar. Capital. Justic. nostro ad placita in
Curia nostra coram nobis in Regno nostro Hiberniae tenend' Assign Salutem
Volentes de certis causis certiorari de duobus Brevibus Domini Caroli Secundi
nuper Regis Angliae etc. e Cur. dicti nuper Domini Regis coram ipso Rege vocat'
the Kings Courts Dublin. nuper emanen' Vic. dicti nuper Regis Com. Civit.
Dublin. direct' ad praemuniend' Donat. Obrian and Elizabeth. Uxor' ejus tunc
nuper dict' Elizabetham Gray dc Civitat. Dublin. vid. ad essend. coram ipso
nuper Rege apud le Kings Courts Dublin. praed. ad ostend' causam quare Abel Ram
modo Mil. sed tempore emanationis praed. Brevium de Scire Fac' Abel Ram de
Civit. Dublin. Alderman. executionem suam versus eos de quodam debito
Octingent' librarum nec non trium librarum undecim solid. and sex denar' pro
dampnis per ipsum Abel versus ipsam Elizabetham dum sola fuit in eadem Cur.
recuperat. quae quidem Elizabetha post recuperationem Judicij praed. versus
ipsam nec non ante impetrationem praed. Brevium de Scire Fac' cepit in virum
suum praed. Donat. Obrian quod certior tot. retorn. process. and adjudication.
execution. super inde ac pro eo quoth. record. and process. Judicij praed. super
quo praed. Brevia de Scire Fac. emanaver. virtute Brevis nostri de error.
corrigend' Cur. nostrae coram nobis apud Westminster. miss. and habit. fuer. ac
ibidem de record. jam resident. erroribus superinde assign' minime discussis
vobis mandamus quoth. praed. duo Breveia dict' nuper Regis de Scire Fac. Vic.
dict' nuper Civit. Dublin. direct' unacum retorn' process. and adjudicatione
executionis superinde nobis indilate ubicunque etc. certifices hoc Breve
nostrum nobis remitten. Test Roberto Wright Mil' apud Westminster. viij die
Novembris Anno Regni tertio

Henly.

Breve retorn' process. and adjudication. The Return.
executionis superinde unde infra fit mentio Serenissimo Domino Regi ubicunque
etc. humillime mitto and certifico prout interius mihi praecipitur sic respond.

T. Nugent.

Breve de Scire Fac. unde in Brevi huic Schedul anexat. fit mentio.

The first Scifac. against Baron and Feme to revive the Judgment and make both
liable.
Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensor etc.
Vic. Com. Civit. Dublin salutem
Cum Abel Ram de Civit. Dublin. Aldermannus nuper in Cur' no stracoram nobis
apud le Kings Courts per billam sine brevi nostro ac per Judicium ejusdem Cur.
recuperavit versus Elizabetham Gray de Civit. Dublin. vid. tam quoddam debitum
Octingent. librarum bonae and lelegalis monetae Angl. quam tres libr. undecim
solid. and sex denar. consimilis monetae quam eidem Abel in eadem Cur. nostra
coram nobis adjudicat. fuer. pro dampnis suis quae sustin. tam ccasione
detention' debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag. suis per ipsum circa sectam
suam in hac part apposit' unde convict' est sicut nobis constat de Recordo
Executio tamen Judicij praed. adhuc restat faciend' ac praed' Elizabetha post
Judicium praed. redditum cepit in virumsuum quendam Donat. Obrian Armiger'
prout ex insinuatione ipsius Abel accepimus Unde nobis supplicavit idem Abel
sibi de remedio suo congruo in hac part adhiberi and nos eidem Abel fieri
volentes quod est justum vobis praecipimus qd' per probos and legales homines
de balliva vestra Scire fac. praefat. Donat. and Elizabethae quod sint coram
nobis apud le Kings Courts die Mercurij prox' post quinque Septimanas Paschae
prox' futur' ad ostend. si quid pro se habeant vel dicere sciant quare praed.
Abel executionem suam versus eos de debito and dampnis praed. habere non debet
juxta vim formam and effectum recuperationis praed. si sibi viderit expedir'
and ulterius ad factur. and receptur. qd' Cur' nostra coram nobis de eo adtunc
and ibidem cons. in hac part and habeat. ibi nomina eorum per quos eis Scire
Fac. and hoc Breve

Test Roberto Booth Mil' apud the Kings Courts septimo die Maij Anno Regni
nostri tricesimo primo.
Cuppaidge Savage and Rives.
Infranominat. The Return.
Donat. and Eli zabetha nihil habent aut eorum alter habet in balliva nostra
per quod eis aut eorum alteri Scire Fac^ possumus neque sunt neque eorum alter
est invent. in eadem Sic respond' Willielmus Cook and Thomas Tennant Armiger'
Vic.

The alias sci. fac.
Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex fidei
Defensor etc.
Vic. Com. Civit. Dublin. Salutem
Cum Abel Ram de Civit. Dublin. Aldermannus nuper in Cur' nostra coram nobis
apud the Kings Courts per billam sine Brevi nostro ac per Judicium ejusdem Cur'
recuperavit versus Elizabetham Gray de Civitat. Dublin. vid. tam quoddam
debitum Octingent' librarum bonae and legalis monetae Angl. quam tres libras
undecim solid. and sex denar' consimilis monetae qui eidem Abel in eadem Curia
nostra coram nobis adjudicat. fuer' pro dampnis suis quae sustinuit tam
occasion detentionis debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag. suis per ipsum
circa sectam suam in hac part apposit. unde convict' est sicut nobis constat.
de Recordo Executio tament Judicij praed. adhuc restat faciend. Ac praed.
Elizabetha post Judicium praed. redditum cepit in virum suum quendam Donat.
Obrian Armiger' prout ex insinuatione ipsius Abel accepimus Unde nobis
supplicavit idem Abel sibi de remed' suo congruo in hac part adhiberi and nos
eidem Abel fieri volentes quod est justum vobis praecipimus sicut alias vobis
praeceperimus quoth. per probos and legales homines de balliva vestra Scire Fac.
praefat. Donat. and Elizabethae qd' sint coram nobis apud le Kings Courts die
Veneris prox' post Crastinum Sanctae Trinitatis proximo futuro ad ostend' si
quid pro se habeant vel dicere sciant quare praed. Abel executionem suam versus
eos de debito and dampnis praed. habere non debet juxta vim formam and effectum
recuperationis praed. si sibi viderit expediri and ulterius factur. and
receptur. quod Cur. nostra coram nobis de eo adtunc and ibidem cons. in hac
part and habeatis ibi nomina eorum per quos eis Scire Fac. and hoc breve

Test Roberto Booth Mil' apud the Kings Courts vicesimo primo die Maij Anno
Regni nostri tricesimo primo.
Cupppaidge, Savage and Ryves.
Infranominat' Donat' and Elizabetha nihil habent aut eorum alter habet in
balliva nostra per quod eis aut eorum alteri Scire Fac. The Return.
possimus neque sunt nec eorum alter est invent in eadem Sic respond'
Willielmus Cook and Thomas Tennant Armiger' Vic.

Record' adjudication. executionis super praed. Breve de Scire Fac.

Placita coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts de Termino Sanctae Trinitatis
Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and
Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensoris etc. tricesimo primo Test Roberto Booth
Milite. The Placita.


Savage and Ryves.

Dominus Rex mandavit Vic. Com. Civit. Dublin. The Entry of the Sci. Fac. upon
the Roll.
Breve suum Clausum in haec verba ss. Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae
Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei Defensor etc. Vic. Com. Civit. Dublin.
salutem Cum Abel Ram de Civit. Dublin. Aldermannus nuper in Cur' nostra coram
nobis apud the Kings Conrts per billam sine Brevi nostro ac per Judicium
ejusdem Cur. recuperavit versus Elizabetham Gray de Civit. Dublin. vid. tam
quoddam debitum octingentarum librarum bonae and legalis monetae Angl' quam
tres libr. undecim solid' and sex denar' consimilis monet. qui eidem Abel in
eadem Curia nostra coram nobis adjudicat. fuer. pro dampnis suis quae sustin'
tam occasion detentionis debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag' suis per
ipsum circa sectam suam in ea part apposit. unde convict' est sicut nobis
constat de Recordo Executio tamen Judicij praed' adhuc restat faciend' ac
praed. Elizabetha post Judicium praed. redditum cepit in virum suum quendam
Donat' Obrian Armiger' prout ex insinuatione ipsius Abel accepimus Unde nobis
supplicavit idem Abel sibi de remedio suo congruo in hac part adhiberi and nos
eidem Abel fieri volentes quod est justum vobis precipimus qd' per probos and
legales homines de balliva vestra Scire Fac. praefat' Donat. and Elizabethae
qd' sint coram nobis apud le Kings Courts die Mercurij prox' post quinque
septimanas Paschae prox' futur. ad ostend' si quid pro se habeant vel dicere
sciant quare praed' Abel executionem suam versus eos de debito and dampnis
praed' habere non debet juxta vim formam and effectum recuperationis praed' si
sibi viderit expediri and ulterius factur' and receptur' qd' Cur' nostra coram
nobis de eo adtunc and ibidem cons. in hac part Et habeatis ibi nomina eorum
per quos eis Scire Fec. and hoc Breve Test Roberto Booth Mil' apud the Kings
Courts septimo die Maij Anno Regni nostri tricesimo primo.

Ad quem diem coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts ven' praed' Abel in
propria persona sua and Vic. Return.
videlicet Willielmus Cook and Thomas Tennant Armiger' retorn' qd' praed'
Donat. and Elizabetha nihil habent in balliva sua per quod eis Scire fac. Als.
Sci. fa. awarded.
and potuissent nec fuer' invent' in eadem and praed' Donat. and Elizabetha non
ven' Ideo sicut alias praecept' fuit eisdem Vic. qd' per probos etc. Scire fac.
praefat' Donat' and Elizabethae qd' sint coram Domino Rege apud the Kings
Courts die Veneris prox' post Crastin' Sanctae Trinitatis ad ostend' in forma
praed' etc. si etc. and ulterius etc. idem dies dat' est praefat' Abel ibidem
etc.

Ad quem diem coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts ven. Return.
praefat' Abel per Faustinum Cuppaidge Attornatum suum and praefat' Vic' ut
prius retorn' qd' praed' Donat' and Elizabetha nihil habent in balliva sua per
quod eis Scire fac' potuissent nec sunt invent. Judgment quoth. habeat executionem
against Baron and Feme.
in eadem and praed' Donat' and Elizabetha non vener. sed defalt' fec' Ideo
cons. est qd' praed' Abel habeat executionem suam versus praefat' Donat' and
Elizabetham de debito and dampnis praed' juxta vim formam and effectum
recurerationis praed' etc.

Al' Breve de Scire fac' int' Abel Ram quer' and Donat' Obrian and Elizabetham
Uxor' ejus defend.

Scire fac. against Baron upon the Judgment upon the Scire fac. against them to
make them both alike.
Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensor etc.
Vic' Com' Civitatis Dublin salutem
Cum Abel Ram de Civitat' Dublin Aldermannus nuper in Curia nostra coram nobis
apud the Kings Courts per Billam suam sine Brevi nostro ac per Judicium ejusdem
Curiae recuperavit versus Donatum Obrian Armigerum and Elizabetham Obrian alias
Gray uxorem ejus tam quoddam debitum octingent' librarum sterling' quam tres
libras undecim solid' and sex denar' consimilis monetae quae eidem Abel in
eadem Curia nostra coram nobis adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis quae sustin' tam
occasion detentionis debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag' suis per ipsum
circa sectam suam in hac part apponit' unde convict' sunt sicut nobis constat
de Recordo Executio tamen Judicij praed' adhuc restat faciend' prout ex
insinuane ipsius Abel accepimus Unde nobis supplicavit idem Abel sibi de
remedio suo congruo in hac part adhiberi and nos volentes eidem Abel fieri
quod est justum vobis praecipimus qd' per probos and legales homines de Balliva
vestra Scire fac' praefat' Donat' Obrian and Elizabethae uzor' ejus qd' sint
coram nobis apud the Kings Courts die Sabbati prox. post Quinden' Sancti
Martini prox. futur' ad ostend' si quid pro se habeant vel dicere sciant quare
praed' Abel executionem suam versus eos de debito and dampnis praed' habere non
debet juxta vim formam and effectum recuperationis praed' si sibi viderit
expediri and ulterius factur' and receptur' qd' Curia nostra coram nobis de eo
adtunc and ibidem consideraverit in hac part Et habeatis ibi tunc nomina eorum
per quos eis Scire fac' Et hoc Breve

Test Roberto Booth Mil' apud the Kings Courts sexto die Novembris Anno Regni
nostri tricesimo secundo.
Cuppaidge, Savage and Rives.
Infranominat' Donat' and Elizabetha nihil habent aut little alter habet in
Balliva nostra per quod eis aut eorum alteri Scire fac. Return.
possumus neque sunt nec eorum alter est invent' in eadem Sic respond' Johannes
Coin and Samuel Walton Armig' Vic'.

Alias Scire Fac.
Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensor etc.
Vic. Com' Civitatis Dublin salutem
Cum Abel Ram de Civitate Dublin Aldermannus nuper in Curia nostra coram nobis
apud the Kings Courts per Billam sine Brevi nostro and per Judicium ejusdem
Curiae recuperavit versus Donatum Obrian Armigerum and Elizabetham Obrian alias
Gray uxorem ejus tam quoddam debitum octingent' libr' sterling' quam tres
libras undecim solid' and sex denar' consimilis monetae quae eidem Abel in in
eadem Curia nostra coram nobis adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis suis quae fustin'
tam occasion detentionis debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag' suis per
ipsum circa sectam suam in hac-parte apposit' unde convict' sunt sicut nobis
constat de Recordo Executio tamen Judicii praed' adhuc restar faciend' perut ex
insinuatione ipsius Abel accepimus Unde nobis supplicavit idem Abel sibi de
remedio suo congruo in hac part adhiberi and nos volentes eidem Abel fieri
quod est justum vobis praecipimus sicut alias vobis praeceperimus qd' per
probos and legales homines de Balliva vestra Scire fac. praefat' Donat' Obrian
and Elizabethae uxor' ejus qd' sint coram nobis apud the Kings Courts die
Mercurii prox. post Octab. Sancti Hillarii prox. futur' ad ostend' si quid pro
se habeant vel dicere sciant quare praed' Abel executionem suam versus eos de
debito and dampnis praed. habere non debet juxta vim formam and effectum
recuperationis praed. si sibi viderit expediri and ulterius factur' and
receptur' quod Curia nostra coram nobis de eo adtunc and ibidem cons. in hac
part Et habeas ibi tunc nomina eorum per quos eis Scire fec. Et hoc breve

Test Robero Booth Mil. apud the Kings Courts vicesimo octavo die Novembris
Anno Regni nostri tricesimo secundo.
Cuppaidge, Savage and Ryves.
Infranominat' Donat' and Elizabetha nihil habent aut eorum alter habet in
balliva nostra per quod eis aut eorum alteri Scire Fac. Return.
possumus neque sunt nec eorum alter est invent. in eadem Sic respond' Johannes
Coin and Samuel Walton Armiger' Vic'.

Record' adjudication' execution' super praed. breve de Scire Fac' ult'
mentionat'.

Placita coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts de Termino Paschae Anno Regni
Domini Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Regis
Fidei Defensoris etc. The Placita
tricesimo tertio Test. Willielmo Davis Mil'

Savage and Ryves.

Dominus Rex mandavit Vic' Com' Civitat' Dublin Breve suum Clausum in haec
verba ss. The Entry of the Scire Fac.
Carolus Secundus Dei gratia Angliae Scotiae Franciae Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensor etc.
Vic' Com. Civitat. Dublin Salutem
Cum Abel Ram de Civitate Dublin Aldermannus nuper in Curia nostra coram nobis
apud the Kings Courts per Billam sine Brevi nostro ac per Judicium ejusdem
Curiae recuperavit versus Donatum Obrian Armigerum and Elizabetham Obrian alias
Gray uxorem ejus tam quoddam debitum octingent' librarum sterling. quam tres
libr. undecim solid. and sex denar' consimilis monetae qui eidem Abel in eadem
Curia nostra coram nobis adjudicat' fuer' pro dampnis suis quae sustin' tam
occasion detentionis debiti illius quam pro mis. and custag' suis per ipsum
circa sectam suam in hac part apposit' unde convict' sunt sicut nobis constat
de Recordo Executio tamen Judicii praed. adhuc restat faciend' prout ex
insinuatione ipsius Abel accepimus Unde nobis supplicavit idem Abel sibi de
remed' suo congruo in hac part adhiberi and nos volentes eidem Abel fieri quod
est justum vobis praecipimus quoth. per probos and legales homines Balliva vestra
Scire Fac' praefat Donat' Obrian and Elizabethae uxori ejus qd' sint coram
nobis apud the Kings Courts die Sabbati prox. post Quinden' Sancti Martini
prox. futur' ad ostend' si quid pro se habeant vel dicere sciant quare praed'
Abel executionem suam versus eos de debito and dampnis praed' habere non debet
juxta formam and effectum recuperationis praed. si sibi viderit expediri and
ulterius factur' and receptur' quod Curia nostra coram nobis adtunc and ibidem
de eo cons. in hac part Et habeatis ibi tunc nomina eorum per quos eis Scire
fec. Et hoc Breve

Test Roberto Booth Mil' apud the Kings Courts sexto die Novembris Anno Regni
nostri tricesimo secundo.



Ad quem diem coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts ven' praed' Abel in
propria persona sua and Vic. Return.
videlicet Johannes Coin and Samuel Walton Armigeri retorn' qd' praed' Donat'
Obrian and Elizabetha uxor ejus nihil habuer' in Balliva sua per quod eis Scire
fac. potuissent neque fuer' invent' in eadem and praed' Donat' and Elizabetha
non ven' Ideo sicut alias praecept' fuit eisdem Vic. Alias Scire Fac. awarded.
qd' per probos etc. Scire fac. praefat. Donat' and Elizabethae quod essent
coram Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts die Mercurii prox. post Octab. Sancti
Hillarii ad ostend' in forma praed' si etc. Et ulterius etc. Idem dies dat' est
praefat' Abel ibidem etc.

Ad quem diem coram dicto Domino Rege apud the Kings Courts ven' praed' Abel
per praed. Faustinum Cuppaidge Attornatum suum and praefat' Vic' ut prius
retorn' qd' praed' Donat' and Elizabetha nihil habuer' in Balliva sua per quod
eis Scire fac. potuissent neque fuer' invent' in eadem and praed. Abel optulit
se quarto die placiti versus praefat. The Defendants appear, and plead that the
Money due upon the Judgment was levied upon a Fi. Fa.
Donatum and Elizabetham Et super hoc idem Donat' and Elizabetha per Henricum
Daniel Attornatum suum ven' and dicunt qd' praefat' Abel executionem versus eos
de debito and dampnis praed' habere non debet quia dic. qd' praed' Abel infra
unum annum post recuperationem praed' prosecut' fuit Breve Domini modo Regis
adtunc Vic' Com' Civitatis Dublin. direct' de Fieri fac. de bonis and catallis
praefat' Donati and Elizabethae debit' and dampn' praed' and qd' ill' haberent
hic in Curia die Mercurii prox. post Quinden' Paschae prox. post recuperationem
debiti and dampn' praed' ad reddend' praefat' Abel Ram pro debito and dampnis
praed' and dicunt qd' iidem Vic. virtute ejusdem Brevis apud Civitatem Dublin.
in Parochia Sancti Michaelis Archangeli in Warda Sancti Michaelis in Com'
ejusdem Civitatis fecer' and levaver' debitum and dampna praed. de bonis and
catallis ipsorum Donat' and Elizathae Et hoc parati sunt verificare unde petunt
Judicium si praedictus Abel executionem suam de debito and dampnis praedict.
versus eos iterum habere debeat etc.

Postea scilicet die Sabbati prox. Relicta Vereficationis.
post Crastin' Ascentionis Domini isto eodem Termino coram dicto Domino Rege
apud the Kings Courts ven' parts praed' per Atornatos suos praed' Et super hoc
iidem Donatus and Elizabetha per Attornatum suum praed' relict' per eos prior'
verification' per ipsos in forma praed' superius placitat' dicunt qd' ipsi non
possunt dedicere quin praed' Abel executionem suam versus eos de debito and
dampnis mis. Judgment thereupon.
and custag' praed. virtute recuperationis praed. habere debeat Ideo
considerat' est qd' praed' Abel habeat Executionem suam versus praefat' Donatum
and Elizabetham de debito mis. and custag' praed' juxta vim formam and effectum
recuperationis praed' etc. Super quo praed' Donat' ut prius dic' qd' in Record'
and process. praed' necnon in adjucatione recuperation' praed' manifest est
erratum allegando Errores praed. The Plaintiff counts upon his Errors.
per ipsum superius allegat' ac petit quoth. Judicium praed' ob Errores ill' and
al' in Record' and process. praed. existen. revocetur adnulletur and penitus
pro nullo habeatur ac qd' idem Donat' ad omnia quae ipse occasion Judicii
praed' amisit restituatur quodque praed' Abel ad Errores praed. rejungeret.

Et superinde praed. The Defendant in the Errors pleads in Nullo est erratum.
Abel dicit quoth. nec in Record. and process. pred. nec in redditione Judicii
praed' nec in adjudicatione executionis super Judic' illud in ullo est erratum
Et pet' similiter qd' Curia dicti Dni. Regis nunc hic procedat tam ad
examinationem tam Record' and process. praed. quam materias praed' superius pro
errore assignat' and qd' Judic' praed. in omnibus affirmetur Sed quia Curia
dicti Dni. Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemissis reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram Domino Rege usque in
Octab. Continuances.
Sancti Hillarii ubicunque etc. de Judicio suo de and super premissis audiend'
eo qd' Curia dicti Domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem coram
Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven' parts praed. per Attornatos suos praed. Sed quia
Curia dict Dni. Regis nunc hic de Judicio de and super praemissis reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram Domino Rege usque a
die Paschae in quindecim dies ubicunque etc. de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo
qd' Curia dicti Domini nunc hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem coram Domino Rege
apud Westm' ven' parts praed' per Attornatos suos praed' Sed quia Curia dicti
Domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemissis reddend' nondum
advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram Domino Rege usque in
Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis ubicunque etc. de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo qd'
Curia dicti Domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem coram Domino
Rege apud Westminster. ven' parts praed' per Attornatos suos praed' sed quia Curia
dicti Domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemissis reddend'
nondum advisatur dies inde dat. est partibus praed' coram Domino Rege usque a
die Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas ubicunque etc. de Judicio suo inde
audiend' eo qd' Curia dicti Domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem
coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. ven' parts praed' per Attorn' suos pred' sed
quia Curia dicti Domini Regis nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super praemiss.
reddend' nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed' coram Domino Rege
usque in Octab. Sancti Hillarij ubicunque etc. de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo
qd' Curia dicti Domini Regis nunc hic inde nondum etc. Postea scilicet a die
Paschae in quindecim dies extunc prox. sequen' usque quem diem Record' and
process. praedict. The Process discontinued, but revived by Act of Parliament.
Stat. 1 W. etc M.
praedict. antea remanen' sine die virtute cujusdam Act' Parliamenti confect'
apud Westm' decimo tertio die Februarii Anno Regni Domini Willielmi and Dominae
Mariae nunc Regis and Reginae Angliae etc. primo revivificat' continuat' and
adjornat' fuit coram dicto Domino Rege and dicta Domina Regina Willielmo and
Maria apud Westm' ven' parts praed. per Attornatos suos praed. sed quia Curia
dict' Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae nunc hic de Judicio suo de and super
praemiss. reddend' nondum advisatur dies inde dat' est partibus praed. coram
Domino Rege and Domina Regina usque a die Paschae in tres Septimanas ubicunque
etc. Continuances.
de Judicio suo inde audiend' eo qd' Curia dict' Domini Regis and Dominae
Reginae nunc hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem coram Dno. Rege and Dna. Regina
apud Westm' vener' parts praed. per Attornatos suos praed' super quo visis and
per Cur' dicti Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae nunc hic before intellect'
omnibus and singulis praemiss. diligenterque examinat' and inspect' tam Record.
and process. praed. ac Judic' and adjudication' executionis super eisdem
reddit' quam praed. causas and materias per praed Donatum Obrian superius pro
Error' assign' videtur Curiae Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae nunc hic qd' nec
in Record' and process. praedict' nec in redditione Judicij praedict' and
adjudicatione executionis superinde in ullo est errat' ac qd' Record' ill' in
nullo vitiosum aut defectivum existit Ideo considerat' est qd' Judicium praed'
and adjudication' executionis superinde in omnibus affirmetur ac in omni suo
robore stet and effectu dict' causis and materiis superius pro Error' assign'
in aliquo non obstante Et ulterius per Cur. Judgment affirmed.
Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae nunc hic cons. est qd' praedict' Abel Ram
recuperet versus praefatum Donatum Obrian octodecim libras eidem Abel per
Curiam Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae nunc hic secundum formam Statuti in
hujusmodi casu edit' and provis. adjudicat' pro mis. custag' and dampn' suis
quae sustin' occasion dilationis executionis Judicij praedict' praetextu
prosecutionis praedict' Brevis de Errore Et qd' praedictus Abel habeat inde
executionem etc.

Obrian versus Ram.
ERror to reverse a Judgment given in Ireland, Whether a Sci. fa. will lie
against the Husband alone, after the death of the Wife, upon a Judgment had
against her dum sola.
upon a Scire Fac. brought against the Plaintiff in the Errors, setting forth,
that Debt was brought upon a Bond against Elizabeth Gray, and a Judgment was
thereupon obtained for 800 l. dum sola: That the said Elizabeth afterward
intermarried with Mr. Obrian: That a Scire Facias was brought upon that
Judgment against Husband and Wife, to show cause why the Plaintiff should not
have execution. That upon this Scire Facias there were two Nichils returned,
and thereupon Judgment was had against Husband and Wife. It rested for a year
and a day and, then the Wife died, and the Plaintiff brought a new Scire Fac.
against the Husband alone, to show cause why he should not have Execution upon
the first Iudgmont.

The Defendant pleaded, that there was another Scire Fac. brought against him
and his Wife for the same Cause, etc. And upon a Demurrer to this Plea,
Judgment was given in Ireland against him.

The Question now was, whether this Scire Fa. will lie against the Husband
alone, after the death of his Wife.

This Case was argued by Mr. Finch and Mr. Pollexfen, that the Husband was not
chargable.

It was admitted on all sides, that if a Feme sole is indebted and marries,
that an Action will lie against the Husband and Wife, and he is liable to the
payment of her Debts.

It was agreed also, that if a Judgment be had against a Feme sole, and she
marries, and afterward dies, that the Husband is not chargable, because her
Debts before Coverture shall not charge him, unless recovered in her Lifetime.

In like manner no Debts which are due to her dum sola, shall go to the Husband
by virtue of the inter-marriage, if she dye before those are recovered,; but
her Administrator will be entitled to them, which may be the Husband, but then
he has a Right only as Administrator, 1 Roll Abr. 351.
and the reason is, because such Debts before they are recoverd are only chooses
in Action.

And from hence the Council did infer, that the Judgment in this Case against
the Wife, dum sola, did not charge the Husband.

Then the Question will be, if the Husband is not chargeable by the Original
Judgment, whether the Judgment on the Scire Fac. had not made an alteration,
and charged him after the death of his Wife?

And as to that, it was said that this Judgment upon the Scire Fac. made no new
charge, for it is only quod habeat executionem, etc. and carries the first
Judgment no farther than it was before, for it is introduced by the Sci. Fac.

At the Common Law no Execution could be had upon a Judgment after a year and a
day; and there was then no remedy but to bring an Action of Debt upon that
Judgment.

This Inconvenience was remedied by the Statute of Westminster. W. 2. cap. 45.
the 2. which gives a Scire Fac. upon the Judgment, to show cause why Execution
should not be had, which can be no more than a liberty to take Execution upon
the Original Judgment, which cannot charge the Husband in this case, because
it is only a consequence of that Judgment, and creates no new charge, for a
Release of all Actions will discharge this award of Execution.

But the Reasons why the original Judgment shall not be carried farther by the
Judgment in the Scire Fac. are as follow.

1. By considering the nature of a Scire Fac. which lay not at the Common Law,
but is given by the Statute in all persosonal Actions; the words whereof are
these, Viz. 2 Inst. 469. Sid. 351.
Observandum est de caetero quod ea quae inveniuntur irrotulat, etc.

Upon which words it is evident, that the execution of the first Judgment on
Record is all which is given by this Act after the year and day, and it takes
off that bar which was incurred by the lapse of time, and gives a speedy
Execution of the Judgment recorded.

2. The Proceedings upon a Scire Facias show the same thing, for the Writ
recites the first Judgment, and then demands the Defendant to show cause why
the Plaintiff should not have Execution thereon juxta vim formam and effectum
recuperationis praed. but prays no new thing.

3. A Scire Facias is not an Original but a Judicial Writ, which depends purely
upon the first Judgment, 1 Roll. Abr. 777. pl. 6. 8 Co. 143 Dr. Drurie's Case.
and a Writ of Error suspends the execution of both; so likewise if the
Original Judgment be reversed, even a Judgment obtained upon a Scire Facias,
will be reversed in like manner.

4. The Law does not charge a Man without an Appearance, but here is none; and
the Statute can never operate upon this Case, because that extends only to such
Judgments upon which there has been a Recovery; and here is nothing recovered
upon this Scire Facias, for it is only to have Execution upon the first Judgment.

If the Law should be otherwise, this absurdity would follow, Viz. There would
be a Recovery without a Record; for the purport of the Scire Facias is only to
have Execution according to the form and effect of the Record, and the very
Record it self does not charge the Husband.

Besides, the first Judgment did charge the Lands of the Wife, which are still
liable to satisfy the Debt; why therefore must the Lands of the Husband be
charged? Cannot the Administrator of the Wife bring a Writ of Error to reverse
this Judgment? and if it should be reversed, shall the Husband pay the Debt,
and the Administrator of the Wife be restored?

The Objections made by the Council on the other side against this Opinion
were, viz. That if an Action of Debt will lie upon a Judgment in a Scire
Facias, the Original Judgment is by this means carried farther, for without a
new Recovery Debt will not lie; F.N.B. 122. E.
and to prove this there is and Authority in Fitzherbert, where a Prior had
Judgment for an Annuity, and brought a Scire Fac. upon that Judgment, against
the Successor of the parson who was to pay it, and obtained a Judgment upon
that Scire Fac. to recover the arrearages, and afterward brought an Action of
Debt upon the last Judgment, and the Book says fuit maintein.

There is another Case in 2 Leon. 2 Leon. 14. 4 Leon. 186. 15 H. 7.16.
where it is held, that an Action of Debt will lie upon a Judgment in a Scire
Facias, upon a Recognizance.

Which Objections may receive this Answer.

First, As to the Case in Fitzherbert, it is admitted to be Law, but it is not an
Authority to be objected to this purpose, because the first Judgment for the
Annuity charges the Successor; but the Original Judgment in this Case does not
charge the Husband, so the Cases are not parallel.

The like answer may be given to the Case in Leonard, for a Recognizance is a
Judgment in it self, and Debt will lie upon it without a Sci. Fa. upon that
Judgment.

But on the other side it was argued, E contra.
that the award of execution is absolute against Husband and Wife; for it is a
Recovery against both, whereas before it was only the Debt of the Wife, but now
it is joint against the one as well as the other.

The Judgment upon the Sci. Fa. is a distinct Action.

It cannot be denied but that if a Woman be indebted and marries, the Husband
is chargable during the Coverture, Bro. Ab. tit. Baron and Feme pl. 27. 49 E.
3.35. b.
which shows that by the Marriage, he is become the principal Creditor.

As to the Sci. Fa. it is true, at the Common Law, if a Man had recovered in
Debt, and did not sue forth Execution within a year and a day, he must then
bring a new Original, 1 H. 5. 5. a 43 Ed. 3.2. b.
and the Judgment thereon had been a new Recovery; but now a Sci. Fa. is given
by the Statute instead of an Original; and therefore a Judgment thereon shall
also be a new Judgment; for though it is a Judicial Writ yet it is in the nature of
an Action, because the Defendant may plead any matter in Bar of the Execution
upon the first Judgment, 1 Inst. 290. b.
and it is for this reason that a Release of all Actions is a good bar to it.

Besides, Rast. Ent. 193. 4 Leon. 186. Dyer 214. b.
an Action of Debt will lie upon a Judgment on a Sci. Fa. which shows that it is
an Action distinct from the Original, and upon such a Judgment the Defendant
may be committed to Prison several years afterward without a new Sci. Fa.

The Husband may have execution of a Judgment recovered by him and his Wife,
after the death of his Wife without a Sci. Fa. 1 Mod. Rep. 179.
for the Judgment has made it a proper Debt due to him, and he alone may bring
an Action of Debt upon that Judgment, and it seems to be very reasonable that
he should have the benefit of such a Judgment and yet not be charged after the
death of his Wife, when there has been a Recovery against both in her lifetime.

This is like the Case where a Devastavit is returned against Husband and Wife
as Executrix, Moor 299. 3 Cro. 216. Cro. Car. 603. Sid. 337.
and a Judgment thereon quod querens habeat executionem de bonis propriis, the
Wife dies, yet the Husband shall be charged, for the Debt is altered.

If it should be otherwise this inconvenience would follow, that if the Wife
should die, F.N.B. 121. c. 1 Roll. Abr. 351. 10 H. 6.11.
the Husband will possess himself of her Estate, and defraud the Creditors; so
that he takes her but not cum onere. But the Law is otherwise, for if a Feme
being Lessee for years does marry, and the Rent is behind, and she dies, the
Husband shall be charged with the Rent arrear, because he is entitled to the
Profits of the Land by his marriage.

To which it was answered, that if a Man should marry an Exerecutrix, and then
he and his Wife are sued, and Judgment obtained against them to recover de
bonis testatoris and thereupon a Fi. Fa. is awarded to levy the Debt and
Damages, and the Sheriff returns a Devastavit, and then the Wife dies, the
Husband is not chargeable, because the Judgment is not properly against him,
who is joined only for conformity; but if upon the return of the Devastavit
there had been an award of execution De bonis propriis, that would have been a
new Judgment, and the old one De bonis testatoris had been discharged, 1 Roll.
Abr. 351.
and then the Husband must be charged for the new wrong. Adjornatur.

Afterward in 1 Will. and Mar. the Judgment was affirmed.

Bowyer versus Lenthal.
INdebitatus Assumpsit quantum meruit ad insimul computasset. Valerent for
Valebant good after Verdict.
The Plaintiff had a Judgment by default in the Court of Common Pleas, and a
Writ of Enquiry was brought, and entire Damages given; and now the Defendant
brought a Writ of Error, and it was argued, that if any of the Promises be ill,
Judgment shall be reversed; the Error now assigned was in the second Promise,
Viz. That in consideration that the Plaintiff would let the Defendant have
Meat, Drink and Lodging, he promised to pay so much Quantum rationabiliter
valerent, it should have been valebant at the time of the Promise made, Sed non
allocatur. So the Judgment was affirmed.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 4 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1688.
Wright Chief Justice. Holloway Justices. Powel Justices. Allibon Justices.
Powis, Attorney General. Wm. Williams, Solicitor General.
NOTA, Wednesday May 2. being the first day of this Term, Sir Bartholomew
Shower Recorder of London, was called within the Bar.

Heyward versus Suppie.
IN an Action of Covenant which was to make such an Assignment to the
Plaintiff, Covenant to make an Assignment as Council should advise.
according to an Agreement made between him and the Defendant as Council should
direct and advise, and for nonperformance thereof this Action was brought; the
Defendant pleaded non est factum, and Judgment was obtained against him.

Upon which a Writ of Error was brought, and the common Error assgned. It was
objected that the Plaintiffs Council should give the advice because he is the
person interested.

This Objection was answered by Mr. Pollexfen, who said, that the Defendant had
likewise an interest in this matter, for it is an advantage to him to make the
Assignment that his Covenant might be saved; it is true, it had been otherwise
if the Covenant had been to make such a Conveyance as Council should advise,
for then the person to whom the Covenant is made may choose whether he will have
a Feoffment, Release, or Confirmation, and then his Council should advise what
sort of Conveyance is proper.

But here it is to make an Assignment, and such as the Parties had agreed on.

If a Man should be bound to give another such a Release as the Judge of the
Prerogative Court shall think fit, 5 Co. 23. Lambs Case. 1 Roll. Abr. 424. pl. 8.
the person who is so bound must procure the Judge to direct what Release shall
be given, because the Condition is for his benefit, and he has taken upon him
to perform it at his Peril.

It Is usual for Men to have Council on both sides, to put their Agreements into
method; but in this Case it being left generally as Council shall direct, what
reason can be given why the Defendants Council shall not be intended;
especially when it seems by the penning of the Covenant he shall? For an
Assignment is to be made as Council shall direct, and here being a Verdict for
the Plaintiff, it must now be presumed that the Defendants Council was first to
give the advice, and then he was to make the Assignment.

E contra. E contra.
It was argued, that first as to the Verdict, it is not materially objected in
this Case, because the Plea is non est factum, so that nothing of the special
matter could come in Evidence.

Now admitting this Covenant to be general, yet one of the Parties must make
his choice of Council, before he can entitle himself to an Action.

All Deeds are taken according to the general intendment, and therefore by this
Covenant his Council is to advise to whom the Assignment is to be made; 3
Bulstr. 168.
for if the Council of the Defendant should advise an insufficient Deed, that
would not have saved his Covenant.

Befides, the Plaintiff has not averred that Council did not advise, and
therefore the Defendant could not plead any thing but non est factum.
Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
A Pleint was removed out of the Lord Mayors Court by Habeas Corpus, the Return
whereof was, Exceptions to a By-Law.
that the City of London was an ancient City Incorporate, and that time out of
mind there was a Custom that the Portage and unlading of all Coals and Grain
coming thither should belong to the Mayor and Aldermen, etc. That there was a
Custom for them to regulate any Custom within the City, etc.

Then they set forth an Act of Common Council, by which the Porters of
Billingsgate were made a Fellowship, and that the Meeters of Corn should from
time to time give notice to the Porters to unlade such Corn as should arrive
there, and that no Bargeman, not being Free of the said Fellowship, shall
unlade any Corn upon the Forfeiture of 20 s. to be recovered in an Action
brought in the Name of the Chamberlain, and that the Party offending shall have
no Essoign or Wager of Law.

Then they set forth the Judgment in the Quo Warranto, and the re-grant, and
that the Defendant not being of the said Fellowship, did unlade one hundred
Quarters of Malt, etc.

Sergeant Thompson took many Exceptions to this By Law, but the most material
were,

1. It appears upon the Return, that the City of London has assumed an
Authority to create a Fellowship by Act of Common Council, which they cannot;
for it is a Prerogative of the Crown so to do; and they have not averred or
showed any special Custom to warrant such an Authority.

2. They have made this By-Law too general, for if a Man should carry and
unlade his own Goods there, he is liable to the Forfeiture, in which Case he
ought to be excepted.

3. This Act of Common Council prohibits Bargemen not being Free of the
Fellowship of Porters, to unlade any Coals or Grain arriving there, and they
have not averred that the Malt unladed did arrive, etc. so they have not
pursued the words of the By-Law.

4. They say in this Law, Godb. 107.
that the person offending shall have no Essoign or Wager of Law, which is a
Parliamentary Power and such as an inferior Jurisdiction ought not to assume.
Adjornatur.

Beak versus Thyrwhit.
THere was a Sentence in the Court of Admiralty, Whether Trover will lie for a
Ship after Sentence in Admiralty for the same Ship.
concerning the Taking of a Ship, and afterward an Executrix brought an Action
of Trover and Conversion for the same.

The Defendant after an Imparlance pleads that at the time of the Conversion he
was a Servant to King Charles the Second, and a Captain of a Man of War called
the Phoenix, and that he did seize the said Ship for the Governor of the
East India Company, she going in a trading Voyage to the Indies contrary to the
King's Prohibition, etc.

And upon a Demurrer these Exceptions were taken to this Plea.

1. The Defendant sets forth that he was a Servant to the King, but has not
showed his Commission to be a Captain of a Man of War.

2. That he seized the Ship going to the Indies contrary to the King's
Prohibition, and has not set forth the Prohibition it self.

It was Argued by the Council contra. That it may be a Question whether this
was the Conversion for which this Action is brought, for it was upon the Sea,
and the Defendant might plead to the Iuisdiction of this Court the Matter being
then under the Cognizance of the Admiralty.

But as to the Substance of this Plea it is not material for the Defendant
either to set forth his Commission or the King's Prohibition; he has showed
enough to entitle the Court of Admiralty to a Jurisdiction of this Cause, and
therefore this Court cannot meddle with it, for he expressly affirms that he
was a Captain of a Man of War, and did seize this Ship, etc. which must be
intended upon the Sea; so that the Conversion might afterward be upon the
Land; Cro. Eliz. 685.
yet the original cause arising upon the Sea, shall and must be tried in the
Admiralty; and it having already received a determination there, shall not
again be controverted in an Action of Trover.

The Case of Mr. 3 Keb. 785.
Hutchinson was cited to this purpose, who killed Mr. Colson in Portugal, and
was acquitted there of the Murder; the Exemplification of which Acquittal he
woduced under the great Seal of that Kingdom being brought from Newgate by an
Habeas Corpus to this Court; notwithstanding the King was very willing to have
him tried here for that Fact; the consideration whereof he referred to the
Judges, who all agreed, that he being already acquitted by their Law, could not
be tried again here. Adjornatur.

Smith versus Pierce.
A Special Verdict was found in Ejectment, A Term for years was devised for
payment of Debts, the Remainder over in Tail, he in Remainder enters and levies
a Fine and settles the Land upon his Wife for life and dies, the Wife
surviving, and the Debts not paid, whether this Term is barred by the Fine and
Nonclaim.
the Substance of which was, That Robert Basket was seized in Fee of the Lands
in Question, who by Will devised it to Philip Basket and others for 99 years,
with power to grant Estates for the payment hf the Debts and Legacies of the
Testator, the Remainder in Tail to John Basket his Brother; but that if he gave
Security to pay the said Debts and Legacies or should pay the same within a
time limited that then the Trustees should assign the Term to him, etc.

John Basket entered after the death of his Brother with the assent of the said
Trustees, and received the Profits, and paid all the Legacies and all the Debts
but 18 l.

The Jury find that John had Issue a Daughter only by his first Wife, after
whose death he married another Woman, and levied a Fine, and made a Settlement
in consideration of that Marriage upon himself for Life, and upon his Wife for
Life, with diverse Remainders over; that he died without Issue by his second
Wife, who entered, and five years were past without any claim, etc.

And now the Heir at Law in the name of the Trustees brought this Action.

The Questions were,

1. Whether the Term for 99 years thus devised to the Trustees was bound by
this Fine and Nonclaim or not?

2. Whether it was divested and turned to a Right at the time of the Fine
levied?

For if it was not, then the Fine could not operate upon it.

It was agreed that as a Disseisin is to a Freehold, so is a divesting to a
Term, and that a Fine and Non-claim is no Bar, but where the Party at the time
of the levying thereof had a Will to enter, and when the Estate of which it is
levied is turned to a Right.

That in the Case at the Bar the Entry of John Basket was tortious, because
the legal Estate was still in the Trustees.

But if he had gained any Right by his Entry it is only a Tenancy at Will to
them, for they took notice of the Devise, and he entered by their consent; and
such a Right is not assignable, and then a Fine levied is no Bar.

To prove this, 9 Co. 106.
Margaret Prodger's Case was cited, where the the Lord granted a Copyhold to
John, Elizabeth and Mary for their Lives, and afterward by Deed enrolled sold
the Land to John in Fee, and levied a Fine to him and his Heirs, etc. and five
years passed without any Claim; John dyed, his Son entered and levied another
Fine to Trustees to the use of himself and Margaret his Wife for Life, the
Remainder to his own right Heirs; the Son died and his Wife survived, who
having a Freehold for Life distrained, and the Husband of Elizabeth brought a
Replevin: It was adjudged that this Fine and Nonclaim did not bar those in
Remainder, becase the Bargain and Sale to John did not divest their Estate and
turn it to a Right; for the Lord did what he might do, and John accepted what
he might lawfully take, who being in possession by virtue of a particular
Estate for Life, could not by this acceptance divest the Estate of her who had
the Freehold; and the Fine and Nonclaim could not do it; for to what purpose
should he make any Claim when he was in actual possession of the thing to be
demanded? And he who is so in possession need not make any Claim either to
avoid a Fine or a collateral Warranty.

Now though at the Common Law there must be Livery and Seisin to create an
Estate of Freehold, 3 Co. Fermer 's Case.
yet any thing is sufficient to make an Estate at Will, in which neither the
Inheritance or the Title of the Land is concerned, and therefore a Fine levied
by such a Tenant is no Bar.

It Is true, Sid. 458. Freeman versus Barns.
if a Lease be made for an hundred years in Trust to attend the Inheritance,
and Cestuy que Trust continues in possession, and devises to another for fifty
years, and levies a Fine and the five years pass without Claim, he being still
in possession after the first Lease made is thereby become Tenant at Will; and
by making the second Lease, the other is divested and turned to a Right, though
he was not a Disseisor, and so it is barred by the Fine, because the Cestuy que
Trust of the term of one hundred years, was also Owner of the Inheritance.

But in the Case at the Bar John shall not be a Disseisor but at the Election
of the Trustees of the Term of 99 years, to prove which there are many
Authorities in the Books.

As if Tenant at Will make a Lease for years and the Lessee enters, Latch. 53.
1 Leon. 121. Lit. Sect. 588.
it is not a Disseisin, but at the Election of him who has the Freehold, and
even in such Case if the Tenant of the Freehold should make a Grant of the Land
it is good, though not made upon the Land it self, for he shall not be taken to
be out of possession but at his own Election.

It Is like the common Case of a Mortgagee for years where the Mortgagor
continues in possession twenty years afterward, and pays the Interest, and in
that time has made Leases and levied a Fine, this shall not bar the
Mortgagee, for the Mortgagor is but Tenant at Will to him.

The Trustees need not make any claim in this Case, because there was no
transmutation of the possession, so they could take no notice of the Fine.

It Is true, John Basket entered by their consent, but still as Tenant at Will to
them; and the Acts done by him after his Entry will not did this Term, for
though he made a Bargain and Sale of the Lands, yet nothing will pass thereby
but what of right ought to pass.

He likewise demised the Lands to Vndertenants for years, but it is not found,
that they entered; but admitting they did enter, yet that could not displace
this Term, for these Tenants claimed no more than for one or two years and made
no pretense to the whole Term.

But if by either of these Acts the Term should be divested; yet still it must
be at the election of those who have the Interest in it. Dyer 61, 62, 173.


The Case of Cro. Car. 302. 1 Roll. Abr. 661.
Blunden and Baugh which is grounded upon Littleton's Text Sect. 588. is an
Authority to this purpose, which was, The Father was Tenant in Tail and his Son
was Tenant at Will, who made a Lease for years, then both Father and Son join
in a Fine to the use of the Son for Life and to Elizabeth his Wife for Life,
the Remainder to the Heirs Males of the Body of the Son, who died without Issue
Male; the Lessee being in possession made a Conveyance of the Estate by Bargain
and Sale to Charles Lord Effingham, who was Son and Heir of the Tenant in Tail,
who made a Lease to the Plaintiff who was ousted by the Defendant Elizabeth.

The Question in which Case was, whether by the Entry of the Son, who was
Tenant at Will, and his making of this Lease the Father was disseised of the
Freehold? And it was held not, for it was found in that Verdict that he
occupying at Will, and entering by his Fathers Assent the Lease was also
intended to be made by his Assent.

But on the other side it was said that this Fine was a Bar by the express
Words of the Statute of H. 7. E contra.
which excludes in all Cases but where there is Fraud or the person is
incapable, 4 H. 7. c. 24.
or where the Right to be barred is not divested.

In this Case John Basket had an Interest and present Right, and though it be
closed with a Trust, yet that will not make any difference.

1. Cro. Car. 550. 10 Co. 56.
Here is no Fraud, for the Fine was levied by Tenant in Tail in possession; but
if there had been Fraud it ought to be found, otherwise it shall not be
presumed.

This is not like Blunden's Case, for there the Son was Tenant at Will, but
it is not found by this Verdict that John occupied at Will.

There is no difference between this Term and a Trust of a Term to attend the
Inheritance, whose Interest shall be barred by such a Fine and Nonclaim,
because the Trust is included in the Fine, and therefore the Trustees not
making of their Claim within the five years are for ever excluded.

It cannot be denied but a Term for years is such an Interest which may be
barred by Fine, 5 Co. 123.
it is Saffin's Case expressly, which was a Lease for years to commence in futuro
after a Lease then in being should be determined; the first Lease ended; the
second Lessee did not enter, but the Reversioner did, and made a Feoffment, and
levied a Fine and five years passed without Entry or Claim by the second
Lessee; it was adjudged that this Fine was a Bar to him, for when his future
Interest commenced, then and not before he had such a present Interest in the
Land, which might be divested, and turned to a Right.

To which it was answered, that this differs from Saffin's Case, which was an
interesse Termini, and the Case of Alport which was an Executory Devise.

If John Basket had still continued in Possession, it might have altered the
Case, but he died, and his Wife entered, and then the five years passed without
any Claim. Adjournatur.

Evans versus Crocker.
A Special Verdict in Ejectment was found in Ireland, In Ejectment, where the
Entry seems to be before the Title, yet the Declaration is good.
and Judgment given there for the Plaintiff; and now a Writ of Error was
brought in this Court, and the Common Error assigned. The Objection was to the
Declaration, which was, That the Plaintiff declared upon a Demise made 12
Junii, etc. Habendum a praedicto duodecimo die Junij ( which must be the 13th
day of the same Month) usque etc. virtute cujus quidem dimissionis he entered,
etc. and that the Defendant, postea scilicet eodem duodecimo die Junij, did
eject him, etc. So that it appears upon the Face of the Declaration that the
Defendant entered before the Plaintiff had a Title; for the Lease commenced on
the 23th of June, and the Entry was on the 12th of that Month.

And it was said that this agrees with a former Resolution in this Court where
the Lease was made the 24th of June for five years Habendum a die datus,
Siderfin 8. 2 Cro. 96.
which must be the 25th by virtue whereof the Plaintiff entered, and that the
Defendant postea scilicet 24th Junij did eject him, which must be before the
commencement of the Lease.

Curia. The Plaintiff entered as a Disseisor by his own showing, and thereupon
Judgment was reversed.

Rex versus Kingsmill.
QUO Warranto against the Defendant to show cause why he executed the Office of
a Bailiff of the Hundred of Barnstaple. Grant of an Hundred, where good, etc.


The Defendant pleaded that the said Hundred was an ancient Hundred, and that
the Office of Bailiff was an ancient Office, and that the Hundred Court was an
ancient Court held from three Weeks to three Weeks before the Steward thereof;
that the Return of Writs was an ancient Liberty and Franchise which did belong
to the said Bailiff; that King Charles I. was seized of the said Franchise jure
Coronae in Fee, who by Letters Patents dated, etc. did grant the same to one
North, Habendum the said Hundred to him and his Heirs, and that by several
mesne Assignments it came to, and was vested in the Defendant, and so he
justified to have Retorna Brevium.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred.

And for the King it was argued, that this Claim was not good.

First as to the manner of the Grant as it is here pleaded, viz. that the King
was seized in Fee, etc. and that he granted the Franchise Habendum the said
Hundred.

That such a Grant can never include the Hundred, for nothing can pass in the
Habendum, but what was mentioned in the Premises.

2. The Defendant has derived a Title from the Crown to this Office of a
Bailiff, which must be either by Grant or Prescription.

It cannot be by Grant, for it is a Question whether the Hundred Court can now
be separated from the County Court; it has been derivative from it in former
times when the Sheriffs did let those Hundreds to farm to several persons who
put in Bailiffs errant to the great oppression of the People, which was the
occasion of the making of the Statute of Ed. 14 E. 3. c. 9.
3. by which such Hundreds were united and rejoyned to the Counties, as to the
Bailiwicks thereof, 4 Inst. 267.
except such as were then granted in Fee by the King or his Ancestors.

Now these Hundreds were usually granted to Abbots and other religious persons,
31 H. 8. c. 13.
and their Possessions coming afterward to the King by the dissolution of
their Abbeys and Monasteries are now merged in the Crown, and cannot be
regranted after the making of that Statute.

And as the Defendnat cannot have a Title by Grant, so he has not prescribed
to have this Office; it is true, the Plea sets forth that it is an ancient
Office, but that is not a Prescription but a bare Averment of its Antiquity.

But admitting he had alleged it by way of Prescription, 14 H. 4.89.
he could not do it by a Que Estate to have Retorna Brevium.

A man cannot preserive to have Cognizance of Pleas in an Hundred Court, he may
in a County Palatine, because it is of a mixed Jurisdiction.

Neither can he prescribe to have Return of the King's Writs, Abbot de Strata
Marcella.
because they are matter of Record.

Here is a good Title pleaded. E contra.


It was never yet denied, but that the King may be seized in Fee of an Hundred,
and that he may grant Retorna Brevium; the Statutes are plain in it, 14 E. 3.
c. 9.
for otherwise how came any Lords to have Hundreds in Fee, but by the Kings
Grants?

And it is as plain that Hundreds may be divided from the County; 2 E. 3. c. 12.
for else to what purpose was the Statute of Lincoln made, which adjoins
Hundreds and Wapentakes to the Counties, and provides that they shall never be
separated again, this shows that they were divided at that time.

The Objections which have been made are, viz. That the Defendant cannot have a
Title to this Office by Grant, and he has not made any Prescription to it.

The Reasons given why he could not have it by Grant were, because ancient
Hundreds which were united to the Counties by the Statute of Ed. 3. could never
afterward be divided from them by any Grant of the King, and those which were
excepted in that Statute, as being granted in Fee by the King or his Ancestors,
when they come again to the Crown cannot be regranted, because they are merged
in it.

In answer to which it was said that such ancient Liberties, which were created
by the Crown and did subsist by the King's Grant before the Statute of Ed. 3.
when afterward they came to the King were not merged, but remained a distinct
Interest in him.

The Hundred of Gartree in the County of Leicester was such a Liberty; it was
an ancient Hundred and granted by Ed. 2. Cole versus Ireland. Raym. 360.
to John Sedington, not in Fee, but durante been placito Regis; this Grant was
long before the making of the Statute of Ed. 3. and yet afterward this very
Hundred was granted to several other persons by the suceeding Kings of England,
which shows it was merged in the Crown, when it came to the King.

The other Objection was, that Retorna Brevium does not lie in Prescription.

Now as to that, though it be true, that no Title by Prescription can be made
to such Franchises and Liberties which cannot be seized as forfeited before the
cause of Forfeiture appears on Record, because Prescription being an Usage in
pais does not extend to such things which cannot be had without matter of
Record: 1 Inst. 114. b.
Yet my Lord Coke is clear that a good Title may be made to hold Pleas, Leets,
Hundreds, etc. by Prescripteon only without Matter of Record.

But notwithstanding what was said to maintain this Plea Judgment was given
against the Defendant.

Rex versus Griffith.
THE Defendant was convicted of Manslaughter at the Old-Bayly, Indictment for
Murder, the Party was found guilty of Manslaughter, and pleaded his Pardon, and
afterward the Indictment was quashed to save the Forfeiture of his Goods.
and the Record being removed into this Court by Certiorari he pleaded his
Pardon, and had Judgment Quod eat inde sine die.

But being once convicted the Dean and Chapter of Westminster did seize his
Goods as forfeited by that Conviction, who thereupon (although he was out of
the Court by that Judgment) yet he moved by his Council to quash the Indictment.

The Exceptions taken were, viz.

That the Indictment was Per Sacramentum duodecim proborum and legalium hominum
jurat' and onerat' praesentat' existit modo and forma sequen'.

Midd. ss. Juratores pro Domino Rege praesentant, etc.

That there was no President to warrant such an Indictment, for this may be the
Presentment of another Jury; it being very incoherent to say that it was
presented by the Oaths of twelve Men, that the Jury do present.

It ought to be praesentat' existit quod, etc. and so is the form of this
Court, as the Clerk of the Crown informed them.

2. They present that Griffith and two others did make an Assault on the Body
of the deceased, and that quidam Johannes in nubibus did wound him with a Gun,
so that it is uncertain who did shoot, and what Gun was discharged, which ought
to be certainly laid in the Indictment.

Vaux 's Indictment for Poisoning Ridley was, 4 Co. 44. b.
that the said Ridley not knowing the Beer to be poisoned, but being persuaded
by Vaux recepit and bibit, but did not say venenum praedictum; and so it not
appearing what thing he did drink (which ought to have been expressly alleged)
the Indictment was held insufficient.

And the reason is plain, for an Indictment for Felony being a Declaration for
the King against the Life of a Subject, ought to set forth a sufficient
certainty of the Fact, which shall not be supplied either by Argument, or any
intendment whatsoever.

And therefore in Long 's Case the Defendant was indicted for discharging a Gun
upon Long, 5 Co. 122. b.
Dans eidem Henrico Long mortale vulnus, and does not say percufsit, for which
reason that Indictment was also held insufficient; because in all Indictments
for Murder they ought expressly to allege a stroke given.

For these Reasons the Indictment was quashed, and a new Roll was made, on
which this Indictment and Certiorari were both entered, and Judgment quod
exoneretur, and this was done to avoid the seizure.

And afterward in Michaelmas- Term primo Will. and Mar. it was said by the
Chief Justice, that it must be intended these were two persons, for no Court
would justify such a Judgment.

Anonymus.
IN Assault and Battery, After a Traverse you must not conclude to the Country.
the Defendant pleaded a Release of all Actions, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that the Release was gotten by duress, etc.

The Defendant rejoyned and showed cause why it was not gotten by duress, but
that he sued forth a Capias, and did Arrest him, etc. and that the Release was
voluntary, etc.

The Plaintiff surrejoyns, and says, that it was gotten by duress, absque hoc,
that it was voluntary, Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam.

Upon this Issue the Cause was tried, Dyer 353. a. 1 Inst. 126. a. Cro. Car.
316. Sid. 341. 2 Cro. 588. 2 Roll. Rep. 186.
and the Plaintiff had a Verdict; and now it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
that he ought not to conclude to the Country after a Traverse, because a
Traverse it self is Negative, and therefore the Defendant ought to have joined
issue in the Affirmative; it is true, if issue had been joined before the
Traverse it might have been helped by the Statute of Ieofails, but it was not
so in this Case; and therefore the Judgment was Arrested.

Hitchins versus Basset, Mil'.
IN Ejectment upon the Demise of Mr. Nosworthy.

The Jury found a special Verdict, A subsequent Will which does not appear,
shall not be a Revocation of the former.
the substance of which was,

Viz. That Sir Henry Killigrew was seized in Fee of the Lands in question, in
the County of Cornwall, and being so seized, did in the year 1644. devise the
same to Mrs. Berkley for Life, remainder over to Henry Killigrew in Tail, and
that he made Mrs. Berkley Executrix of his Will, which was found in haec verba.

That afterward in the year 1645. the said Sir Henry Killigrew made aliud
Testamentum in Writing, but what was contained in the said last mentioned Will
juratores penitus ignorant.

They find that Sir Henry Killigrew in the year 1646. died seized of those
Lands, and that Mrs. Berkley conveyed the same to Mr. Nosworthy 's Father,
whose Heir he is, and that the Defendant Sir William Basset is Cousin and Heir
to Sir Henry Killigrew, etc.

The Question upon this special Verdict was, whether the making of this last
Will was a revocation of the former or not?

It was argued this Term by Mr. Finch, and in Michaelmas- Term following by
Sergeant Maynard for the Plaintiff, that it was not a revocation.

In their Arguments it was admitted that a Will in it is nature was revocable at
all times, but then it must be either by an express or implied revocation.

That the making of this latter Will cannot be intended to be an implied
revocation of the former; for if so, then the Land must also be supposed to be
devised contrary to the express disposition in the first Will, and that would
be to add to the Record, which finds, Viz. that what the last Will was penitus
ignorant.

It is possible that a subsequent Will may be made so as not to destroy but
consist with a former; for the Testator may have several parcels of Land, which
he may devise to many persons by diverse Wills, and yet all stand together.

A man may likewise by a subsequent Will revoke part and confirm the other part
of a former Will; and therefore admitting there was such a Will in this case,
it is still more natural that it should confirm than revoke the other.

If the Testator had purchased new Lands, and had devised the same by a
subsequent Will, no person will affirm that to be a revocation of the former
Will.

When a Man has made a disposition of any part of his Estate, it is a good Will
as to that part; so is likewise the disposal of every other part; they are all
several Wills, though taken altogether, they are an entire disposition of the
whole Estate.

Nothing appears here to the contrary, but that the latter Will may be only a
devise of his personal Estate, or a confirmation of the former, which the Law
will not allow to be destroyed without an express revocation.

The Case of Coward and Marshal is much to this purpose, Cro. Eliz. 721.
which was, a devise in Fee to his younger Son; and in another Will (after the
Testators Marriage to a second Wife) he devised the same Lands to his Wife for
Life, paying yearly to his younger Son 20 s. It was the Opinion of Anderson and
Glanvil, that both these Wills might stand together, and that one was not a
revocation of the other; because it appeared by the last Will that he only
intended to make a Provision for his Wife, but not to alter the Devise to his
Son.

So where a Man had two Sons by several Venters, Cro. Car. 24. Hodgkinson verse.
Whood. Co. Lit. 22. b. 1 Co. 104. a. 319. b.
and devises the Lands to his eldest Son for Life, and to the Heirs Males of
his Body, and for default of such Issue to the Heirs Males of his second Son,
and the Heirs Males of their Bodies, Remainder to his own right Heirs, and then
made a Lease of 30 years to his youngest Son, to commence after the death of
the Testator: the youngest Son entered and surrendered the Term to his elder
Brother, who made a Lease to the Defendant, and then dyed without Issue;
afterward the youngest Brother entered and avoided this Lease made by his
Brother. It was held that the Lease thus made to him was not a revocation of
the devise of the Inheritance to his Brother, though it was to commence at the
same time in which the devise of the Inheritance was to take effect, but it was
a revocation quoad the Term only, that the elder Brother should not enter
during that time, for the devise shall not be revoked without express words;
and that though the Testator had departed with the whole Fee without reserving an
Estate for Life to himself, yet the Law created such an Estate in him, till the
future Use should commence; and in such case the right Heirs cannot take by
Purchase but by Descent; so that here the Inheritance in Fee simple was not
vested in the elder Brother by Descent, for then the Lease which he made would
be executed out of the Fee and the younger Brother would be bound thereby.

But in the Case at the Bar, there is no color of a Revocation.

1. Upon the nature of the Verdict, to which nothing can be added, neither can
it be diminished, for whatever is found must be positive, and not doubtful,
because an Attaint lies if the Verdict be false.

Therefore the Court cannot take notice of that which the Jury has not found:
Now here the entry of the Judgment is,

Viz. Quibus lectis and auditis and per Curiam hic satis intellectis, etc. But
what can be read or heard where nothing appears?

That Case in the Year-Book of the 2 R. 3. 2 R. 3. f. 3.
comes not up to this question, it was an Action of Trespass for the taking of
his Goods.

The Defendant pleaded that the Goods did appertain to one Robert Strong, who
before the supposed Trespass devised the same to him, and made him Executor,
etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that the said Strong made his last Will, and did
constitute him Executor.

And upon a Demurrer to this Replication, because he had not traversed that the
Defendant was Executor, it was argued for the Plaintiff, that this last Will
was a Revocation of the former, for though there were no express words of
Revocation, yet by the very making another the Law revoked the former; and to
prove this, two Instances were then given, viz. That if a Man devise his Lands
to two, and by another Will gives it to one of them and dies, he to whom it is
devised by the last Will shall have it.

So likewise, if the Testator by one Will gives Lands to his Son, and by
another Will devises the same again to his Wife, then makes an Alienation, and
takes back an Estate to himself, and dies; and in an Assise brought between
the Widow and the Son, he was compelled by the Court to show that it was his
Father's intention that he should have the Land, otherwise the last Devisee
will be entitled to it.

Now both these Instances are not sufficient to evince that the last Will in
this Case was a revocation of that under which the Plaintiff claims, because
those Wills were contradictory to each other; for by one the Land was devised
to the Son, and by the other to the Wife, they both had their existence at one
and the same time, and it appeared they were made to distinct purposes, but
here no body can tell what was designed or intended by the Testator in this
subsequent Will.

And therefore it has been held, Cro. Car. 51. Eyres Case. Godolph. 443.
Perkins 92. b.
that where a Man devised Legacies to his two Brothers, and afterward in his
sickness was asked to leave Legacies to his said Brothers, he replied he would
leave them nothing, but devised a small Legacy to his Godson, and died. This
Discourse was set down in a Cocidil, which, together with the Will was proved
in common form: This Codicil was not a revocation of the Legacies given to the
Brothers, because the Testator took no notice of the Will which he had made in
the time of his Health, and non constat what he intended by these words which
were set down in the Codicil.

If therefore doubtful words shall not make a revocation of a former Will, a
fortiori, a subsequent Will, especially when the contents of such Will do not
appear, shall not revoke a former.

It was argued for the Defendant. E contra.
And

The only Objection is, That a latter Will being made, and it not appearing to
the Jury what was contained in that Will, it can be no revocation, because no
express words of revocation can be found, or any thing which is contradictory
to the first Will, and without the one or the other, a former Will cannot be
revoked.

But this is contrary to all the Authorities in the Books, Linwood 175. Swinb.
7 part, Sect. 14. 2 H. 5.8. pl. 3. Offiice of Ex. 443.
which show that a Testament which is good in the beginning may become void by
making of a subsequent Will, by words of revocation, or by words contradicting
each other; for in such cases it is not doubted but the first Will is revoked.

But the meaning must be, that by the very making of a latter Will the first is
become void.

This may be collected from the nature of a Will, which a Man has power to
alter in part or in all, at any time during his Life; but when he makes a new
Will, it must be presumed that he declared his whole mind in it; for if his
Intentions are to alter any part, the Law has appointed a proper Instrument
for that purpose, which is a Codicil; but when he makes aliud Testamentutum,
it is a sign that he intended nothing of his former Will should take any effect,
when he had so easy a method to alter it in part.

Every subsequent act of the Testator shows that he intends a revocation,
either by word or deed; and there is great reason why it should be so, because
every revocation of a Will is in the nature of restitution to the Heir.

It cannot be denied but that a Will may be revoked by words without writing,
before the making of the Statute against Frauds, 1 Roll. Abr. 614. Dyer 310. b.
etc. As if a Man should say that he would alter his Will when he came to such
a place, and he should dye before he came thither, this is a revocation.

But it never was yet controverted but a revocation may be by Deed; as if a Man
devise Lands to another, 1 Roll. Abr. 614.
and afterward makes a Feoffment to the use of his Will, this was always held
a revocation.

So it is if Lands which are well given by a Will are afterward by another
Will devised to the Poor of the Parish; 1 Roll. Abr. 614. pl. 4.
though this last Will is void, because the Devisees have not a capacity to take,
yet it is a revocation of the first Will; and shall a Will which is lost be of
less authority than such which is void?

It Is not denied but that there may be a subsequent Will which may not
contradict the first; so is Coward 's Case, where both Wills did appear to be
consistent; but that is not parallel with this, because the Jury has found
that the Testator made aliud Testamentum, which word aliud imports a distinct
Will from the former.

It Is agreed also, that a Man may make many Wills, and that they may stand
together; and it must also be agreed that such are but partial Wills, because
they are but pieces of the whole, though written in several papers; but when it is
found in general that aliud Testamentum was made, it must naturally be intended
of his whole Estate.

The Case in the Year Book of Richard III. is an Authority in point, where in
Trespass the Defendant justified the taking of the Goods by virtue of a Will by
which they were devised to him, and of which Will he was made Executor.

The Plaintiff replied, that the Testator made another Will, and thereby did
constitute him Executor; and this was held a good Replication without a
Traverse that the Defendant was Executor, because by the making of the second
Will the other was void in Law; and therefore the showing that he was Executor
was not to avoid the first Will (which the Law does adjudge to be of no force)
but to make to himself a Title to the Goods taken out of his possession.

If a Man should make twenty Codicils without dates, they may all stand
together; but if he make two Wills without dates they are both void; the reason
is because by the making of the later Will the first is destroyed; and it being
uncertain which is the last, rather than the Rules of Revocation should be
broken they adjudge both to be void.

It cannot be reasonably objected, that this later Will may devise the same
Lands to the same person; for why should a Man be thought so vain? Besides if
it was so, the Plaintiff should have claimed under that Will.

But this cannot be the same Will, because it is contrary to the Verdict which
has not found it to be idem, but aliud Testamentum; besides it is in the Case
of an Heir who shall not be disinherited by an intendment that the later Will
is the same with the first.

Neither can the Statute of Wills have any influence upon this Matter. 32 H. 8.
c. 1. 34 H. 8. c. 5.
It Is true, at the Common Law no Land could be devised by a Will, but now by
the Statutes of H. 8. Lands, etc. in Socage may be devised by Will; and if held
in Knights Service then only two parts in three, Godolph. 299.
but it must be by the last Will.

Now how can any Man say that this shall be a Devise of the Lands by the last
Will of the Testator, when the Jury find he made aliud Testamentum; the
Contents whereof are not necessary to be showed, because the Defendant claims
as Heir, and not as Executor.

It must not be intended that this Will shall confirm or stand with the other,
because the Law is otherwise; and therefore if the Plaintiff would have
supported his Will by which he claims, he ought to show the other Will, by
which it must appear that nothing is contradictory to it, or that it does
confirm the first; but if Presumptions shall be admitted it must be in favor
of the Heir, for nothing shall be presumed to disinherit him.

Afterward in Trinity-Term 5 Willielmi, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
and a Writ of Error was brought in the House of Peers to reverse that Judgment,
but it was affirmed.

Anonymus.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment in the Common Pleas in an
Ejectment for Lands in the County of Essex, in which a Special Verdict was
found, viz. That R. F. What Words in a Will make Tenants in Common.
was seized in Fee of the Lands in question, who had Issue two Daughters
Frances, Jane.


Frances had Issue Philp, Frances, Anne.


R. F. the Father devised unto Philip, Frances and Anne, the Children of his
Daughter Frances, and to Jane his other Daughter, the Rents and Profits of his
Manor of Spain for thirty years, to hold by equal parts, viz. the three
Grandchildren to have one Moiety and his Daughter Jane the other Moiety.

And if it happen that either of them should die before the thirty years
expired, then the said Term should be for the benefit of the Survivor; and if
they all die, then the same was devised over to other Relations.

Afterward he made a Codicil in these words, viz.

I give Power and Authority to my Executors to let my whole Lands for the Term
of thirty years for the benefit and behalf of my Children.

Anne, one of the Granchildren, died without Issue.

Frances, another of the Grandchildren, died, but left Issue.

The first Question was, whether the Power given to the Executors by the
Codicil will take away that Interest which was vested in the Grandchildren by
the Will?

Mr. Appleton argued that it would not, because the Executors had only a bare
Authority to let it or improve it for the benefit of the Children, there was no
Devise of the Land to them.

If Power be given to Executors to sell Lands, it is only an Authority and not
an Interest in them; but a bare Authority only to let is of much less
importance.

2. After the Testator had devised the Profits of these Lands to his
Grandchildren and Daughter equally to be divided during the term, and had
provided that if any dye without Issue, that then it should survive, and if all
dye, then to remain over to collateral Relations, etc.

Whether Frances being dead, but leaving Issue, her Interest shall survive to
Philip, or go to such her Issue?

As to that he held that the Testator made them Tenants in Common, by equal
parts, and therefore he devised it by Moieties, in which there can be no
Survivorship.

It Is like a Devise to the Wife for life, 2 Cro. 448. 1 Roll. Abr. 833. King
versus Rumbal. Cro. Car. 185.
and after her decease to his three Daughters equally to be divided, and if any
of them die before the other, then the Survivors to be her Heirs equally to be
divided, and if they all die without Issue then to others, etc. the Daughters
had an Estate Tail, and there was no Survivorship.

So in this Case it shall never go to the third Grandchild as long as any Issue
of the second are living.

On the other side it was argued that they are Ioyntenants and not Tenants in
Common, E contra.
for the Testator having devised one Moiety to his three Grandchildren jointly
by equal parts that will make them Ioyntenants.

But the Court were all of Opinion that the words in the Will show them to be
Tenants in Common, for equally to be divided runs to the Moieties. So the
Judgment was affirmed.

Woodward 's Case.
THE Statute of 23 H. 8. c. 9. Church Ornaments are a personal Charge upon the
Inhabitants and not upon those who live else where, though they occupy Lands in
that Parish. Godb. 134. pl. 4. 152. pl. 29. 154. pl.
prohibites a Citation out of the Diocese wherein the Party dwells, except in
certain Cases therein mentioned, one whereof is, viz. Except for any Spiritual
Cause neglected to be done within the Diocese whereunto the Party shall be
lawfully cited.

One Woodward and others, who lived in the Diocese of Litchfield and Coventry,
but occupied Lands in the Diocese of Peterborough, were taxed by the
Parishioners, where they used those Lands, for the Bells of the Church, and
they refusing to pay this Tax a Suit was commenced against them in the Bishop
of Peterborough's Court, who thereupon suggested this Matter, and prayed a
Prohibition, because they were not to be charged with this Tax, it being only
for Church Ornaments.

And a Prohibition was granted, the reason given was, because it is a personal
charge to which the Inhabitants only are liable, and not those who only occupy
in that Parish and live in another; but the repairing of the Church is a real
Charge upon the Land let the Owner live where he will.

DE Term. Sanct. Trin. Anno 4 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1688.
Wright, Chief Justice. Holloway, Justices. Powel, Justices. Allibon, Justices.
The Bishop 's Case. Friday, June 15th.
THE King having set forth a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, did on the
4th day of May last by Order of Council enjoin that the same should be read
twice in all Churches, etc. and that the Bishops should distribute it through
their respective Diocesses that it might be read accordingly.

The Archbishop of Canterbury (who then was) together with six other Bishops
petitioned the King, setting forth that this Declaration was founded upon a
dispensing Power, which had been declared illegal in Parliament, and therefore
they could not in Honor or Conscience make themselves Parties to the
Distribution and Publication of this Declaration, who thereupon were summoned
before the King in Council, and refusing there to give Recognizance to appear
before the Court of Kings Bench, they were committed to the Tower by Warrant of
the Council Board.

The Attorney General moved for a Habeas Corpus retornable immediate, and the
same Morning in which that Motion was made Sir Edward Hales Lieutenant of the
Tower returned the same, and they were all brought into the Court.

The Substance of the Return was, viz. That they were committed to his Custody
by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the Lord Chanchellor Jefferies, and
also naming more of the Lords of the Privy Council, Dominos Concilij, for
contriving, making and publishing a Seditious Libel against the King, etc.

Then it was prayed that the Return might be filed, and that the Information
which was then exhibited against them for this Crime might be read, and that
they might all plead instanter.

Sergeant Pemberton, Mr. Finch and Mr. Pollexfen oppsed the reading of it, and
moved that the Bishops might be discharged, because they were not legally
before the Court; for it appears upon the Return that there is no lawful cause
of Commitment, and that for two reasons.

1. Because the persons committing had not any Authority so to do; for upon the
Return it appears that they were committed by several Lords of the Council,
whereas it should have been by so many Lords in Council, or by Order of Council.

2. They ought not to be committed for this Fact, which is only a Misdemeanour.
The Bishops are Peers, and therefore the Process ought to be a Summons by way
of Subpoena out of the Crown Office, and not to commit them the first time. If
a Man comes in voluntarily he cannot be charged with an Information; neither
can a person, who is found in Court by any Process be so charged if it be
illegal, as if a Peer be committed by Capias.

Justice Allybon replied, that when a Commitment was made by the Lord Chief
Justice of this Court his Name is to the Warrant, but not his Office; it is not
said Committitur per Capitalem Justiciarium Angliae etc. for he is known to be
so; and why should not a Commitment by such persons Dominos Concilij be as good
as a Commitment by Sir Rob. Wright Capitalem Justiciarium? That it was enough
for the Officer to return his Warrant, and when that is done the Court will
presume that the Commitment was by the Power which the Lords in Council had,
and not by that Power which they had not.

To which it was answered by Mr. Finch, that the Lord Chief Justice always
carries an Authority with him to commit wherever he goes in England; but the
Lords of the Privy Council have not so large a Power; for though they be Lords
of the Council always, yet they do not always act in Council.

Then the Statute of 17 Car. 1. cap. 10. was read, in which there is mention
made of a Commitment by the Lords of the Privy Council, etc.

But it was answered that that Statute was to relieve against illegal
Commitments, and those enumerated in that Act were such only, and none else.

And it was strongly insisted, that Peers of the Realm cannot be committed at
the first instance for a Misdemeanour before Judgment; and that no President
can be showed where a Peer has been brought in by Capias, which is the first
Process for a bare Misdemeanour.

The constant Proceedings in the Starr-Chamber upon such Informations were,
Crompt. Jurisdiction 33. Dyer 315. 4 Inst. 25. Regist. 287.
viz. First the Lord Chancellor sent a Letter to the person, then if he did not
appear, an Attachment went forth;

The Kings Council answered, Sir Baptist Hick's Case. Hob.
that a Peer may be committed for the Breach of the Peace, for which Sureties
are to be given, and can there be any greater Breach of the Peace than a Libel
against the King and Government? It Is certainly such a Breach of the Peace for
which Sureties ought to be demanded; for where there is any seditious Act there
must be a Breach of the Peace, and if Sureties are not given then the person
must be committed.

The Objections were overruled by three Judges.

Then the Information was read, which in Substance was, viz. That the King by
virtue of his Prerogative did on the 4th day of April in the third year of his
Reign publish his gracious Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, which was set
forth in haec verba.

That afterward, viz. 27 Aprilis in the fourth year of his Reign, the King did
publish another Declaration reciting the former in which he expressed his care
that the Indulgence by him granted might be preserved, etc. that he caused this
last Declaration to be printed; and to manifest his favor more signally
toward his Subjects, on the 4th day of May, 1688. it was Ordered in Council
that his Declaration dated the 27th day of April last, be read on two several
days in all Churches and Chapels in the Kingdom, and that the Bishops cause
the same to be distributed through their several Diocesses, etc.

That after the making of the said Order, etc. the Bishops (naming them) did
consult and conspire amongst themselves to lessen the Authority and Prerogative
of the King, and to elude the said Order; and in further prosecution of their
said Conspiracy they with Force and Arms did on the 18th day of May, etc.
unlawfully, maliciously, etc. frame, compose and write a Libel of the King,
subscribed by them, which they caused to be published under the pretense of a
Petition.

Then the Petition was set forth in haec verba,

In contemptum dicti Domini Regis, etc.

The King's Council moved that the Defendants might plead instanter, for so
(they said) is the course of the Court when a Man is brought thither in
Custody, or appears upon Recognizance.

But the Council on the other side prayed an Imparlance and a Copy of the
Information, and argued that the Defendants ought not to plead instanter,
because their Plea ought to be put in Writing, and that they ought to have time
to consider what to plead; that it was impossible to make any Defense when they
did not know the Accusation, and that the Practice of the Court anciently was
with them.

It Is true, when a Subpoena is taken out, and the Party does not appear but is
brought in by Capias, he shall plead instanter; and the reason is, because he
has given delay to the Cause: So it is likewise in Cases of Felony or Treason,
but not to an Information for a Misdemeanour.

Then the Clerk of the Crown informed the Court that it was the Course to plead
instanter in these following Cases, viz. when the person appears upon a
Recognizance, or in propria persona, or is a Prisoner in Custody upon any
Information for a Misdemeanour where no Process issued out to call him in.

As to the Objection that the Defendants cannot make any Defense without a Copy
of the Information; the Usage is otherwise even in Cases where a Man's Life is
concerned, and what greater difficulty can there be to defend an Accusation for
a Misdemeanour than a Charge for High Treason? certainiy the Defendants all
know whether they are innocent or not.

These Points being overruled by the Court, the Archbishop offered a Plea in
writing, the Substance of which was, that they (naming all the Defendants) were
Peers of Parliament, and ought not to be compelled to answer this Misdemeanour
immediately, but they ought to appear upon due Process of Law, and upon their
Appearance to have a Copy of the Information, and afterward to imparle; and
because they were not brought in by Process, they pray the Judgment of the
Court.

This Plea was offered to the end that what was denied before upon a Motion
might be settled by the Opinion of the Court, but it was over ruled.

Then they pleaded severally Not-Guilty, and were tried at the Bar a Fortnight
afterward by a Middlesex Jury, and acquitted.

Anonymus. In the Common Pleas.
AN Action of Debt was brought upon a Bond against the Defendant; Where an
Averment may be made of another person, so as it consists with the Condition of
a Bond.
in which Bond the said A. B. the elder, and A. B. the younger, were jointly
and severally bound in the penal Sum of 1000 l. conditioned that if the above
bounden A. B. (omitting the word younger) do and shall forbear knowingly and
wittingly to come to or write Letters unto C. the Wife of D. that then the
Obligation to be void.

The Defendant pleaded that he did not come to or write Letters to the said C.
knowingly, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that he exhibited an Information against A. B. the
younger (showing in what Term) and that it was agreed between them, that in
consideration that he would forbear to prosecute the same, the said A. B. the
elder together with A. B. the younger, should become bound to the Plaintiff in
1000 l. that the said A. B. the younger should not knowingly or wittingly come
into the Company, etc. then sets forth the Bond and the Condition thereof at
large, and avers that A. B. in the Condition mentioned is A. B. the younger;
and farther that the said A. B. the younger did afterward knowingly come into
the Company, etc.

The Defendant re-joyned and said, that the Plaintiff ought not to averr that
the aforesaid A. B. the younger is the person in the Condition of the said
Bond, etc.

And upon a Demurrer the Question was whether the Plaintiff was estopped by the
words in the Condition to make such an Averment.

It was argued for the Plaintiff, that he might make such an Averment which is
to reduce a thing to a certainty which was very uncertain before if it be not
repugnant in it self; nay sometimes an Averment does reduce contradictory
things to a certainty.

It Is plain that A. B. the younger is bound in this Bond; the Objection is that
A. B. the elder being of the Name and being likewise bound, that the Condition
might referr to either.

It Is agreed there are many Cases where a Man shall be estopped to averr
against a Record; but this Averment is not contradictory to any thing in the
Record; for it appears by the Pleadings that the Information was prosecuted
against A. B. the younger, and therefore he must be intended to be bound not to
come to the said C. knowingly, etc.

If an Estate should be devised to A. and the Name of the Testator omitted in
the Will, 2 Leon. 35.
yet the Devise is good by averring of the Name, and by proof that it was his
intention to give it him by his Will.

So if the Plaintiff should claim a Title under the Grant of such a person
Knight, and the Jury find he was an Esquire, Lit. Rep. 181, 223.
but that the Knight and the Esquire are both the same person, this is a good
Declaration.

It Is usual to make an Allegation even against the express words of a Condition
to show the truth of an Agreement; Cro. Car. 501.
as if Debt be brought upon a Bond of 100 l. conditioned to pay 50 l. within
six Months; the Defendant pleaded the Statute of Usury; the Plaintiff replied
that he lent the Money for a year, and alleged that by the mistake of the
Scrivener the Bond was made paiable in six Months. The Defendant rejoyned that
it was lent for six Months only: And upon a Demurrer this was adjudged to be a
good Allegation, though it was against the very words of the Condition, which
is a stronger Case than this at the Bar, because the Averment consists with
the Condition of the Bond.

If a Man should levy a Fine and declare the Uses thereof to his Son William,
and he has two Sons of that Name, 4 Co. 71. 8 Co. 155. a. Dyer 146.
then an Averment is made that he intended to declare the Uses to his youngest
Son of that Name; this Averment out of the Fine has been adjudged good for the
same reason given already, which is, because it stands with the words
thereof, and it is a good Issue to be tried.

It cannot be objected that the Bond is illegal being entered into for the not
prosecuting of an Information, because a Nolle prosequi was entered as to that
Matter, so it is the Act of the Court.

Lastly, It was said that every Estoppel must be certain to every intent which
cannot be in this Case, for by the words of this Condition it is uncertain which
of the Obligors shall be intended.

E contra. It was argued, that an Estoppel is as well intended by Law, as
expressed by Words, that if an Averment can be taken, yet this is not well,
because the Plaintiff has absolutely averred that A. B. in the Condition is A.
B. the younger; he should have said, that A. B. in the Condition is intended A.
B. the younger, which might have been traversed, and Issue taken thereon.

No Judgment was given, for this Case was ended by Compromise.

Hoil versus Clerk, In the Common Pleas.
THIS was a special Verdict in Ejectment for Lands in Wetherfield, A subsequent
Will, though not made pursuant to the Statute, is a Revocation of a former.
in the County of Essex, upon the demise of Abigail Pheasant.

The Jury find that one John Clark was seized in Fee of the Lands in question,
who by his last Will in writing, bearing date the 14th day of September, in the
year 1666. devised the same to Benjamin Clark for Life, so to his first and
second Sons, etc. in Tail Male, and for default of such Issue, then to his two
Sisters for Life, Remainder over, etc.

This Will was attested by one Witness only.

They find that the said John Clark made another, dated the sixth day of
February, 1672. which was 13 years after the making of his first Will, and that
by this last Will he revoked all former Wills and Testaments by him made.

They find an Endorsement on this Will, written by the Testator himself in
these words,

Viz. My Will and Testament dated the 6th of February, 1679. and then published
by me in the presence of three Witnesses.

They find that this last Will was so published and attested by three Witnesses
in his presence, but that it was not signed by the Testator in their presence.

They find that Benjamin Clark entered, and devised the Lands to Mary
Micklethwaite, who made a Lease thereof to the Plaintiff for three years, upon
whom the Defendant entered.

This Case was argued at the Bar, and in this Term at the Bench Seriatim.

The single Question was, 29 Car. 2. cap. 3.
whether this last Will, not being duly executed according to the Statute, is a
Revocation of the first Will, or not?

It was admitted by all, that it was a good Will to pass the personal Estate,
but as to the point of Revocation, the Court was divided.

Justice Lutwitch argued that it was not a Revocation: He agreed that if the
last Will has any respect to the first, it must be as a Revocation, or not at
all, which revocation must depend upon the construction and exposition of the
sixth Paragraph in the Statute of Frauds, etc. the words whereof are,

Viz. That no Devise of Lands, etc. or any clause thereof shall be Revoked
otherwise than by some Codicil in Writing, or other Writing declaring the same,
or by burning, cancelling, tearing or obliterating the same by the Testator
himself, or in his presence, and by his direction or consent. But all devises
of Lands, etc. shall be good, until burnt, cancelled, torn, etc. by the
Testator, etc. or unless the same be altered by some other Will or Codicil in
Writing, or other Writing of the Devisor, signed in the presence of three
Witnesses, declaring the same.

So that the Question will be, whether a Will which revokes a former Will,
ought to be signed by the Testator in the presence of three Witnesses?

It Is clear that a Will by which Lands are devised ought to be so signed, and
why should not a Will which revokes another Will have the same formality?

The Statute seems to be plain that it should, for it says that a Will shall
not be revoked, but by some Will or Codicil in writing, or other writing of the
Devisor, signed by him in the presence of three or four Witnesses declaring the
same: which last Clause is an entire sentence in the disjunctive, and appoints
that the Writing which revokes a Will, must be signed in the presence of three
Witnesses, etc.

Before the making of this Act it was sufficient that the Testator gave
directions to make his Will, though he did never see it when made, which mischief
is now remedied, not in writing the Will, but that the Party himself should
sign it in the presence of three Witnesses; and this not being so signed, but
only published by the Testator, in their presence; it is therefore no good
Revocation.

Justice Street was of a contrary Opinion, that this was a good Revocation:
That the words in the fifth Paragraph of this Statute which altered the Law
were,

Viz. That all Devises of Lands, etc. shall be in Writing, and signed by the
Party so devising, or by some other person in his presence, and by his express
Directions, and shall be attested and subscribed in the presence of the
Devisor, by three or four credible Witnesses.

In which Paragraph there are two parts,

1. The act of the Devisor, which is to sign the Will, but not a word that he
shall subscribe his Name in the presence of three Witnesses.

2. The act of the Witnesses, viz. that they shall attest and subscribe the
Will in the presence of the Devisor, or else the Will to be void.

But the sixth Paragraph is penned after another manner, as to the Revocation
of a Will, which must be by some Codicil in writing, or other Writing declaring
the same, signed in the presence of three Witnesses.

Now here is a Writing declaring that it shall be revoked, not expressly, but by
implication, and though that Clause in the disjunctive which says, that the
revocation must be by some Writing of the Devisor, signed in the presence of
three Witnesses, etc. yet in the same Paragraph it is said that it may be
revoked by a Codicil or Will in Writing, and therefore an exposition ought to
be made upon the whole Paragraph, that the intention of the Law may more fully
appear.

Such a construction has been made upon a whole Sentence, Sid. 328. 1 Sand. 58.
where part thereof was in the disjunctive; as for instance, viz. A Man was
possessed of a Lease by disseisin, who assigned it to another, and covenanted
that at the time of the assignment it was a good, true, and indefeasable Lease,
and that the Plaintiff should enjoy it without interruption of the Disseisor,
Or any claiming under him; in this Case the Diffeisee re-entred; and though the
Covenant was in the disjunctive to defend the Assignee from the Disseisor, or
any claiming under him; yet he having undertaken for quiet enjoyment, and that
it was an indefeasable Lease, it was adjudged that an exposition ought to be
made upon the whole Sentence. and so the Plaintiff had Judgment.

The Chief Justice Herbert was of the same Opinion with Justice Street.

Rex versus Grimes and Thompson.
THE Defendants were indicted for being Common Pawn-Brokers, Two are indicted
for a Confederacy, one is acquitted, and that is the acquittal of the other.
and that Grimes had unlawfully obtained Goods of the Countess of, etc. and
that he together with one Thompson, per confoederationem and astutiam, did
detain the said Goods, until the Countess had paid him 12 Guineas.

Thompson was acquitted, and Grimes was found Guilty, which must be of the
first part of the Indictment only; for it could not be per confoederationem
with Thompsom, and therefore it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that to obtain
Goods unlawfully, was only a private injury for which the party ought not to be
indicted.

To which it was answered, that a plain Fraud was laid in this Indictment,
which was sufficient to maintain it; and that tho one was acquitted, yet the
Jury had found the other guilty of the whole.

But the Court were of Opinion, that the acquittal of one, is the acquittal of
both upon this Indictment, and therefore it was quashed.

King versus Dilliston. Hill. 2 and 3 Jacobi Rot. 494.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Judgment in Ejectment, given in the
Common Pleas, Infant not bound by a Custom.
for one Message and twenty Acres of Land held of the Manor of Swafling.

There was a special Verdict found, the substance of which was, viz. That the
Land in question was Copyhold, held of the said Manor of Swafling in the
County of Suffolk, and that Henry Warner and Elizabeth his Wife, in right of
the said Elizabeth, were seized thereof for Life, Remainder to John Ballat in
Fee.

That the Custom of the said Manor was that if any Customary Tenant does
surrender his Estate out of Court, that such Surrender shall be presented at
the next Court of the said Manor, and public Proclamation shall be made three
Court days afterward for the Party to whose use the Surrender was made, to
come and be admitted Tenant, and if he refuses, then after three Proclamations
made in each of the said Courts, the Steward of the said Manor issues forth a
Precept to the Bailiff thereof to seize the Copyhold as forfeited.

They find that Henry Warner and his Wife and John Ballat made this Surrender
out of Court to the use of Robert Freeman and his Heirs, who died before the
next Court, and that John Freeman an Infant, was his Son and Heir.

That after the said Surrender three Proclamations were made at three several
Courts held for the said Manor, but that the said John Freeman did not come to
be admitted Tenant, thereupon the Steward of the said Manor made a Precept to
the Bailiff, who seized the Lands in question as forfeited to the Lady, who
entered and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, upon whom the Defendant re-entred.

The single Question upon this special Verdict was, whether this was a
Forfeiture, and so a good seizure to bind the right of an Infant.

It was argued for the Plaintiff in the Action that it was a good Seizure and a
Forfeiture till the Infant should come of Age; for as a Copyhold is established
by Custom, so likewise it is Custom which obliges the Infant to the Conditions
thereof; and therefore where one under Age has an Estate upon a Condition to
be performed by him, 8 Co. 44. b. Whittingham 's Case. Latch. 199. Jones 157.
and that Condition is broken during his Minority, the Estate is lost for ever.

In this Case the Custom obliges the Heir to be admitted, that the Lord may be
entitled to a Fine, which if he should lose, because his Tenant is an Infant,
then that privilege of Infancy works a wrong, which the Law will not permit.

It Is true, an Infant shall not be prejudiced by the Laches of another, but
shall be answerable for himself; and therefore if he is Tenant of Lands and the
Rent should be unpaid for two years, and no Distress can be found, a Cessavit
lies against him, and the Lord shall recover the Land, because of the
Nonperformance which arises by his own default.

So if one under Age be a Keeper of a Gaol and suffer a Prisoner to escape out
of Execution, 2 Inst. 382.
an Action of Debt will lie against him upon the Statute of W. 2.

It was agreed that such a Custom and Non-claim will not foreclose an Heir, 8
Co. 100. Sir Rich. Letchford 's Case.
who is an Infant and beyond Sea at the time of his Ancestors Death, though he
is bound by the Custom to claim it at the next Court; but that if he will come
over and tender himself, though after a Seizure, he shall be admitted, and so
shall the person in this Case if after his Minority he offer himself to be
admitted.

But it cannot be denied, 2 Cro. 226.
but that the Lord may seize when the Heir is beyond Sea till he return and
tender himself to be admitted, and by the same reason he may also seize in this
case during the Minority.

A Temporary Forfeiture is no new thing in the Law; Cro. Car. 7.
for if a Feme Covert be a Copyholder and marries, and her Husband makes a
Lease for years without License of the Lord, it is a Forfeiture and shall bind
her during the Coverture.

So the Law is, Cro. El. 351.
that the Lord may seize the Land till a Fine is paid, for it is a reasonable
Custom so to do.

It has been a good Custom for the Lord to assign a person to take the Profits
of a Copyhold Estate descended to the Infant during his Minority without
rendering an Account when he came of Age. 1 Leon. 266. 2 Leon. 239.


So that all taht is to be done in this Case is to enforce the Infant to be
admitted, that the Lord may be entitled to a Fine: The Inheritance is not
bound, but the Land is only seized quousque.

E contra. It was argued that here is a general Seizure, E contra.
which cannot extend to an Infant, for he is not bound in a Writ of Right, much
less in an inferior Court after three Proclamations; but if this had been a
Temporary Seizure the Jury ought to have found it so, which is not done.

There are many Authorities in the Books which affirm that an Infant is not
obliged to be admitted during his Nonage, 1 Leon. 100. 3 Leon. 221.
or to tender the Fine in order to an Admittance; that the Law was settled in
this Point, and therefore without any further Argument he prayed Judgment for
the Defendant.

Afterward in Hillary-Term 1 Willielmi and Mariae this Case was argued
seriatim at the Bench, three Judges being of a contrary Opinion to the Chief
Justice for the affirming of the Judgment.

Justice Air premised two things.

1. That he could not intend but that this Verdict had found an absolute
Forfeiture, the Jury having no way qualified it as to a certain time, and
therefore he would give a Judgment upon the whole Record.

2. He agreed that a Feoffment of an Infant was no Forfeiture at the Common
Law, and that as a particular Custom may bind an Infant for a time, so it may
bar him for ever; but whether this Custom, as it is found in general words,
shall bind an Infant after three Proclamations is now the Question, he not
coming then to be admitted.

And he held that it shall not, and that for these reasons.

1. The Right of Infants is much favored in the Law, and their Laches shall
not be prejudicial to them as to Entry or Claim, upon a Presumption that they
understand not their Right, 1 Inst. 380. 2 Inst. 401.
and therefore in a Cessavit per biennium, which is a remedy given by the
Statute of W. 2. and which extends to Infants, Westminster. 2. c. 31.
who have not the Land by descent; for if a Cesser be in that Case the Infant
shall have his Age, because the Law intends that he does not know what
Arrerages to tender.

It Is admitted that if an Infant does not present to a Church within six
Months, or does not appear within a year that his Right is bound, but this is
because the Law is more tender of the Church, and the life of a Man than of the
Privileges of Infancy.

So if an Office of Parkship be given or descends to an Infant, if the
Condition in Law annexed to such an Office (which is skill) be not observed,
the Office is forfeited.

But that a Proclamation in a base Court should bind an Infant, when he is not
within the reason of the Custom, is not agreeable either to Law or Reason.

2. Cro. Jac. 80. Cro. El. 879. Noy 42. 1 Roll. Abr. 568.
All Customs are to be taken strictly when they go to the destruction of an
Estate; and therefore a Custom was, that if a Copyholder in Fee surrender out
of Court, and the Surrendree does not come in after three Proclamations, the
Lord shall seize it. A Copyholder in Fee surrendered to another for Life, the
Remainder over in Fee, if the Tenant for Life will not come in, he in the
Remainder shall not be barred, for the Custom shall be intended to extend only
to those in possession.

But the Infant in this Case is not within the Letter of the Custom, for it is
found that the Surrender was made to one Freeman, who died before the next
Court-day; and that John Freeman the Infant was his Son and Heir, so they have
found a Title in him; for the word Heir is not here a word of Purchase, but of
Limitation.

3. Jones 157. Noy 92.
Infants are not bound by other Customs like this, as a Custom that every
Copyholder who makes a Lease of his Land shall forfeit it; but this does not
conclude an Infant.

4. There is not any necessity to construe an Infant to be within this Custom;
for it is not found that the Lord was to have a Fine upon admittance; and it is
no consequence to say that the Lord shall have a Fine, because usually Fines
are taken upon admittances; 1 Leon. 100. 3 Leon. 221.
for an Infant may be admitted to a Copyhold, but not be bound to tender his
Fine at any time during his Nonage.

Justice Gregory was of the same Opinion, which he chiefly grounded upon Sir
Richard Letchford's Case, between which and the Case at the Bar he said there
was no material difference, only in that Case the Heir was beyond Sea, and in
this at the Bar, 2 Cro. 226. Latch. 199. Godb. 364. Jones 391. Dyer 104.
he was an Infant.

It Is very true, that the Books mention a Seizure quousque it is so said by
Justice Williams in Croke, but he gives no reason for it, it is only an Opinion
obiter; but it is clear by many Authorities that Infants may be bound by Acts
of necessity, and so they may by a Custom.

Justice Dolben of the same Opinion, which he said was agreeable to the reason
of the Law in parallel Cases: An Infant is privileged in a Fine, for he is
excepted by the Statute, because he knows not how to make his Claim.

He said this was likewise agreeable to the Custom of 26 Manors of which he
was formerly Steward; for in such Cases he always marked the Court Roll, Nulla
Proclamatio quia Infans.

It cannot be a Forfeiture quousque, because an Infant is wholly exempted by
the Custom, and therefore it is no Forfeiture at all.

It Is an Objection of no moment, to say that the Lord by this means will lose
his Fine, and that he has no remedy to make the Infant when of Age to be
admitted, for no Fine is due to him before admittance.

But this Objection will be of less weight, if the loss of the Infant be
compared to that of the Lord, who loses only the Interest of a Fine before
Admittance; and shall this Infant who is now but three years of Age loose the
Profits of his Estate for 18 years?

But there may be a way found out that neither may loose; for if it should be
that when the Infant comes of Age his Estate should be then forfeited, if he
does not tender himself to be admitted after three Proclamations; Now upon his
admittance the Lord may set a reasonable Fine, having respect to the length of
time in which it was detained from him.

Stowel's Case was no more but this, viz. Pl. Com. 356.
A Disseisor levied a Fine with Proclamations, and lived three years, his Heir
being under Age, and the five years incurred after the said Heir came of Age,
and then he entered within a year, and his Entry was adjudged unlawful. But that
will not concern this Case, because it was a Judgment upon the Statute of H. 7.
4 H. 7. c. 24.
for the five years being once attached and begun in the life of his Ancestor
shall incurr and go on, and bind the Infant, if he do not pursue his Claim
within that time after he comes of Age; but it is to be observed that my Lord
Dyer in the Argument of that Case said nothing of a Seizure quousque.

The Chief Justice was of a contrary Opinion from the other three Justices, and
that the Judgment ought to be reversed.

Because until the Infant is admitted the Estate remains in the Surrenderor,
and without an Admittance he cannot enter but by a special Custom to warrant
it; and for this reason it is that the Surrenderor shall have an Action of
Trespass against any person who enters, because he shall be intended still in
possession, till the Admittance of another.

If so, 2 Cro. 368. Yelv. 16.
then Infancy cannot protect an Estate to which the Infant has no Title till
Admittance; for till then he has neither Jus in re nor Jus ad rem.

This is a Condition annexed to the Estate to be performed by the Infant, by
which he is bound notwithstanding his Nonage, otherwise his Estate is
forfeited.

The Custom which obliges him to be admitted is to entitle the Lord of the
Manor to a Fine to which he has a right. Now Infancy was never yet extended
to endanger that remedy, which Men have to recover their Rights; it has been
often so far extended as to delay such a remedy, but never to destroy it; for
if the Infant should die the Lord loses the Fine and then another person is
to be admitted; but he cannot increase the Fine upon him who is a Stranger for
the neglect of the Infant.

It Is true, Bridge. 83. Yelv. 144. Poph. 127.
where an Infant has a Right it shall be preserved though a Fine be levied and
the five years pass, but in this Case he has no Right before Admittance.

If a Feme Covert be an Heir to a Copyhold Estate, where the like Custom is,
and she marries, and the Husband after three Proclamations will not come and
be admitted, it is a Forfeiture during the Coverture.

Now the reason in the Cases of Coverture and Infancy is the same; for if there
shall be a Seizure during the time the woman is Covert, why not during the
Infancy?

As to Sir Richard Letchford's Case, the Heir was beyond Sea, but when he came
into England he desired to be admitted; but this Infant never yet desired to be
admitted; he stands upon his Privilege of Infancy.

But upon the Opinion of the other three Justices the Judgment was affirmed
that the Custom does not bind the Infant.

Carter versus Dowrich.
A Covenant to pay so much Money to the Plaintiff or his Assigns as should be
drawn upon the now Defendant by a Bill of Exchange, Custom of Merchants, where
it must be particularly set forth.
etc. The Breach was assigned in Non-payment.

The Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff secundum legem Mercatorum did assign
the Money to be paid to A. who assigned it to B. to whom he paid 100 l. and
tendered the rest drawn upon by Bill of Exchange, etc.

And upon a Demurrer Mr. Pollexfen insisted, that this was not a good Plea,
because the Defendant had not set forth the Custom of Merchants, without which
all these Assignments are void, of which Custom the Court cannot take any
judicial notice, but it must be pleaded; and it is not sufficient to say, that
the Assignment was made secundum legem Mercatoriam, but it must be secundum
consuetudinem Mercatoriam, otherwise it is not good.

E contra. E contra. Litt. 182.
It was argued that the Custom of Merchants is not a particular Custom and
local; but it is of an universal extent and is a general Law of the Land.

The pleading it as it is here, is good; for if an Action is brought against an
Innkeeper or common Carrier it is usual to declare secundum legem and
consuetudinem Angliae; for it is not a Custom confined to a particular place,
but it is such which is extensive to all the King's People.

The word Consuetudo might have been added, 1 Inst. 182.
but it imports no more than Lex, for Custom it self is Law.

If the Custom of Merchants had been left out the Defendant had then pursued
his Covenant; for if a Man agrees to pay Money to such a person or his Assigns,
and he appoints the payment to another, a tender to that person is a good
performance of the Covenant.

But the Court were of Opinion that this was not a good Plea.

Panton versus the Earl of Bath.
A Scire Facias to have Execution of a Judgment obtained in the Court of Oliver
late Protector of England and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; Where the Pleading is good in substance though there is a small
variation it will not hurt.
and in reciting the Judgment it is said that it was obtained before Oliver
Protector of England and the Dominions thereunto belonging ( leaving out the
word Territories.)

And upon a Demurrer Mr. Pollexfen held this to be a variance, Yelv. 212. Orde
versus Moreton.
and like the Case where a Writ of Error was brought to remove a Record in
Ejectment directed to the Bishop of Durham, setting forth that the Action was
between such Parties, and brought before the said Bishop and seven other
persons (naming them;) and the Record removed was an Ejectment before the
Bishop and eight others, so that it could not be the same Record which was
intended to be removed by the Writ.

E contra. E contra.
It was said, suppose the word Scotland should be left out of the King's Title,
would that be a variance?

The Judicature in this Case is still the same, and the Pleading is good in
Substance; and of that Opinion was the whole Court.

Hyley versus Hyley.
HYley had Issue W. Where the Reversion in Fee shall pass in a Will by the
words viz. Remaining part of my Estate.
his eldest Son, who had Issue Peter, Charles, John.


He by Will devised 1000 l. to his eldest Son, and several parcels of Land to
other Legatees.

Then he gave to Peter Lands in Tail Male.

To John a Mansion House (now in question) in Tail Male.

He devised another House to his Grandson Charles in like manner.

And all the rest and remaining part of his Estate he devised to his three
Grandsons equally to be divided amongst them, that only excepted which he had
given to Peter, Charles and John, and to the Heirs of their Bodies, whom he
made Executors.

Then by another Clause he devised, viz. That if either of his Executors die
without Issue then the part or parts of him so dying shall go to the Survivor
or Survivors equally to be divided.

John, the youngest Grandson, dyed without Issue, and the question was, whether
the Reversion of his House shall be divided between his surviving Brothers or
descend to his Heir.

And it was adjudged that the Exception in the Will did comprehend the
Reversion in Fee, and that it did not pass but without such an Exception it had
passed; Allen 28.
as where a Man devised his Manor to another for years, and part of other
Lands to B. and his Heirs, and all the rest of his Lands to his Brother in
Tail, it was held that by these words the Reversion of the Manor did pass.

Anonymus:
NOTA. An Infant having entered into a Statute brought an Audita Querela to
avoid it; he was brought into the Court, and two Witnesses were sworn to prove
his Age, and then his Appearance and Inspection were recorded; he was bound in
this Case with two other persons for 1600 l. and had no more than 200 l. for
his share.

Lydcott versus Willows.
IN Ejectment. A special Verdict was found, viz. Devise of an Hereditament
carries the Reversion in Fee.
that the Testator being seized in Fee of certain Houses in Bedfor-Bury and in
Parker's Lane, did by Will devise his Houses in Parker's Lane to charitable
Uses; then he gave several specific Legacies to several persons named in the
said Will; and then he devised his Houses in Bedford-Bury to Edward Harris and
Mary his Wife for their Lives; then follow these words, viz. The better to
enable my Wife to pay my Legacies I give and bequeath to her and her Heirs all
my Mesuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the Kingdom of England not
before disposed of, etc.

The Question was whether this Devise would carry the Reversion of the Houses
in Bedford-Bury to his Wife.

Adjudged that it did not, but that it ought to go to the Heir of the Testator,
who was Plaintiff in this Case: It being found that Harris and his Wife were
dead, and that the Wife who was Executrix had sufficient Assets to pay the
Legacies without the Reversion.

But Justice Powel was of another Opinion; for that the word Hereditament
imports an Inheritance, and if it had devised thus, viz. the Inheritance not
before disposed of the Reversion had passed.

Afterward a Writ of Error was brought in the Exchequer-Chamber upon this
Judgment, 2 Vent. 285.
and according to the Opinion of Justice Powel the Judgment was reversed.

Nota. A Rule of Court was made, that no Certiorari should go to the Sessions
of Ely without Motion in Court, or signing of it by a Judge in his Chamber.

But Mr. Pollexfen insisted that the Sessions there did not differ from other
Courts and Franchises; for the inferior Courts in London are of as large a
Jurisdiction as any, and yet a Certiorari goes to them, and so it ought to go
to Ely; for it is the Right of the Subject to remove his Cause hither.

Their course in the Royal Franchise of Ely is to hold the Sessions there twice
a year, viz. in March and September, in which two Months the Judges are seldom
in Town; and if this Court should deny a Certiorari, the Court of Common Pleas
would grant it.

Attorney General contra. This Franchise of Ely is of greater Privilege and
Authority than any inferior Court, for it has many Regalia though it is not a
County Palatine.

A Certiorari will not lie to the Grand Sessions, nor to a County Palatine, to
remove Civil Causes; it is true, it lies to remove Indictments for Riots; and
this Franchise being truly called Royal has equal privilege with a County
Palatine, and therefore a Certiorari will not lie.

But no Rule was made.

Osborn versus Steward.
TRespass. Distress for an Heriot, where it may be taken.
The Case upon the Pleadings was this, viz. A Lease was made of Land for 99
years if Margery and Dorothy Upton should so long live, reserving a yearly Rent
and an Heriot or 40 s. in lieu thereof after the death of either of them,
Provided that no Heriot shall be paid after the death of Margery, living
Dorothy.

Margery survived, and is since dead.

The Question was whether upon this Reservation the Beast of any person being
upon the Land may be distreined for an Heriot.

Mr. Pollexfen argued that it could not, because the words in the Reservation
ought to be taken very strictly, and not to be carried farther than the plain
expression.

Where words are doubtful they have been always expounded against the Lessor;
Cro. Eliz. 217. 2 Roll. Abr. 448. Latch. 99.
as if a Lease be made for years reserving a Rent durante termino to the
Lessor, his Executors or Assigns; the Lessor dies, his Heir shall not have the
Rent, because it is reserved to the Executors.

But here is no room for any doubt upon these words, for if a Lease for years
be made, in which there is a Covenant, that the Lessee shall pay the Rent
without any other words, this determines upon the death of the Lessee.

So where a Lease was made for 99 years if A. B. C. 2 Roll. Abr. 451. Hetley 58.
Cro. Car. 314.
or any of them should so long live, reserving Rent to him and his Executors,
and also at or upon the death of either his or their best Beast, in the name of
an Heriot, provided that if B. or C. die, living A. no Heriot shall be paid
after their deaths.

A. assigns his Term, and the Beast of the Assignee was taken for an Heriot,
but adjudged that it could not, for the words his or their shall not be carried
farther than to the persons named in the Limitation.

The Books that affirm that a Man may seize for an Heriot Service, cannot be
brought as Authorities in this Case, because they are all upon Tenures between
Lord and Tenant, and not upon particular Reservations as this is.

The old Books say, that if a Tenant by Fealty and Heriot-Service, Broke tit.
Heriot 2.
made his Executor and died, that the Lord might seize the best Beast of his
Tenant in the Hands of the Executor, and if he could not find any Beast, then
he might distrain the Executor, Plo. Com. 95.
and the reason of this seizure was because immediately upon the death of the
Tenant, a Property was vested in the Lord; but it was held always unreasonable
to put him to distrain when he might seize.

And it is now held that for Heriot-Service the Lord may either distrain or
seize, but then if he makes a seizure, Cro. Car. 260. Jones 300.
it must be the very Beast of the Tenant, but if he distrain, he may take any
persons Cattle upon the Land.

So that admitting this to be Law, yet it proves nothing to this matter,
because such Services being by Tenure, shall not be extended to those which are
created within time of memory, upon particular reservations; for by those
ancient Tenures the Lords had many Privileges which cannot be upon
Reservations.

Besides, the seisures in those Cases were by the Lords, who continued so to be
at the very time of the seizure; but in our Case the Lease is determined by the
death of the last Life, so the Privilege is lost, and then it must stand upon
the particular words in the Deed. Sed adjornatur into the Exchequer Chamber,
the Judges being divided in Opinion. Vid. 2 Sand. 165.

Shipley versus Chapel. Pasch. 3 Jac. Rot. 404.
THE Plaintiff Shipley as Administrator of Hannah his Wife, Condition of two
parts in the disjunctive, and one part becomes impossible to be done, yet the
other must be performed according to the subsequent matter.
brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond, against Chapel an Attorney, for 140 l.

The Defendant craved Dyer of the Condition, which was

Viz. Whereas Hannah Goddard (who was Wife to the Plaintiff) and Thomas Chapel
of Greys-Inn, in the County of Middlesex, are Coparceners (according to the
Common Law) of one House, with the Appurtenances in Sheffeild, in the
possession of William White; and whereas the said Hannah Goddard has paid unto
Thomas Chapel the Father, for the use of his Son, the Sum of 72 l. in
consideration that the said Thomas Chapel the Son, when he attains the Age of
21 years ( which will be about Midsomer next) do by good Conveyance in the Law,
at the costs and charges of the said Hannah Goddard, convey his said moiety of
the said House with the Appurtenances, unto her and her Heirs. Now the
Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the said Thomas Chapel the Son
shall at the Age of 21 years convey his said moiety of the said House, or
otherwise if the said Thomas Chapel the Father, his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, shall pay or cause to be paid the sum of 72 l. with lawful
Interest for the same, unto the said Hannah Goddard, her Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, that then this Obligation to be void.

Then he pleaded, that his Son Thomas Chapel was Coparcener with Hannah
Goddard, as Co-heires of Elizabeth Goddard, that Thomas came of Age, and that
before that time Hannah died without Issue.

The Plaintiff replied, that true it is, that before Thomas Chapel the Son
came of Age the said Hannah died without Issue of her Body, that Elizabeth
Goddard before the making of the said Bond died seized in Fee of the said
Message, but that she first married with one Malm Stacy, by whom she had Issue
Lydia; that Malm her Husband died, and Elizabeth married John Goddard, by whom
he had Issue Hannah, their only Daughter and Heir; that John Goddard died, and
that Lydia Stacy married the Defendant Thomas Chapel, by whom he had Issue
Thomas Chapel his Son; that Lydia died in the lifetime of Elizabeth; that
Thomas Chapel has not paid the 72 l. to Hannah in her life time, or to John
Shipley after her death.

The Defendant demurred, and the Plaintiff joined in Demurrer.

The Question was, since the word Heirs in the Condition being a word of
Limitation, and not of any designation of the person, whether the death of
Hannah Goddard before Chapel the Son came of Age, and who was to make the
Conveyance shall excuse the Defendant from the payment of the Money?

Those who argued for the Defendant, 5 Co. 21. b.
chiefly relied upon Laughter's Case, which was, viz. Laughter and Rainsford
were bound that if R. after marriage with G. together with the said G. shall
sell a Message, etc. if then R. do or shall in his lifetime purchase for the
said G. and her Heirs and Assigns Lands of as good value as the Money by him
received by the said Sale, or leave her as much Money at his decease, then, etc.

G. died, R. did not purchase Lands of an equal value with that he sold; and
upon Demurrer it was held that where a Condition consists of two parts in the
disjunctive, and both possible at the time of the Bond made, and afterward one
is become impossible by the act of God, there the Obligor is not bound to
perform the other part, because the Condition is made for the benefit of the
Obligor, and shall be taken most beneficially for him who had election either
to perform the one or the other, to save the penalty of the Bond.

But the Council for the Plaintiff said that the whole intent of the Condition
in that Case was to provide a Security for G. who died before her Husband; so
that no body could be hurt for the nonperformance of that Condition, there
being no manner of necessity that any thing should be done in order to it after
her decease.

It Is quite otherwise in the Case at Bar, for Hannah Goddard paid Money for the
House, and certainly it was never intended that Chapel the Father to whom the
Money was paid, should have both House and Money.

If she had lived the House ought to have been conveyed to her; now she is dead
the Money ought to be paid, for it is not lost by her death.

In Laughter's Case, the person who was to do the thing was the Obligor
himself, but here the Father undertakes for his Son, that he should convey when
he came of Age, or to repay the Money, so that it is not properly a Condition in
the disjunctive, for it is no more than if it had been penned after this manner.

Viz. The Father undertakes for his Son that he shall convey at the Age of 21
years; if he refuse, then the Father is to repay what money he received.

Besides, Cro. Eliz. 399.
Laughter's Case is Reported by Justice Croke, and therein he cites two other
Cases of Chew and Baker.

That of Chew was viz. A. promised B. that if C. did not appear at Westminster
such a day, he would pay him 20 l. The Defendant pleaded that C. died before
the day; and ruled to be no Plea, for he ought to pay the Money, which Case is
parallel to this, for it is the same in Reason and Sense.

That of Baker was viz. A Man was bound that A. should appear the first day in
the next Term at the Star Chamber, or he would pay 20 l. A. died before the
day, so as by the act of God he could not appear, yet it was adjudged that the
Money must be paid.

The like Case was adjudged between Huntley and Allen in the Common Pleas, in
my Lord Hale 's time; it is entered Pasch. 1658. Rot. 1277.

The Rule in Laughter's Case cannot be denied, viz. where the Condition is in
the disjunctive consisting of two parts, and one becomes impossible by the act
of God, the Obligor is not bound to perform the other, but then it must be
governed by the subsequent matter.

As in Greningham's Case, Cro. Eliz. 396. Moor 395.
viz. Debt upon Bond, conditioned that if the Defendant delivered three Bonds
to the Plaintiff, wherein he was bound to the Defendant, or a Release of them,
as should be advised by the Plaintiff's Council before such a day, then, etc.

The Defendant pleaded, that neither the Plaintiff or his Council did advise a
Release before the day, etc. and upon Demurrer it was adjudged that the Plea
was good, for the Defendant had an election to deliver or release as the
Plaintiff should devise, which if he will not do, the Defendant is discharged
by the neglect of the Plaintiff; for the Defendant being at his choice to
perform the one thing or the other, it is not reason that the Plaintiff should
compel him to perform one thing only.

It was argued on the other side, E contra.
that this is a disjunctive condition, and not only an undertaking of the
Father for the Son.

Where a Condition is to perform two things, and if either be done, no Action
will lie, such Condition is in the disjunctive, as in this Case, if the Son had
conveyed or the Father repaid the Money.

By the Condition of this Bond, the Father did as much undertake for his Son,
as Laughter did for Rainsford, viz. to convey the House, or pay the Money to
Hannah Goddard; now the last part of the Condition being discharged by the Act
of God, he is acquitted of the other.

Suppose the Condition had been single to convey to Hannah Goddard, if she die,
the Bond is void.

There is an Authority to this purpose, Cro. Eliz. 380.
Reported by Justice Croke, which was, an Action of Debt was brought by the
Plaintiff, as Executor, etc. The Condition of the Bond was for the yearly
payment of a Sum of Money twice in a year, viz. at Michaelmas and Lady- day,
during the Life of a Lady, or within 30 days after either of the said Feasts:
the Lady died after one of the Feasts, but within the 30 days; it was adjudged
that by her death that payment which was due at the Feast preceding was
discharged.

In the Case at Bar the Condition is, that if the Son should not convey when of
Age, or otherwise, if the Defendant re-pay, etc. Now certainly these words or
otherwise, make the Condition disjunctive.

It Is like the common Case of Bail entered into in this Court, whereby the
Parties undertake that the Defendant shall render himself to Prison if
condemned in the Action, or they shall pay the condemnation money; this is a
disjunctive condition, and if the Defendant dye before the return of the second
Sci. Fa. the Bail are discharged.

Justice Allibon said, Roll. Abr. tit. condition 450. pl. 4.
that if a condition be to make an Assurance of Land to the Obligee and his
Heirs, and the Obligee dies before the Assurance made, yet it shall be made to
the Heir, for this copulative is a disjunctive. Sed Adjornatur.

Franshaw versus Bradshaw. Mich. 1 Jac. Rot. 45.
DEbt upon a Judgment obtained in this Court, 34 Car. 2. Matter of Form not
amendable upon Demurrer.
setting forth the said Judgment, etc. Sicut per Recordum and processum inde
remanen' in eadem Curia nuper Domini Regis coram ipso Rege apud Westmonast.
before liquet and apparet. And upon a Demurrer to the Declaration this
Objection was made, viz. It does not appear that the Judgment was in force, or
where the Reeord was at the time of this Action brought; he should have
declared Coram ipso nuper Rege apud Westminster. sed jam coram Domino Rege nunc
residen' etc. before liquet, etc.

The Court held it was but matter of form, but being upon a Demurrer it was not
amendable.

Letchmere versus Thorowgood, and al' Vic. London.
TRespass by the Assignees of Commissioners of Bankrupcy for taking of their
Goods; When a Judgment is once executed, the Goods are in Custodia Legis, and
shall not be taken away by an Exchequer Process, or Assignment of Commissioners
of Bankrupts.
upon not Guilty pleaded, the Jury find a special Verdict, the substance of
which was, viz. one Toplady a Vintner, on the 28th of April became a Bankrupt,
against whom a Judgment was formerly obtained; the Judgment Creditor sued out a
Fi. Fa. and the Sheriffs of London, by virtue thereof, did on the 29th day of
April seize the Goods of the said Toplady; that after the seizure, and before
any Venditioni exponas, viz. 4 Maij an Extent (which is a Prerogative Writ)
issued out of the Exchequer against two persons who were indebted to the King,
and by inquisition this Toplady was found to be indebted to them, whereupon
parcel of the Goods in the Declaration was seized by the Sheriffs upon the said
Extent, and sold, and the Money paid to the Creditors, but before the said Sale,
or any execution of the Exchequer Process, a Commission of Bankrupcy was had
against Toplady, and that the Commissioners on the second of June assigned the
Goods to the Plaintiff.

The Question was, whether this Extent did not come too late? And it was held
it did; or whether the Fi. Fa. was well executed, so that the Assignees of the
Bankrupts Estate could not have a Title to those Goods which were taken before
in Execution, and so in Custodia Legis? And it was held that they had no Title.

Fitzgerald versus Villiers.
WRIE of Error upon a Judgment in Dower, Infant must appear by Guardian.
and the Error assigned was, that the Tenant in Dower was an Infant, and no
Warrant was alleged of the admission of any Guardian, 29 Assise pl. 67. Bridge.
74. Lib. Entr. 45. Hut. 92. 4 Co. 53. Lit. 92. Hetl. 52. 3 Cro. 158. Moor 434.
Hob. 5.
that it might appear to be the act of the Court; it is true an Infant may sue
by Prochein Amy, but shall not appear by Attorney but by Guardian, because it is
intended by Law, that he has not sufficient discretion to choose an Attorney,
therefore it is provided that he appear per Guardianum, which is done by the
Court, who are always careful of Infancy, and a special Entry is made upon the
Roll.

Viz. Per Guardianum ad hoc per Curiam admissum, etc.

2. The Appearance is by the Guardian in his own Name: Viz. Et praedicta
Katherina Fitzgerald per Richardum Power Guardianum suum venit and dicit quod
ipse, etc. it should have been in the name of the Party quod ipsa, etc.
Adjurnatur.

Harrison versus Austin.
A Settlement was made as follows, Viz. What words amount to a Covenant to
stand seized.
That if I have no Issue, and in case I dye without Issue of my Body lawfully
begotten, then I give, grant and confirm my Land, etc. to my Kinswoman Sarah
Stokes, to have and to hold the same to the use of my self for Life, and after
my decease to the use of the said Sarah and the Heirs of her Body to be
begotten, with Remainders over, etc.

The Question was, whether this did amount to a Covenant to stand seized, so as
to raise an use to Sarah without transmutation of the possession.

The Objection against it was, Sid. 26. Moor 687. Dyer 96. 2 Roll. Abr. 786.
Winch 59. Plowd. 300.
that Uses are created chiefly by the intention of the Parties, and that by
these words grant and confirm, the Feoffor did intend the Land should pass at
Common Law; so it could not be a Covenant to stand seized; it is like the Case
where a Letter of Attorney is in the Deed, or a Covenant to make Livery, there
nothing shall pass by way of use, but the possession, according to the course
of the Common Law; and therefore there being neither Livery and Seisin or
Attornment, no use will pass to Sarah.

It cannot be a Bargain and Sale, for that is only where a Recompense is on
each side to make the Contract good; besides, 2 Inst. 672.
the Deed is not enrolled.

To this it was answered, 1 Vent. 137.
that it shall be construed to be a Covenant to stand seized, though the formal
words are wanting to make it so; and for that purpose it was compared to Fox 's
Case, 8 Co. 93.
who being seized in Fee, devised his Land to C. for Life, remainder over for
Life, reserving a Rent: and afterward by Indenture in consideration of Money,
did demise, grant and set the same Lands to D. for 99 years, reserving a Rent,
the Lessee for Life did not attorn, in which Case there was not one word of any
use, or any attornment to make it pass by Grant, and the Question was, whether
this Lease for years shall amount to a Bargain and Sale, so that the Reversion
together with the Rent shall pass to the Lessee, without Attornment; Hob. 277.
and it was held that by construction of Law it did amount to a Bargain and
Sale, for the words import as much.

And in this Case it was adjudged that it was a Covenant to stand seized.

Hexham versus Coniers.
IN Ejectment the Plaintiff declared de uno Messuagio sive Tenemento, An
Ejectment will lie for a Tenement.
and had a Verdict, but Judgment was arrested, because an Ejectment will not
lie of a Tenement, for it is a word of an uncertain signification, it may be an
Advowson House or Land; but it is good in Dower; so is Messuagium sive
Tenementum vocat' the Black Swan, for this addition makes it certain that the
Tenement intended is a House.

Rex versus Bunny.
A Motion was made for a Melius inquirendum to be directed to a Coroner, who
had returned his Inquisition upon the death of Bunny, that he was not compos
mentis, when in truth he was Felo de se.

But it was opposed by Sergeant Pemberton and Mr. Pollexfen who said, that the
Law gives great credit to the Inquest of a Coroner, and that a Melius
inquirendum is seldom or never granted, though it appear to the Court upon
Affidavits, that the Party had his Senses. Mod. Rep. 82.
It has been granted where any fault is in the Coroner, or any incertainty in
the Inquisition returned.

That there is such a Writ it cannot be denied; Cro. Eliz. 371.
but it is generally granted upon Offices or Tenures, and directed to the
Sheriff, 3 Keb. 800.
but never to a Coroner in the case of a Felo de se, who makes his Enquiry
super visum Corporis.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 4 Jac. II. in Banco Regis, 1688.
In Trinity-Vacation last, Mr. Justice Holloway and Mr. Justice Thomas Powell
had their Quietus, and Mr. Sergeant Baldock and Mr. Sergeant Stringer were made
Justices of this Court: And Mr. Justice Allibon (who was a Roman Catholic)
died in the same Vacation, and Sir John Powell, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, was made a Justice of this Court; Sir Thomas Jennor, another of the
Barons of the Exchequer, was made a Justice of the Common Pleas, and Mr.
Sergeant Rotheram and Mr. Sergeant Ingoldby were made Barons of the Exchequer.

Wright Chief Justice. Powel Justices. Baldock Justices. Stringer Justices.
Shuttleworth versus Garnet. Intratur Trin. 1 Willielmi and Mariae Rotulo 965.
THE Defendant was Tenant of Customary Lands held of the Manor of A. of which
Manor B. was Lord; Indebitatus Ass. will lie for a Fine, upon an Admission, etc.
That a Fine was due to him for an admission: That upon the death of the said
Lord, the Manor descended to W. as his Son and Heir, who died, and the
Plaintiff, as Executor to the Heir, brought an Indebitatus Assumpsit for this
Fine.

He declared also that the Defendant was indebted to him in 25 l. for a
reasonable Fine, etc.

The Plaintiff had a Verdict and entire Damages, and it was now moved in arrest
of Judgment that an Indebitatus will not lie for a Customary Fine, because it
does not arise upon any Contract of the Parties, but upon the Tenure of the
Land; for upon the death of the Lord there is a Relief paid; for there must be
some personal Contract to maintain an Action of Debt or an Indebitatus
Assumpsit; 2 Cro. 599. Jones 339.
and therefore it was held that where the Plaintiff locasset a Warehouse to
the Defendant, he promised to pay 8 s. per Week. An Assumpsit was brought for
this Rent, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff: And a Motion was made in Arrest of
Judgment, that this was a Lease at Will, and the weekly payment was in the
nature of a Rent; and it was agreed that an Assumpsit would not lie for a Rent
reserved, because it sounds in the Realty, but because it was only a Promise in
consideration of the occupying of the Warehouse, the Action was held to be well
brought.

2. Where the Cause of an Action is not grounded upon a Contract but upon some
special Matter, there an Indebitatus Assumpsit will not lie, and therefore it
will not lie upon a Bill of Exchange, or upon an Award, or for Rent, though
there is a Privity both of Contract and Estate, without a special Assumpsit.

E contra. E contra.
It was argued, that the Action lies; for though a Fine savours of the Realty,
yet it is a certain Duty.

In all Cases where Debt will lie upon a simple Contract there an Assumpsit
will lie likewise; it is true, this does concern the Inheritance, but yet it is a
Contract that the Tenant shall be admitted paying the Fine.

It has been also maintained for Money had and received out of the Office of
Register for the Plaintiffs use, and for Scavage Money due to the Mayor and
Commonalty of London, 3 Keb. 677.
which is also an Inheritance.

It Is a Contract employed by Law, and therefore the Action is well brought.

Afterward in Michaelmas Term 1 Willielmi and Mariae by the Opinion of Justice
Dolben, 2 Leon. 79.
Air and Gregory Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: But the Chief Justice
was of another Opinion; for he held that if the Defendant had died indebted to
another by Bond, and had not Assets besides what would fatisfie this Fine, if
the Executor had paid it to the Plaintiff it would have been a Devastavit in
him.

Suppose the Defendant promises, that in consideration that the Plaintiff
would demise to him certain Lands that then he would pay the Rent. If the
Defendant pleads Non Assumpsit, Cro. Car. Acton versus Symonds.
the Plaintiff must prove an express Promise, or be Non suit.

Also here is no Tenure or Custom set out.

Yet by the Opinion of the other three Justices the Plaintiff had his Judgment.

Rex versus Johnson.
INformation upon the Statute of 29 and 30 Car. 2. cap. 1. Pardon after a
Verdict for the King excuses the Forfeiture.
prohibiting the Importation of several French Commodities, and amongst the
rest (Lace) under the Penalty of 100 l. to be paid by the Importer, and 50 l.
by the Vendor, and the Goods to be forfeited.

The Information sets forth, that a Packet containing so many yards of Lace was
imported by the Defendant from France, and that he did conceal it to hinder the
Seizure; and that he did privately sell it contra formam Statuti.

Upon Not-Guilty pleaded the King had a Verdict, and on the 2d of October there
came forth a general Pardon, in which were these Words, viz. That the Subjects
shall not be sued or vexed, etc. in their Bodies, Goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements for any Matter, Cause or Contempt, Misdemeanour, Forfeiture, Offense,
or any other thing heretofore done, committed, or omitted, against us Except
all Concealments, Frauds, Corruptions, Misdemanours and Offenses, whereby we or
our late Brother have been deceived in the Collection, payment or answering of
our Revenues or any part thereof, or any other Money due or to be due to us, or
received for us or him, and all Forfeitures, Penalties and Nomine Poena's
thereupon arising, and all Indictments and Informations or other Process and
Proceedings now depending or to be depending thereupon.

The Question now was, whether this Forfeiture was excused by this Pardon.

The Attorney General argued, that it was not, because an Interest is vested in
the King by the Judgment, and that no particular or general Pardon shall divest
it without words of Restitution.

So was Tooms's Case, who had Judgment against another, 1 Sand. 361.
and then became Felo de se; his Administrator brought a Scire Facias quare
Executionem non haberet: The Debtor pleaded that after the Judgment the
Intestate hanged himself, which was found by the Coroners Enquest returned into
this Court. The Plaintiff replied the Act of Pardon. But it was adjudged for
the Defendant; for when the Inquisition was returned, then the Debt was vested
in the King, which could not be divested without particular words of
Restitution, and which were wanting in that Act of Pardon.

The most proper word in the Body of this Pardon which seems to excuse the
Defendant, is the word Offense; but the same word is likewise in the Exception,
viz. Except all Offenses, etc. in collecting or paying of Money due to us, and
all Forfeitures, etc. Now the concealing of forfeited Goods from Seizure is an
Offense excepted; for it is a remedy for the King's Duty, of which he was
hindered by the Concealment.

It Is true, the first part of the Pardon excuses all Misdemeanors committed
against the King in his standing Revenue; but this Exception takes in all
Concealments and Frauds in answering of the Revenue, and this Information is
principally grounded upon Fraud; 5 Co. 56.
so that the Exception ought to be taken as largely for the King as the Pardon
it self to discharge the Subject.

No Fraud tending to the diminution of the Revenue is pardoned, for it excepts
not only all Concealments in collecting the Revenue, but other Money due or to
be due to the King.

If therefore when the King is entitled by Inquisition, Office or Record,
there must be express and not general words to pardon it; and since this Fact
was committed before the Pardon came out, and so found by the Jury, whose
Verdict is of more value than an Enquest of Office; so that the King by this
means is entitled to the Goods by Record, and that before the Pardon; for
these Reasons it cannot be revested in the party.

Sergeant Pemberton and Mr. E contra.
Finch contra.

The Question is what Interest the King has by this Verdict; for as to the
Offense it self it is within the Body of the Pardon, for all Misdemeanors and
Offenses are pardoned; and the Exception does not reach this Case, for that
excepts Misdemeanors in answering of the Revenues. Now that which arises by a
Forfeiture can never be taken to be part of the King's Revenue, because the
Revenue is properly a stated Duty originally settled on the King; and the
Penalty to be inflicted for this Misdemeanour cannot be a Revenue, because the
Court have not yet given Judgment; so that it is uncertain what Fine they will
set, and this appears more plain, because the King may assign his Revenue, but
cannot grant over a Penalty.

The Information is not grounded upon any Act of Parliament which establishes
the Revenue, but for concealing of a thing forfeited to prevent the Seizure
thereof, which indeed may be a casual Revenue, as all Fines are; so that if
this should be taken as an Offense committed against the King in deceiving him
of this Revenue, then the first part of the Pardon discharges all such
Offenses and the Exception pardons none.

It Is for these Reasons that the Case cannot fall under any of the words in the
Exception, no not under these Words, viz. Money due or to be due to the King,
because no Money is yet due to him. It Is true, the Jury have found it a
Misdemeanour, which is finable; but until the Fine is set no Money is due,
because the Court may set a greater or less Fine as they shall see cause: And
if any other Construction should be made of this Exception, then every thing
for which a Fine may be set, is excepted, and this will be to make the Pardon
signify nothing; for what is meant by Offenses and Misdemeanors if they
should be pardoned, and yet the Fine arising thereon should not?

But admitting that all Offenses relating to the Concealment of collecting of
the Revenue are excepted, then this Revenue must be either antecedent or it
must arise by the Fine.

It Is no antecedent Revenue; this appears by the Book of Rates wherein the
King's stated Revenue is set down, and no mention of this; so that the Revenue
to which this relates must arise upon the Offense; and what an absurd thing is
it to say, that all Offenses are pardoned by one part of this general Pardon,
and by the Exception none are pardoned?

Besides, the Information is not grounded upon that part of the Statute which
inflicts a Penalty upon the person who exposes prohibited Goods to Sale, for
then they would sue for the 50 l. therefore it must be upon the Forfeiture,
which is expressly pardoned; and though there is a Conviction, yet nothing is
vested in the King before Judgment, because it may be arrested; and therefore
Tooms's Case is in no wise applicable to this, for the Debt which was due to
him was actually vested in the King by the Inquisition returned here, which
found him to be Felo de se. Adjornatur.

Anonymus.
A Libel in the Admiralty against a Ship called the Sussex Ketch, A Ship was
pawned for necessaries, and a Libel was exhibited in the Admiralty though the
pawning was at the Land.
setting forth that the said. Ship wanted Necessaries super altum Mare; and
that the Master took up several Sums of the Plaintiff at Roterdam, for which he
did hypothecate the said Ship; and upon a Suggestion that this Contract was
made at St. Katherines infra Corpus Comitatus, Council moved for a Prohibition,
upon which a Question did arise, whether a Master of a Vessel can pawn it on
the Coast for Necessaries, and the person to whom it is pawned shall sue for the
Money in the Admiralty here.

By the Common Law a Master of a Ship had neither a general or special property
in it, Sid. 453.
and therefore could not pawn it; but by the Civil Law in cases of necessity he
may rather, than the Voyage should be lost; and if any such cause appear it is
within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, but then the pawning must be super
altum Mare.

Now the Statute of 28 H. Cap. 15.
H. 8. which abridgeth the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty in Trials of Pirates,
and which appoints Offenses committed on the Sea to be tried by a Commission
under the great Seal directed to the Admiral and others according to the course
of the Common Law, and not according to the Civil Law, gives a remedy in this
very Case, Molloy de Jure maritimo 62.
for it provides that it shall not be prejudicial to any person for taking of
Victuals, Gables, Rapes, etc. in cases of necessity upon the Sea paying for the
same.

So that this is an excepted Case, because of the Necessity; and it is like the
Cases of suing for Mariners Wages in this Court. The Service was at Sea so that
the Admiralty has no proper Jurisdiction over this Matter.

It Is true, Prohibitions have been denied for Mariners Wages; the first is
reported by Justice Winch, Winch. f. 8.
but the reason seems to be because they proceed in the Admiralty not upon any
Contract at Land, but upon the Merits of the Service at Sea, and allow or
deduct the Wages according to the good or bad performance of the Services in
the Voyage.

Besides, there is an Act of Parliament which warrants she Proceedings in the
Court of Admiralty for Mariners Wages: Cotton Abr. f. 340. nu. 37.
For in a Parliament held in the 14th year of Richard II. the Commons
petititioned for remedy against great Wages taken by Masters of Ships and
Mariners; to which the King answered that the Admiral shall appoint them to
take reasonable Wages, or shall punish them.

Now the reason of the Civil Law, which allows the pawning of a Ship for
necessaries upon the high Sea seems to be plain, because there may be an
extraordinary and invincible necessity at Sea, but not at Land.

So that this being a Contract beyond Sea and at Land the Court of Admiralty
cannot have any Jurisdiction over it; 4 Inst. 134. Cro. Car. 603. Latch. 11. 2
Brownl. 37.
for where the Common Law cannot relieve, in such Cases the Admiralty shall
not, because they are limited to Acts done upon the Sea and in cases of
necessity; for if the Law should be otherwise the Master may take up as much
Money as he will.

Mr. Pollexfen contra. 1 Rolls 530.
That things arising upon Land may be sued for in the Admiralty is no new
thing; for so it is in all Cases of Stipulation; Mariners Wages are also
recoverable in that Court, not by virtue of any Act of Parliament, Exton. Mant.
Diraeologiae f. 192.
but because it grows due for Services done at Sea, which is properly a
Maritime Cause, though the Contract for that Service with the Master was at
Land: But the principal reason why Mariners Wages are sued for in the Admiralty
is because the Ship is liable as well as the Master, who may be poor and not
able to answer the Seamen.

Curia. Take a Trial upon the necessity in this Case.

Anonymus.
THE Plaintiff recovered a Verdict against the Defendant in an Action upon the
Case.

The Defendant now moved by his Council, The Court will not order a Plaintiff
to file the Venire Facias.
that the Plaintiff should file the Venire Facias and Distringas, because all
Writs which are returnable in this Court ought to be filed, otherwise a Damage
may ensue to the Officers, and a Wrong to the King upon the Forfeitures of
Issues by the Jurors, which are always estreated upon the coming in of the
Distringas.

The Council insisted upon it, that it was the Common Law of this Realm, and
that it was the Right of the Subject that all Writs which issue out of the
King's Courts should be filed, that the Panel of the Venire Facias is part of
the Record, and that an Attaint could not be brought against the Jury if these
Writs were not filed, because non constat de personis.

This matter was referred to some of the ancient Clerks of the Court, and to
the Secondary Aston, who reported that the Court never ordered a Plaintiff to
file a Venire Facias against his Will.

Davies 's Case.
TRespass against Davies and Powel for breaking of the Plaintiffs Close and
chasing and killing of Fowl in his Free Warren. Prescription for all the
Tenants of a Manor to fowl in a Warren, good; though it was objected that it
was too large.


The Defendant as to all the Trespass, but chasing and killing of the Fowl,
pleaded Not-Guilty, and as to that he sets forth that the Dean and Chapter of
Exeter were seized in Fee of the Manor of Brampton of which the said Warren
was parcel, and that they and all those, whose Estates they had, etc. had
liberty for themselves, their Tenants and Farmers to fowl in the said Warren;
that the Dean and Chapter did make a Lease of parcel of the said Manor to the
Defendants for one and twenty years, reserving a Rent, etc. and so they
justify as Tenants, etc. they did fowl in the said Warren.

The Plaintiff replied de injuria sua propria: Upon which they were at Issue,
and there was a Verdict for the Defendants.

Mr. Pollexfen moved in arrest of Judgment, because it is an unreasonable
Prescription for an interest in every Tenant of the Manor to fowl in that
Warren: It has been so ruled for a Common, Roll. Abr. 399.
without saying for his Cattle Levant and Couchant, for it must be for a
certain number.

In this Case the Prescription is not only in the person of the Lord, but for
all his Farmers and Tenants, who cannot prescribe to have a free Warren in
alieno solo.

E contra. E contra.
It was argued that such a Prescription might not be good upon a Demurrer, but
it is well enough after a Verdict.

It Is not an Objection to say, that this Prescription is too large, for all
Tenants as well Freeholders as Copyholders to prescribe in the Soil of another;
and so there may not be enough for the Lord himself, Yelv. 187. 2 Cro. 256.
because this is a Profit apprender in alieno solo, and for such the Tenants of
a Manor may prescribe by a Que estate exclusive of the Lord; and of that
Opinion was the Court, so the Defendant had his Judgment.

Anonymus.
NOTA. An Information was brought in this Court for throwing down of Hedges and
Ditches, in which there were several Defendants, who pleaded specially, and the
Clerk of the Crown Office demanded 13 s. and 4 d. for every Name, (which came
to 17 l. for his Fees;) in this Plea, and by reason of the great charge the
Defendants did not plead but let Judgment go by default.

Mr. Pollexfen moved that the Plea might be received, and that it might be
enquired what Fees were due, which the Court would not try upon a Motion, but
advised an Indictment of Extortion, if their Clerk was guilty.

Rex versus Inhabitants de Malden.
Sergeant Shaw moved to affirm an Order made upon an Appeal to the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace for the County of Essex: The Case was, viz. Order of
Sessions quashed for settling a poor Man, because he had not given formal
notice in writing.


John Pain served an Apprentiship at Malden, where he married and had several
Children.

His Wife died, he married another Woman, who had a Term for years of an House
in the Parish of Heybridge, where he lived for a year and left Malden.

Afterward he returned to Malden, was rated to the Poor, and lived there two
years, then he dyed.

In a short time after his death his Widow and Children were removed by an
Order of two Justices to Heybridge, from which Order they appeal; and by the
Order of Sessions they were declared to be Inhabitants of Malden.

It was now moved by Mr. Pollexfen to quash it, because it does not appear,
that he gave any formal Notice in Writing to the Overseers of Malden when he
returned from Heybridge, and therefore ought to be settled there, and not at
Malden; for being taxed to the Poor will not amount to Notice; and he cited a
stronger Case, which was, viz. The Churchwardens of Covent Garden certified
under their Hands, that such a person was an Inhabitant within their Parish,
but because no Note was left with them pursuant to the Statute notwithstanding
such Certificate he was held to be no Inhabitant within their Parish, and of
that Opinion was all the Court.

Anonymus.
IN Replevin three persons made Cognizance as Bailiffs to A. Whether an Infant
should make Cognizance per Attorn. or per Guardianum.
and so justify the taking of the Cattle Damage Feasant in his Ground.

The Plaintiff replied that the Cattle were taken in his Ground, and traverseth
the taking in the place mentioned in the Cognizance.

There was Judgment for the Defendant; upon which a Writ of Error was brought,
and the Error assigned was, that one of the Bailiffs was an Infant and made
Cognizance per Attornatum, when he ought to do it per Guardianum.

Mr. 2 Cro. 441. 2 Sand 212. 1 Roll. Abr. 228. 3 Cro. 441.
Pollexfen. This might be pleaded in Abatement, but it is not Error; for an
Infant Administrator may bring an Action of Debt per Attornatum, because he
sues in the Right of another, and so his Infancy shall be no impediment to him.

The Bailiff in this Case is as much a Plaintiff as the Administrator in the
other, for he makes Cognizance in the Right of another; and in such case, if
two are of Age and one is not they who are of Age may make an Attorney for him
who is not.

So if there are two Executors one of them of Age, 2 Sand. 212.
and the other not, one may make an Attorney for the other.

There is no difference between Executors and Infants in this Case; for
Executors recover in the right of the Testator, and the Bailiffs in the Right
of him who has the Inheritance.

Besides the Avowants are in the nature of Plaintiffs, and wherever a
Plaintiff recovers the Defendant shall not assign Infancy for Error. Adjornatur.

Capel versus Saltonstal.
INdebitatus assumpsit in the Common Pleas; Where there are several Plaintiffs
in a personal thing, and one dies before Judgment, the Action is abated.
in which Action there were four Plaintiffs; one of them died before Judgment,
the others recover, and now the Defendant brought a Writ of Error in this Court
to reverse that Judgment, and the Question was, whether the Action was abated
by the death of this person.

Those who argued for the Plaintiffs in the Action held that the Debt will
survive, and so will the Action, for it is not altered by the death of the
party; for where Damages only are to be recovered in an Action well commenced
by several Plaintiffs, and part of that Action is determined by the Act of God
or by the Law, and the like Action remains for the residue, the Writ shall
not abate.

As in Ejectment, if the Term should expire pending the Suit, 1 Inst. 285.
the Plaintiff shall go on to recover Damages; for though the Action is at end
quoad the possession, yet it continues for the Damages after the Term ended.

So if the Lessor bring Waste against Tenant pur auter vie, and pending the
Writ Cestui que vie dies, the Writ shall not abate, because no other person
can be sued for Damages but the Survivor.

So where Trover was brought by two, 2 Bulst. 262. 1 Inst. 198.
and after the Verdict one of them died, the Judgment shall not be arrested,
because the Action survives to the other.

Mr. Pollexfen contra. He admitted the Law to be that where two Iointenants are
Defendants, the death of one would not abate the Writ, because the Action is
joint and several against them.

But in all Cases where two or more are to recover a personal thing, there the
Death or Release of one shall abate the Action as to the rest, though it is
otherwise when they are Defendants and are to discharge themselves of a
personalty. 6 Co. 25. b. Ruddock's Case. 2 Cro. 19.


And therefore in an Audita Querela by two, the death of one shall not abate
the Writ because it is in discharge.

Now in this Case Judgment must be entered for a dead Man, which cannot be, for
it is not consistent with reason.

The Case of Wedgewood and Bailey is express in it, which was this, Trover was
brought by six and Judgment for them, one of them died, the Judgment could not
be entered. It Is true, where so many are Defendants and one dies the Action is
not abated, but then it must be suggested on the Roll.

Curia. Actions grounded upon Torts will survive, but those upon Contracts will
not. The Judgment was reversed.

Fisher versus Wren. In the Common Pleas.
THE Plaintiff brought an Action of Trespass on the Case, Prescription and
Custom alleged together.
and declared that he was seized of an ancient Mesuage and of a Meadow, and an
Acre of Land parcel of the Demesnes of the Manor of Crosthwait, and sets forth
a Custom to grant the same by Copy of Court Roll; and that there are several
Freehold Tenements parcel of the said Manor, and likewise several Customary
Tenements parcel also thereof grantable ad voluntatem Domini, and that all the
Freeholders, etc. time out of Mind, etc. together with the Copyholders
according to the Custom of the said Manor have enjoyed solam and seperalem
Pasturam of the Ground called Garths, parcel of the said Manor for their
Cattle Levant and Couchant, etc. and had liberty to cut the Willows growing
there for the mending of their Houses; and the Defendant put some Cattle into
the said Ground, called Garths, which did eat the Willows, by reason whereof
the Plaintiff could have no benefit of them, etc.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff.

And now Sergeant Pemberton moved in arrest of Judgment, and took these
Exceptions.

1. As to the manner of the Prescription which the Plaintiff had laid to be in
the Freeholders, and then alleged a Custom for the Copyholders, etc. and so
made a joint Title in both, which cannot be done in the same Declaration,
because a Prescription is always alleged to be in a person, and a Custom must
be limited to a place, and therefore an entire thing cannot be claimed both by
a Prescription and Custom, Vaughan 215. Carter 200. 1 Sand. 351.
because the Grant to the Freeholders and this Usage amongst the Copiholders
could not begin together.

2. As to the Custom, it is not good as pleaded to exclude the Lord, for it can
never have a good Commencement, because Copyholders have Common in the Lords
Soil only by permission to improve their Estates, which Common being spared by
the Lord and used by the Tenant becomes a Custom; but no Usage amongst the
Tenants or permission of the Lord can wholly divest him of his Soil and vest an
Interest in them who in the beginning were only his Tenants at Will. 2 Sand.
325.


3. The third Exception, and which he chiefly relied on, was, viz. That this is
a Profit apprender in alieno Solo, to which all the Tenants of the Manor are
entitled, and that makes them Tenants in Common; and therefore in this Action
where Damages are to be recovered they ought all to join. It Is true, in real
Actions Tenants in Common always sever, 1 Inst. 197, 198. Godb. 347.
but in Trespasses quare Clasum fregit and in personal Actions they always
join; and the reason is plain, because in those Actions though their Estates
are several, yet the Damages survive to all, and it would be unreasonable to
bring several Actions for one single Trespass.

E contra. It was argued that it cannot be denied, E contra.
but that there may be a Custom or Prescription to have solam and seperalem
pasturam; but whether both Prescription and Custom can be joined together is
the doubt now before the Court; and as to that he held it was well enough
pleaded, 1 Sand. 351.
for where there is an unusual Right there must be the like remedy to recover
that Right; it was thus pleaded in North's Case.

But admitting it not to be well pleaded; it is then but a double Plea, to which
the Plaintiff ought to have demurred; and this may serve for an Answer to the
first Exceptions.

Then as to the last Objection that it is a Profit apprender in alieno solo for
which all the Tenants ought to join; it is true, a Common is no more than a
Profit apprender, etc. yet one Commoner may bring an Action against his Fellow;
besides, in this Case they are not Tenants in Common, for every Man is seized
severally of his Freehold. Adjornatur.

Airs versus Huntington.
AScire Facias was brought upon a Recognizance of 1000 l. Amendment of the word
Recuperatio for Recognitio after a Demurrer.
to show cause quare the Plaintiff should not have Execution de praedictis
mill libris recognitis juxta formam Recuperationis, where it should have been
Recognitionis praed. And upon a Demurrer it was held that the words juxta
formam Recuperationis were Surplusage: The Record was amended, and a Rule that
the Defendant should plead over.

Mather and others versus Mills.
THE Defendant entered into a Bond to acquir, Non damnificatus generally where
it is a good Plea.
discharge and save harmless a Parish from a Bastard Child.

Debt was brought upon this Bond, and upon Non damnificatus generally pleaded
the Plaintiff demurred, and Tremain held the Demurrer to be good; for if the
Condition had been only to save harmless, etc. then the Plea had been good; but
it is likewise to acquit and discharge, etc. and in such Case Non damnificatus
generally is no good Plea, 1 Leon. 71.
because he should have showed how he did acquit and discharge the Parish, and
not answer the Damnification only.

E contra. E contra. 2 Co. 3. 2 Cro. 363, 364 2 Sand. 83, 84.
It was argued that if the Defendnat had pleaded that he kept harmless and
discharged the Parish, such Plea had not been good unless he had showed how,
etc. because it is in the affirmative; but here it is in the negative, viz. that
the Parish was not dampnified, and they should have showed a Breach; for though
in strictness this Plea does not answer the Condition of the Bond, yet it does
not appear upon the whole Record, that the Plaintiff was dampnified, and if so,
then he has no cause of Action.

Judgment for the Defendant.

DE Term. Sanctae Trin. Anno 1 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae in Banco
Regis, 1689.
Memorandum, That on the 4th day of November last past, the Prince of Orange
landed here with an Army, and by reason of the Abdication of the Government by
King James, and the Posture of Affairs, there was no Hillary-Term kept.

Coram
Johanne Holt Mil' Capital' Justic. Gulielmo Dolben Mil' Justiciar. Gulielmo
Gregory Mil' Justiciar. Egidio Air Mil' Justiciar.
Kellow versus Rowden. Trin. 1 Willielmi and Mariae Rotulo 796.
IN Debt by Walter Kellow, Where the Reversion in Fee is expectant upon an
Estate Tail, and that being spent, it descends upon a collateral Heir, he must
be sued as Heir to him who was last actually seized of the Fee, without naming
the intermediate Remainders.
Executor of Edward Kellow against Richard Rowden. The Case was this, viz.

John Rowden had Issue two Sons John and Richard.


John the Father being seized in Fee of Lands, etc. made a Settlement to the
use of himself for Life, the Remainder to John his eldest Son in Tail Male, the
Remainder to his own right Heirs.

The Father died, the Reversion descended to John, the Son, who also died,
leaving Issue John his Son, who died without Issue; so that the Estate Tail was
spent.

Richard the second Son of John the elder, entered, and an Action of Debt was
brought against him as Son and Heir of John the Father, upon a Bond of 120 l.
entered into by his Father, and this Action was brought against him, without
naming the intermediate Heirs, viz. his Brother and Nephew.

The Defendant pleaded Quod ipse de debito praed. ut filius and haeres praed.
Johannis Rowden Patris sui virtute scripti obligatorii praed. onerari non
debet, quia protestando quod scriptum obligatorium praed. non est factum praed.
Johannis Rowden pro placito idem Richardus dicit quod ipse non habet aliquas
terras seu tenementa per discensum haereditarium de praed. Johanne Rowden patre
suo in feodo simplici nec habuit die exhibitionis billae praed. Walteri praed.
nec unquam postea and hoc parat est' verificare unde pet. judicium si ipse ut
filius and haeres praed. Johannis Rowden patris sui virtute scripti praed.
onerari debeat, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that the Defendant die Exhibitionis billae praed.
habuit diversas terras and tenementa per discensum haereditarium a praed.
Johanne Rowden patre suo in feodo simplici, etc.

Upon this pleading they were at Issue at the Assizes in Wiltshire, and the
Jury found a special Verdict, viz. that John Rowden the Father of Richard (now
the Defendant) was seized in Fee of a Message and 20 Acres of Land in Bramshaw
in the said County, and being so seized, had Issue John Rowden his eldest Son,
and the Defendant Richard; that on the 22th of Januarii 18 Car. I. John the
elder did settle the Premises upon himself for Life, Remainder ut supra, etc.

That after the death of the Father, John his eldest Son entered and was
possessed in Fee-Tail, and was likewise entitled to the Reversion in Fee, and
died in the 14th year of King Charles the II. that the Lands did descend to
another John his only Son, who died 35th Car. II. without Issue, whereupon the
Lands descended to the Defendant as Heir of the last mentionted John, who
entered before this Action brought, and was seized in Fee, etc. But whether upon
the whole matter the Defendant has any Lands by by descent from John Rowden in
Fee-simple, the Jury do not know, etc.

The Council on both sides did agree that this Land was chargable with the
Debt, but the Question was whether the Issue was found for the Defendant, in
regard the Plaintiff did not name the intermediate Heirs.

It was argued that the Defendant ought to be sued as immediate Heir to his
Father, and not to his Nephew, for whoever claims by descent must claim from
him who was last actually seized of the Freehold and Inheritance, this is the
express Doctrine of my Lord Coke in his first Institutes, and if so, Co. Lit.
11.
the Defendant must be charged as he claims.

Seisin is a material thing in our Law, for if I am to make a Title in a real
Action, I must lay an actual seisin in every Man; 8 E. 3.13. Bro. Assise 6.
F.N. B. 212. F.
it is so in Formedons in Descender and Remainder, in both which you are to run
through the whole Pedigree.

But none can be Filius and Haeres but to him who was last actually seized of
the Fee-simple, and therefore the Brother being Tenant in Tail, and his Son the
Issue in Tail, in this Case they were never seized of the Fee, 1 Inst. 14. b.
for that was expectant upon the Estate Tail, which being spent, then John the
Father was last seized thereof, and so his Son is justly and rightly sued as
Son and Heir.

In some Cases the persons are to be named, not by way of a Title, but as a
Pedigree; as if there be Tenant for Life, the Reversion in Fee to an Idiot, and
an Uncle who is right Heir to the Idiot levied a Fine, and died living the
Idiot, leaving Issue a Son named John, who had Issue William, who entered: the
Question was, whether the Issue of the Uncle shall be barred by this Fine? It
was the Opinion of two Judges that they were not barred, because the Uncle died
in the lifetime of the Idiot, and nothing attached in him; March 94. Cro. Car.
524.
and because the Issue claim in a collateral Line, and do not name the Father
by way of Title, but by way of Pedigree.

But Justice Jones, who has truly Reported the Case, Jones 456.
was of Opinion, that the Issue of the Uncle were barred, because the Son must
make his Conveyance from the Father by way of Title.

The Jury have found that the Reversion did descend to the Defendant, as Heir
to the last John; it is true, it descends as a Reversion, but that shall not
charge him as Heir to the Father, Jenk's Case, 1 Cro.
for the other was seized of the Estate Tail, which is now spent, and the last
who was seized of the Fee was the Father, and so the Defendant must be charged
as his Heir.

It Is likewise true, that where there is an actual Seisin, you must charge all,
but in this Case there was nothing but a Reversion.

Tremaine Sergeant for the Defendant.

In this Case the Plaintiff should have made a special Declaration, for the
Estate-Tail and the Reversion in Fee are distinct and separate Estates.

John the Nephew might have sold the Reversion and kept the Estate Tail; if he
had acknowledged a Statute or Judgment, it might have been extended, and if so,
then he had such a Seisin that he ought to have been named.

A Man becomes bound in a Bond and died; Debt is brought against the Heir; it
is not common to say that he had nothing by descent, but only a Reversion
expectant upon an Estate Tail.

In the Case of Chapel and Lee, Covenant was brought in the Common Pleas,
against Judith, Daughter and Heir of Robert Rudge.

She pleaded Riens per descent. Issue was joined before Sir Francis North then
Chief Justice; and it appearing upon Evidence that Robert had a Son named
Robert, who died without Issue; a Case was made of it, and Judgment was given
for the Defendant: the Plaintiff took out a new Original, and then the Land was
sold, so the Plaintiff lost his Debt. Adjornatur.

Afterward in Hillary- Term a Gulielmi and Mariae, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, by the Opinion of three Justices against Justice Air, who argued
that the Defendant cannot be charged as immediate Heir to his Father; it is
true, the Lands are Assets in his Hands and he may be charged by a special
Declaration. Dyer. 368. pl. 460.


In this Case the intermediate Heirs had a Reversion in Fee, which they might
have charged either by Statute, Judgment, or Recognizance; they were so seized
that if a Writ of Right had been brought against them, they might have joined
the Mise upon the Mere right, which proves they had a Fee, and though it was
expectant on an Estate Tail, 3 Co. 42. Ratcliff's Case.
yet the Defendant claiming the Reversion as Heir, ought to make himself so to
him who made the Gift.

The person who brings a Formeden in Descender, must name every one to whom any
Right did descend, 8 Co. 88. F.N.B. 220. c. Rast. Ent. 375.
otherwise the Writ will abate.

A Man who is sued as Heir, or who entitles himself as such, must show how
Heir.

The Case of Duke and Spring is much stronger than this, 2 Roll. Abr. 709. 2
Cro. 161.
for there Debt was brought against the Daughter, as Heir of B. She pleaded
Riens per descent, and the Jury found that B. died seized in Fee, leaving Issue
the Defendant and his Wife then with Child, who was afterward delivered of a
Son, who died within an hour; and it was adjudged against the Plaintiff,
because he declared against the Defendant as Daughter and Heir of the Father,
when she was Sister and Heir of the Brother, who was last seized.

But the other three Judges were of a contrary Opinion.

The Question is not, whether the Defendant is liable to this Debt, but whether
he is properly charged as Heir to his Father? or whether he should have been
charged as Heir to his Nephew, who was last seized?

It must be admitted that if the Lands had descended to the Brother and Nephew
of the Defendant in Fee, that then they ought to have been named; but they had
only a Reversion in Fee expectant upon an Estate Tail, which was uncertain, and
therefore of little value; now though John the Father and Son had this
Reversion in them, yet the Estate Tail was known only to those who were Parties
to the Settlement.

It Is not the Reversion in Fee, Bro. Fit. Descent pl. 30.37 Ass. pl. 4.
but the Possession which makes the party inheritable; and therefore if Lands
are given to Husband and Wife in Tail, the Remainder to the right Heirs of the
Husband; then they have a Son, and the Wife dies, and the Husband has a Son by
a second Venture, and dies; the eldest Son enters and dies without Issue, and
his Uncle claimed the Land against the second Son, but was barred, because he
had not the Remainder in Fee in possession, and yet he might have sold or
forfeited it.

But here the Reversion in Fee is now come into possession, and the Defendant
has the Land as Heir to his Father; it is Assets only in him, and was not so
either in his Brother or Nephew, who were neither of them chargeable, because a
Reversion expectant upon an Estate Tail is not Assets.

Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 1 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae, in Banco
Regis, 1689.
Young versus Inhabitants de Totnam.
AN Action was brought against the Hundred for a Robbery, in which the
Plaintiff declared, that he was Robbed apud quendam locum prope Fair Mile
Gate, in such a Parish. He had a Verdict: And now Sergeant Tremaine moved in
arrest of Judgment, and the Exceptions taken were these, viz.

1. That it does not appear that the Parish mentioned in the Declaration was in
the Hundred.

2. Neither does it appear that the Robbery was committed in the Highway.

3. The Plaintiff has not alleged that it was done in the day time; for if it
was not, the Hundred is not liable by Law.

But these Exceptions were all disallowed, because it being after a Verdict the
Court will suppose that there was Evidence given of these Matters at the Trial,
so the Plaintiff had his Judgment.

Eggleston and al' versus Speak alias Petit. Intratur Trin. 1 W. and M. Rot.
249.
THis was a Trial at the Bar, A Will shall not be revoked by a subsequent
Writing, unless that be also a good Will.
by a Wiltshire Jury, in an Ejectment brought by the Plaintiffs as Heirs at Law
to Ann Speak, who died seized in Fee of the Lands in Question.

Upon not Guilty pleaded, this Question did arise at the Trial, Whether the
Answer of a Guardian in Chancery shall be read as Evidence in this Court to
conclude the Infant: There being some Opinions that it ought to be read; and
the Defendants Council insisting on the contrary, Mr Justice Eyres being the
Puisne Justice, was sent to the Court of Common Pleas then sitting, to know
their Opinions, who returning made this Report, That the Judges of that Court
were all of Opinion, that such Answer ought not to be read as Evidence, for it
was only to bring the Infant into Court, and to make him a Party.

Then the Plaintiffs proceeded to prove their Title as Heirs at Law, viz. by
several Inquisitions which were brought into Court, and by the Heralds Office.

The Defendants Title likewise was thus proved, viz. That the Lady Speak being
seized in Fee, etc. did by Will dated in March 1682. devise the Lands to John
Petit for Life, Remainder to the Defendant and his Heirs for ever: That the
Lady Speak died so seized, that John Speak the Tenant for Life, and Father to
the Defendant was also dead, etc.

This Will was proved by several Witnesses, one of which likewise deposed that
my Lady Speak made two other Wills subsequent to this now produced; and a
Minister proved that she burnt a Will in the Month of December, which was in
the year 1685.

Then the Plaintiffs produced another Will made by her at Christmas 1685.
attested by three Witnesses, but not in the presence of my Lady; so that though
it might not be a good Will to dispose the Estate, yet the Council insisted
that it was a good Revocation of the other, for it is a Writing sufficient for
that purpose, within the sixth Paragraph of the Statute of Frauds.

The Case of Sir George Sheers was now mentioned, whose Will was carried out of
the Chamber where he then was, into a Lobby, and signed there by the Witnesses;
but one of them swore that there was a Window out of that Room to his Chamber,
through which the Testator might see the Witnesses as he lay in his Bed.

Upon which Evidence the Jury found this special Verdict, viz. That Ann Speak
being seized in Fee, etc. did on the 12th day of March 1682. make her Will, and
devised the Lands to John Pettit for Life, and afterward to George his Son,
and to his Heirs for ever, upon condition that he take upon him the Name of
Speak.

That the 25th of December 1685. she caused another Writing to be made,
purporting her Will, which was signed, sealed and published by her in the
presence of three Witnesses in the Chamber where she then was, and where she
continued whilst the Witnesses subscribed their Names in the Hall, but that she
could not see them so subscribing.

They find that the Lessors of the Plaintiff are Heirs at Law, and that they
did enter, etc.

This matter was argued in Easter- Term following; and the Question was,
whether this Writing purporting a Will, was a Revocation of the former or not,
and that depended upon the Construction of the sixth Paragraph in the Act of
Frauds, viz. All Devises of Lands shall be in Writing, and signed by the party
or some other in his presence, and by his express Directions, and shall be
attested by three or four Witnesses, etc. and that such devise shall not be
revocable, but by some other Will or Codicil in Writing, or other Writing, etc.
declaring the same.

Now the want of Witnesses does not make the last Will void in it self, but
only quoad the Lands therein devised, it has its operation as to all other
purposes.

It must therefore be a Revocation of the former; and this is agreeable to the
Resolution of the Judges in former times, for there being nothing in the
Statute of Wills, which directs what shall be a Revocation, 32 H. 8. cap. 1.
Dyer 143.
the Judges in Trevilian's Case did declare that it might be by word of mouth,
or by the very intention of the Testator to alter any thing in the Will, for
before the late Statute very few words did amount to a Revocation. Moor 429. 1
Roll. Abr. 614, 615, 616.


If Lands are devised and afterward a feoffment is made of the same, but for
want of Livery and Seisin, it is defective, yet this is a Revocation of the
Will, though the Feoffment is void.

The Council on the other side argued that this Will was not void by any Clause
in the Statute of Frauds, E contra.
for if this is a Revocation within that Statute, then this second Writing
purporting a Will, must be a good Will; for if it is not a good Will, then it is
not a good Revocation within that Law.

No Man will affirm that the latter Writing is a good Will, therefore the first
being a Devise of Land, cannot be revoked but by a Will of Land, which the
second is not.

This Statute was intended to remedy the mischief of parol Revocations, and
therefore made such a solemnity requisite to a Revocation.

It cannot be denied but that this latter Writing was intended to be made a
Will, but it wanting that perfection which is required by Law, it shall not now
be intended a Writing distinct from a Will, so as to make a Revocation within
the meaning of that Act.

If a Man has a power of Revocation, either by Will or Deed, and he makes his
Will in order to Revoke a former, this is a Writing presently, but it is not a
Revocation as long as the person is living.

Therefore a Revocation must not only be by a Writing, but it must be such a
Writing which declares the intention of a Man that it should be so, which is
not done by this Writing.

Upon the first Argument, Judgment was given for the Defendant, that the second
Will must be a good Will in all Circumstances to Revoke a former Will.

Cross versus Garnet.
THE Plaintiff declared, that on such a day and year there was a discourse
between him and the Defendant concerning the Sale of two Oxen, then in the
possession of the Defendant, and that they came to an agreement for the same;
that the Defendant did then sell the said Oxen to the Plaintiff, and did falsely
affirm them to be his own, ubi revera, they were the Oxen of another Man.

The Plaintiff had a Verdict, Cro. Eliz. 44. 1 Roll. Rep. 275. 2 Cro. 474 1
Roll. Abr. 91. More 126. Yel. 20. Sid. 146.
and Sergeant Thompson moved in arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was
not good, because the Plaintiff has not alleged that the Defendant did affirm
the Cattle to be his own sciens the same to be the Goods of another, or that he
sold them to the Plaintiff fraudulenter and deceptive, or that there was any
Warranty, for this Action will not lie upon a bare Communication.

But notwithstanding these Exceptions the Plaintiff had his Judgment; it might
have been good upon Demurrer, but after Verdict it is well enough.

Lea versus Libb.
IN Ejectione firmae for Lands in Hampshire; Two Witnesses to a Will, and two
to a Codicil, one whereof was a Witness to the Will, these are not three
Witnesses to the Will it self.
the Jury found a special Verdict, the substance of which was this, viz.

That the Lessor of the Plaintiff was Heir at Law to one John Denham his
Ancestor, who being seized in Fee of the Lands in question did by Will bearing
date the 28th day of January in the year 1678. devise the same to the
Defendant, which he subscribed and published in the presence of two Witnesses,
and they likewise attested it in his presence.

They find that on the 29th day of December, 1679. he made another Will or
Codicil in Writing, reciting that he had made a former Will and confirming the
same, except what was excepted in the Codicil, and declared his Will to be,
that the Codicil should be taken and adjudged as part of his Will.

They find that he published this Codicil in the presence likewise of two
Winesses, one of which was Witness to the first Will, bue the other was a new
Man.

They find that these were distinct Writings, etc.

The Question was, whether this was a good Will attested by three Witnesses,
since one of the Witnesses to the Codicil was likewise a Witness to the Will,
so that the new Man (if any) must make the third Witness.

Sergeant Thompson argued that it was not a good Will: The Clause of the
Statute is, That all Devises of Lands shall be in Writing and signed by the
Testator in the presence of three Witnesses, and they to attest it in his
presence.

But here are not three subscribing Witnesses in the presence of the Testator,
so that the first Will must be void, for one of the Witnesses to the Codicil
did never see that Will.

Besides, the Codicil is not the same thing with the Will; it is a confirmation
of it, and this being in a Case wherein an Heir is to be disinherited ought not
to have a favorable Construction.

Attorney General contra. A Will may be contained in several Writings and yet
but one entire Will. It Is true, if it be attested only by two Witnesses it is
not good; but if the Testator call in a third person, and he attests that
individual Witing in his presence, this is a good Will though the Witnesses
were not all present together and at the same time, for there is the Credit of
three persons to such a Will, which is according to the intent of the Statute.

And therefore it cannot be objected that these are distinct Wills, or that the
Papers are not annexed, for no such thing is required by Law; for a Man may
make his Will in several Sheets of Paper, and if the Witnesses subscribe the
last Sheet it is well enough, or if he does put up all the Sheets in a blank
piece of Paper and the Witnesses attest that Sheet it is a good Will.

In these Cases the intent of the Lawmakers must and ought to be chiefly
regarded, and for what reasons and purposes such Laws were made, and what
Judgments have been given in parallel Cases.

If a Man grants a Rentcharge to his youngest Son for Life, 2 Cro. 144. Noy
117.
and afterward devises that he shall have the Rent as expressed in the Grant:
Now though the Writing was no part of the Will, but of another nature, yet the
Will referring to the Deed is a good Devise of the Rentcharge within the
Statute of Wills.

But in this Case the Codicil is part of the Will, it is of the same nature, and
being made animo restandi the end of the Statute is performed for both Will and
Codicil joined together make a good Devise; the first was a Will to all
purposes; it only wanted that circumstance of a third Witness to attest it,
which the Testator completed after by calling in of a third person for that
purpose.

Curia. If a Man makes a Will in several pieces of Paper and there are three
Witnesses to the last Paper, and none of them did ever see the first, this is
not a good Will.

Afterward in Hillary-Term Judgment was given that this was not a good Will.

Tippet versus Hawkey.
TIppet the Elder and his Son covenant with John Hawkey to sell and convey Land
to him free from all Encumbrances, and that they will levy a Fine, etc. and
deliver up Writings, Where two covenant the Action may be brought in the name
of one.
Item, It Is agreed between the Parties that the said Hawkey shall pay to Tippet
the younger so much Money, etc.

The Action is brought in the name of both, and upon a Demurrer to the
Declaration it was held ill, for the Duty is vested in Tipper the younger, and
he only ought to have brought this Action.

Judgment for the Defendant.

Rees versus Phelps.
DEBT upon a Bond conditioned for performance of an Award. Award where good.


Upon nullum fecerunt arbitrium pleaded, the Plaintiff replied, and showed an
Award that the Defendant should pay 5 l. to the Plaintiff presently, and give
Bond for the payment of 10 l. more on the 29th day of November following, and
that this should be for and toward the Charges and Expenses in and about
certain differences then depending between the Parties, and that they should
now sign general Releases.

And upon a Demurrer it was argued to be a void Award, because mutual Releases
were then to be given which would discharge the Bond payable in November
following. 1 Roll. Abr. 259, 260.


But the Court held it to be good, for the Releases shall discharge such
Matters only which were depending at the time of the Submission.

Godfrey and al' versus Eversden.
THere was a Parish Church and a Chapel of Ease in the Parish of Hitchen;
Prohibition denied upon Suggestion that there was a Chapel of Ease, and so
ought not to repair the Parish Church
the Defendant was taxed toward the Repairs of the Church, and a Livel was
brought against him for the refusing of the payment of that Tax.

He now suggests that there was a Chapel of Ease in the same Parish, to which
the Inhabitants do go, and that they have always repaired that Chapel, and so
prayed a Prohibition.

But Sergeant Tremain moved for a Consultation, because the Parishioners of
common right ought to repair the Church; and though there is a Chapel of Ease
in the same Parish, yet that ought not to excuse them from repairing of the
Mother Church.

He produced an Affidavit that there had been no Divine Service there for forty
years past, Hob. 66.
nor Burials or Baptism whereupon a Prohibition was denied.

Anonymus.
A Gentleman was convicted upon his own Confession for High Treason in the
Rebellion of the Duke of Monmouth and executed; Attainder for Treason reversed.
and it was moved that his Attainder might be reversed.

The Judges were attended with Books, and the Exceptions taken were, viz.

1. There was no Arraignment or demanding of Judgment. Co. Ent. 358.


2. There was Process of Ven. Fac. which ought not to be in Treason, but a
Capias.

3. Because after the Confession the Judgment followed, and it does not appear
that the Party was asked what he could say why Sentence of Death should not
pass upon him; for possibly he might have pleaded a Pardon.

For these Reasons the Attainder was reversed.

Mr. Parkinson's Case.
IT was moved for a Mandamus to reffore him to a Fellowship of Lincoln-
College in Oxford being a Member of a Lay Corporation, and having a Freehold
in it. Mandamus denied for restoring of a person to a Fellowship. 1 Mod. 82. 1
Sid. 71. Sid. 29.


The like Mandamus had been granted to restore Dr. Goddard to the place of one
of the Fellows of the College of Physicians in London, which is a Lay
Corporation.

But it was denied by the Court, for the Visitor is the proper Judge; and when
a Man takes a Fellowship he submits to the Rules of the College and to the
private Laws of the Founder.

It was denied by my Lord Hales in Dr. Robert'ss Case, because in all Lay
Corporations the Founder and his Heirs are Visitors, and in all Ecclesiastical
Corporations the Bishop of the Diocese is the proper Visitor, who is Fidei
Commissarius, and from whose Sentence there is no Appeal to this Court
especially in the case of a Fellowship of a College, which is a thing of
private design, and not at all concerning the public.

Anonymus. Hill. 3 and 4 Jacobi Rot. 1018.
A.B. nuper de Parochia Sancti Jacobi Westm' in Comitatu Midd. Generosus
attachiatus fuit per corpus suum ad respondend' C. D. Viduae quae fuit uxor J.
D. Generosi de morte praed. J. quondam viri sui unde eum appellat Et sunt pleg'
de pros' J. B. nuper de Parochia Sancti Jacobi Westminster. in Comitatu Midd. Gen'
and Johannes Do de eadem Gen' and unde eadem Elizabetha per E. F. Attornatum
suum juxta formam Statut. in hujusmodi casu edit. and provis. instanter
appellat praed. A. B. de eo quod ubi praed. J. D. fuit in pace Dei and dicti
Domini Regis nunc apud Parochiam Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem Westminster. in
Comitatu Middlesex. decimo die J. Anno Regni Domini Jacobi nuper Regis Angliae
tertio hora prima post meridiem ejusdem diei ibidem scilicet apud Parochiam
Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem Westminster. in Com. Midd. venit praed. A. B. and
felonice ac ut felo dicti Domini Regis nunc volutarie and ex malicia sua
praecogitat. and insidiis praemeditatis contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc
hora nona post meridiem ejusdem diei in and super praefat. J.D. adtunc vi and
armis etc. apud Parochiam Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem Westminster. praedict. in
Comitatu praedicto insultum fecit and praedict. A.B. adtunc and ibidem cum
quodam gladio Anglice a Rapier ad valenciam quinque solidorum quod ipse idem A.
B. in manu sua dextra adtunc and ibidem scilicet praedicto decimo die J. Anno
tertio supradicto apud Parochiam Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem Westminster.
praedict. in Com. Midd. praed. habuit and tenuit ipse praedict. J. D. in and
super sinistram partem ventris ipsius J. D. prope umbilicum Anglice the Navel
ipsius J. D. adtunc and ibidem felonice voluntary and ex malitia sua
praecogitata percussit and pupugit and dedit eidem J. D. adtunc and ibidem in
and super praedictam sinistram partem ventris ipsius J. D. prope dictum
umbilicum ipsius J. D. cum gladio praedicto unam plagam mortalem longitud.
dimid. unius pollicis and profunditat. sex pollicium de qua quidem plaga
mortali idem J. D. a praedicto decimo die J. Anno tertio supradicto apud
praedictam Parochiam Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem Westminster. in Comitatu Midd.
praedict. languebat and languidus vixit and adtunc scilicet decimo sexto die
Junii Anno tertio supradicto apud Parochiam Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem
Westminster. in Comitatu Midd. praedict. ipse idem J. D. de plaga mortali praedicta
obiit and sic praefat. A. B. praedictum J. D. apud Parochiam Sancti Jacobi
infra Libertatem Westminster praedict. in Comitatu Midd. praedict. modo and forma
praedict. voluntary and ex malitia sua praecogitata interfecit and murdravit
contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc Coron' and Digitates suas and quam cito
idem A. B. Feloniam and Murdrum praedict. fecisset ipse idem A. B. fugit
dictaque C. D. ipsum recenter insecut. fuit de Villa in Villam usque ad quatuor
Villas propinquior' and ulterius quousque etc. Et si praedictus A. B. Feloniam
and Murdrum praedict. ei in forma praed. imposit. velit dedicere praefat. C. D.
hoc parata est versus eum probare prout Curia etc.

The Defendant having prayed Judgment de Brevi originali pleaded, Quod ipse A.
B. per Breve illud appellat' existit per nomen A. B. nuper de Parochia Sancti
Jacobi Westminster. in Comitatu Midd. Generosi ubi revera and in facto infra
Comitatum Midd. praedict. est quaedam Parochia vocat. and cognit. per nomen
Parochiae Sancti Jacobi infra Libertatem Westminster. sed in eodem Comitatu Midd. non
habetur nec die impetrationis Brevis originalis appelli praedict. seu unquam
habebatur aliqua Parochia sive locus cognit' and nuncupat' per nomen Parochiae
Sancti Jacobi Westminster. tanrum prout praed. C. D. per breve suum superius supponit
Et hoc ipse idem A. B. parat' est verificare unde petit Judicium de Brevi illo
Et quod praed. Breve cassetur.

The Plaintiff demurred, and the Appellee joined in Demurrer.

An Appeal of Murder was brought against A. B. The Defendant pleaded in
Abatement to an Appeal of Murder, and did not plead over to the Felony.
of the Parish of St. James Westminster in the County of Middlesex Gent. for
that he on the 10th day of June in the third year of King James did run the
deceased into the left part of his Belly with a Rapier, and that he died of
that wound three days afterward.

The Defendant demands Oyer of the Return, and pleads that there is a Parish
known by the name of the Parish of St. James within the Liberty of Westminster,
but no such place as the Parish of St. James Westminster only.

And upon a Demurrer it was argued that this Plea was not good, for it being in
Abatement the Appellee ought to have pleaded over to the Murder, Cro. Eliz. 694.
so it was adjudged in the Case of Watts and Brain, the Pleadings of which Case
are at large in my Lord Coke's Entries.

2. He ought to have pleaded in person, and not by Attorney; the Statute of
Gloucester is plain in this Point.

Curia. If the Plea is in Abatement, and the Party does not answer over to the
Murder, yet that does not oust him of his Plea, but the Appellant ought to have
prayed Judgment.

It Is a Question whether he ought to plead over to the Felony or not, for the
Presidents are both ways; there is no Judgment entered.

Proud versus Piper.
THere was a Libel brought in the Spiritual Court for a Mortuary. Mortuary due
only by Custom. 21 H. 8. c. 6.


The Defendant suggests that by the Statute of H. 8. no Mortuary ought to be
paid, but in such places where it had been usually paid before the making of
that Statute, and that there was no Custom in this place to pay a Mortuary, and
it was thereupon moved for a Prohibition; Cro. Eliz. 151.
for Mortuaries are not due by Law, but by particular Custom of places.

It Is true, 2 Inst. 491. 1 Cro. 237. Seld. of Tithes 287.
a Prohibition was denied in the Case of * Sid. 263.
Mark and Gilbert, but it was because 'twas admitted that there a Mortuary was
due by Custom, but they differed in the person to whom it ought to be paid.

Curia. Prohibitions have been granted and denied upon such Suggestions,
therefore the Defendant was ordered to take a Declaration in a Prohibition as
to the Mortuary, and to try the Custom at Law.

Lutwich versus Piggot.
IN Ejectment for Lands in Northumberland, Lease, whether made pursuant to the
power in the Reservation.
tried at the Bar, the Case was thus, viz.

Peter Venables was seized in Fee of the Manor of Long Witton in the said
County, and being so seized made a Settlement thereof, by Lease and Release to
the use of himself for Life, without impeachment of Waste, then to the Trustees
for seven years, to raise Portions for Daughters, then to William Venables and
the Heirs Male of his Body, and if he dye without Issue, then to Ann his
Daughter for Life, with Remainders over.

In which Settlement there was this Proviso, viz.

Provided that it shall be lawful for William Venables by Will or Deed, to
dispose of any part of the said Manor to his Wife for Life.

And another Proviso to this purpose. viz.

Provided that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said William Venables,
by any Deed in Writing under his Hand and Seal, to Demise for 3 Lives or 21
years, or under, or for any time or term of years, upon one, two, or three
Lives, or as Tenant in Tail in Possession may do, all or any part of the said
Manor, Lands, etc. which were in Lease for the space of forty years last past.

The Defendants Title was a Lease for 99 years, made by the said William
Venables to one Mary Venables, if three Lives should so long live.

And the Question was, whether that Lease was pursuant to the power in the last
Proviso?

It was objected that it was not, for it ought to be a Lease for 21, and not 99
years, determinable for three Lives.

But the Plaintiff was Nonsuit.

Rex versus Fairfax, and al.
AN Order made at the Quarter Sessions of Gloucester, Who shall be bound to
take an Apprentice in Husbandry.
was removed hither, confirming another made by the Justices there, for placing
of a poor Boy to be an Apprentice in Husbandry, and it was moved that it might
be quashed.

Mr. Pollexfen argued that the Justices had no power given them by the Law, to
compel a Man to take such an Apprentice, and this will depend upon the
construction of such Statutes which relate to this matter.

The first is that of Queen Elizabeth, which enacts, 5 Eliz. cap. 4. Paragraph
25.
that for the better advancing of Husbandry and Tillage, and to the intent such
who are fit to be made Apprentices to Husbandry may be bound thereunto, that
every person being an Householder, and having or using half a Plough Land at the
least in Till age, may take any to be an Apprentice above ten, and under
eighteen years, to serve in Husbandry, until the Party be of the Age of twenty
one, or twenty four years, the said Reteiner and taking of an Apprentice to be
by Indenture.

Now before the making of this Statute, the practice of putting out poor
Children was only in Cities and great Towns, to particular Trades and
Employments.

The next Statute is 43 Eliz. by which power is given to the Churchwardens or
Overseers of the Poor, 48 Eliz. cap. 2.
to raise weekly or otherwise by Taxation of every Inhabitant, such competent
Sum or Sums of Money as they shall think fit, for relief of the Poor, and
putting out of Children to Apprentice.

And then in the fifth Paragraph power is given to them by the Assent of two
Justices of Peace, to bind poor Children where they shall see convenient, etc.
which words were the foundation for the making of this Order.

But the construction thereof can be no otherwise than, viz. Whereas before the
making of this Act poor Children were bound Apprentices to Tillage, now the
Churchwardens may raise Money to bind them out to Trades; for if they could
compel Men to take them, what need was there of raising Money to place them out?

This must be the natural construction of that Law, 1 Jac. cap. 25. Paragraph
23.
which appears yet more plain, by the words of a subsequent Statute, which
continues that of the 43th of Eliz. with this addition, that all persons to
whom the Overseers of the Poor shall (according to that Act) bind any Children
to Apprentice, may take, receive and keep them as Apprentices.

It Is true, the general practice of putting out poor Children seems to warrant
this Order; but this has been occasioned upon a Mistake in Mr. Dalton 's Book,
Dalt. 114.
who Reported the Resolution of the Judges in 1633. to be, That every Man who
by his calling, profession, or manner of living, and who entertaineth and must
use Servants of the like quality, such must also take Apprentices.

By this Resolution the Justices of Peace have been governed ever since. But
Justice Twisden would often say, that those were not the Resolutions of the
Judges, as Reported by Mr. Dalton, and therefore the Book was mistaken.

2. The Order it self does not mention that the party to whom this poor Boy was
bound Apprentice, did occupy any Land in Tillage, for so it ought to be,
otherwise the Overseers of the Poor may bind him to a Merchant or to an
Attorney, which he called a Free quarter; for by such means Diseases may be
brought into a Family, and a Man has no security either for his Goods or Money.

This was the Opinion of Justice Twisden in Coutrell's Case; Sid. 29.
and it seems to be very natural, and therefore the chief reason why power was
given by the Statute to the Overseers to raise money, was that they might place
poor Children to such who were willing to take them for Money, for otherwise
they might compel a Man to receive his Enemy into his Service.

He relied on the Case of the King and Price, Hillary 29 and 30th of Car. II.
which was an Order of the like nature moved to be quashed: And Justice Twisden
said in that Case, that all the Judges of England were of Opinion that the
Justices had not such a Power, and therefore that Order was quashed.

It Is plain that by the Statute of the 43 Eliz. E contra.
the Justices may place out poor Children where they see it convenient, and so
the constant practice has been; so is the Resolution of the Judges in Dalton,
which was brought in by the Lord Chief Justice Hyde, but denied so to be by
Justice Twisden, for no other reason but because Justice Jones did not concur
with them.

In Price 's Case this matter was stirred again, but there has been nothing
done pursuant to that Opinion.

Since then the Justices have a power to place out poor Children. It Is no
Objection to say that there may be an inconvenience in the exercise of that
power, by placing out Children to improper persons; for if such things are
done, the Party has a proper remedy by way of Appeal to the Sessions.

Three Justices were of Opinion that the Justices of Peace had such a Power,
and therefore they were for confirming the Order; and Justice Dolbin said it
was so resolved in the Case of the King and Gilliflower, in the Reign of King
James the first, Foster being then Chief Justice, though the Judges in Price 's
Case were of another Opinion.

The Chief Justice was now likewise of a different Opinion, for the Statute
means something when it says that a Stock shall be raised by the Taxation of
every Inhabitant, etc. for putting out of Children Apprentice.

There are no compulsory words in the Statute for that purpose, nor any which
oblige a Master to take an Apprentice, and if not, the Justices have not power
to compel a Man to take a poor Boy, for possibly such may be a Thief or Spy in
the Family.

But this Order was quashed for an apparent fault, which was, that the Statute
has entrusted the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor by and with the
Approbation of two Justices to bind Apprentices, etc. And the Churchwardens are
not mentioned in this Order.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 1 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae, in Banco
Regis, 1689.
Thirsby versus Helbot.
DEBT upon a Bond for performance of an Award: Award void where a person who is
a Stranger to the Submission is ordered to be a Surety.
Upon Nullum Arbitrium pleaded, the Plaintiff replied and showed an Award made,
which amongst other things was, that the Defendant should be bound with
Sureties such as the Plaintiff should approve in the Sum of 150 l. to be paid
to him at such a time, and that they should seal mutual Releases, and assigned
a Breach in not giving of this Bond.

There was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and now Sergeant Pemberton moved in
arrest of Judgment, that this was a void Award, because it is that the Defendant
shall be bound with Sureties, etc. and then Releases to be given; now the
Sureties are Strangers to the Submission, and therefore the Defendant is not
bound to procure them.

He relied upon the Case of Barns and Fairchild, 1 Roll. Abr. 259.
which was an Award that all Controversies, etc. should cease, and that one of
the Parties should pay to the other 8 l. and that thereupon he should procure
his Wife and Son to make such an Assurance, etc. this was held to be void,
because it was to bind such persons who were not Parties to the Submission.

Tremain Sergeant contra. E contra.
That Cause does not come up to this at the Bar, because by this Award the
Party was to sign a general Release whether the Defendant paid the Money or not.

But the Court was of Opinion, that the Award was void, because it appointed
the Party to enter into a Bond with such Sureties as the Plaintiff shall like,
and Releases then to be mutually given. Now if the Plaintiff does not like the
Security given then he is not to seal a Release, and so it is but an Award of
one side.

Savier versus Lenthal.
ASsisa ven' recogn' si Willielmus Lenthal Armiger Henricus Glover Armiger
Johannes Philpot Generosus Thomas Cook Generosus and Samuel Ellis Generosus
injuste etc. Assize.
disseisiverunt Thomam Savier de libero tenemento suo in Westminster. infra triginta
annos etc. Et unde idem Thomas Savier per Jacobum Holton Attornatum suum
queritur quod disseisiverunt eum de officio Marr' Maresc' Domini Regis and
Dominae Reginae coram ipso Rege and Regina cum pertin' etc.

The Crier made Proclamation and then called the Recognitors between Thomas
Savier Demandant, and William Lenthal Tenant, who were all at the Bar, and
severally answered as they were called.

Then Mr. Goodwin of Greys-Inn arraigned the Assize in French, but the Count
being not in Parchment upon Record the Recognitors were for this time
discharged and ordered to appear again the next day.

But the Council for the Tenant relied on the authority in Calvert's Case, that
the Title ought to be set forth in the Count, Plo. Com. 403. 4 E. 4.6.
which was not done now, and therefore the Demandant ought to be nonsuited.

But the Writ being returnable that day, was ex gratia Curiae adjourned to the
Morrow afterward; and if the Demandant did not then make a Title he must be
nonsuited.

The next day the Jury appeared: Then the Crier called Thomas Savier the
Demandant, and then the Tenants, and afterward the Recognitors; and the Assize
being arraigned again the Demandant set forth his Title.

Then Sir Francis Winnington of Council for Mr. Lenthal one of the Tenants
appeared after this manner, Vouz avez icy le dit Williem Lenthal and jeo prye
oyer del Brief and del Count.

Then the other Tenants were called again three times, and they not appearing
Process was prayed against them.

Do versus Dawson.
BAil was put in to an Action brought by the Plaintiff, Bail liable if the
Principal had two Terms after an Injunction dissolved.
and before he declared, the Defendant obtained an Injunction to stay
Proceedings at Law, which was not dissolved for several Terms afterward.

Then the Injunction was dissolved, and the Plaintiff delivered his
Declaration, and had Judgment by default; and now he brought a Scire Fac.
against the Bail, who pleaded that no Declaration was delivered or filed
against the Principal within two Terms after the Action commenced and the Bail
entered, and upon a Demurrer the Plaintiff had Judgment against them, for the
Bail are liable; so as the Principal in the Action declare soon after the
Injunction dissolved; and its no fault in the Plaintiff that he did not declare
sooner, for if he had, he would have been in contempt of the Court of Chancery
for a Breach of the Injunction.

Anonymus.
A Writ of Error was brought to reverse a Recovery suffered in the grand
Sessions of Wales. Error to reverse a Recovery, there must be a Scire Fac.
against the Heir and Tertenants. Dyer 321.


The Question now was, whether there ought to be a Scire Fac. against the
Tertenants and the Heir.

It was said that it is discretionary in the Court, and that the first Case of
this nature was in my Lord Dyer, where a Writ of Error was brought in B. R. to
reverse a Fine levied in the County Palatine of Chester, and a Scire Facias was
brought against the Heir, but not against the Tertenants.

But the Heir in this Case is an Infant, so that if he be admitted to be a
Defendant he ought not to appear during his Minority, and there is no remedy
till his full Age.

Curia. It Is not necessary in point of Law, but it seems to be the course of
the Court, and that must be followed; and it is reasonable it should be so,
because the Errors upon a Recovery should not be examined before all the
Parties are in Court, therefore there should be a Scire Facias against the Heir
and the Tertenants. Sid. 213.


Lambert versus Thurston.
TRespass Quare vi and armis clausum fregit, etc. Trespass Quare vi and Armis,
lies for small Damages.
which the Plaintiff had laid to his Damage of 20 s.

The Defendant demurred to the Declaration, and for cause showed that B. R.
has not cognizance, either by the Common Law, or by the Statute of Gloucester,
to hold Plea in such an Action, where the Damages are laid to be under 40 s.

But the Court were of another Opinion, That an Action of Trespass Quare vi and
armis, will lie here, let the Damage be what it will. So the Plaintiff had
Iugment.

DE Termino Paschae, Anno 2 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae, in Banco
Regis, 1690.
Whitehal versus Squire.
TRover for a Horse, What shall be a Conversion, what not.
the Defendant pleaded Not Guilty, and a special Verdict was found, viz. That
John Mathers was possessed of this Horse, who on the 4th day of December, in
the first year of King James the II. put him to Grass to the Defendant, who
kept him till the first day of May following.

That John Mathers died Intestate, and before Administration was granted, the
Plaintiff desired the Defendant to Bury the said Mathers, and that he would see
him satisfied for his Expenses, and accordingly the Defendant did Bury him.

Then the Plaintiff gave this Horse to the Defendant in part of satisfaction
for the Charges of the Funeral, and a Note under his Hand to pay him 23 l. more.

The Plaintiff afterward took out Administration, and brought his Action
against the Defendant for this Horse; and whether this was a conversion or not,
was the Question.

Justice Dolben and Air held that it was not, but the Chief Justice was of
another Opinion.

Cole versus Knight, Hill. 1 and 2. Rot. 810.
SCire Fac. upon a Judgment of 6000 l. Release by one Executor of a Legacy, is
not a good bar to a Sci. Fa. upon a Judgment.
brought by the Plaintiffs Knight and Donning, as surviving Executors of John
Knight, against the Defendant Cole and his Wife, as Executrix of John Lawford,
setting forth, That Sir John Knight, Mr. Air and John Knight, had recovered a
Judgment of 6000 l. against John Lawford; That John Knight survived, who made
his Will and appointed John Kent, Thomas Knight and William Donning to be his
Executors, that he died, the Debt and Damages not being satisfied, that they
the said Knight and Donning proved the Will, that John Kent died, and that John
Lawford made his Will and appointed his Daughter Mary, now the Wife of Thomas
Cole, to be sole Executrix, and soon after departed this Life, that Cole proved
Lawford's Will, and that the Debt was not yet paid.

The Defendant Cole and his Wife pleaded a Release from Donning, one of the
Plaintiffs, by which he acknowledged to have received of the said Cole and his
Wife, as Exetutrix of the last Will and Testament of John Lawford, the Sum of 5
l. being a Legacy given to him by Lawford and then in general words he released
the said Cole and his Wife, of the Legacy, and of all Actions, Suits and
Demands whatsoever which he had or might have against the Defendants Cole and
his Wife, as Executrix of John Lawford, or may or can have for any matter or
thing whatsoever.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and the Question was, whether the Release
is a good Bar or not?

It was argued to be no Bar, for it being given upon the receipt of the Legacy,
is tied up to that only, and shall not be taken to release any other thing.

If a Man should receive 10 l. and give a Receipt for it, and does thereby
acquit and release the person of all Actions, Debts, 2 Roll. Abr. 409.
Duties and Demands, nothing is released but the 10 l. because the last words
must be limited to those foregoing.

It Is no new thing in the Law for general words to be restrained by those which
follow; as for instance, if a Release be of all Errors, Actions, Suits, and
Writs of Error whatsoever, Het. 15.
it has been held that an Action of Debt upon a Bond was not released, but
only Writs of Error.

And this seems to be the intent of the Parties here, that nothing but the
Legacies should be released; and therefore those general words which follow,
must be confined to the true meaning and intention of him who gave the Release.

So it is if a Man promise to pay 40 s. Yelv. 156.
to another during Life, a Release of all Quarrels, Controversies and Demands
which he had or may have will not discharge this Annuity, because the Execution
of the Promise was not to be 'till the Rent, should be due.

So likewise a Release of all Demands will not discharge a growing Rent. 1 Sid.
141.


2. If this should be a good Release, it discharges only such Actions which he
has in his own Right; for by the words all Actions which he had are released;
Cro. Eliz. 6. 1 Leon. 263.
now if an Executor grant omnia bona sua, the Goods which he has as Executor
do not pass.

E contra. E contra.
It was argued that this is a good Bar, for by the first words the Legacy is
released, then the subsequent words, viz. all Actions, Suits and demands
whatsoever, which he had against the Defendant as, Executor of Lawford, must
mean something.

It Is true, where general words are at the beginning of a Release, and
particular words follow, if the general words agree with those which are
particular, the Deed shall be construed according to the special words: But
where there are such words at first, and the conclusion is with general words,
as it is in this Case, both shall stand; for the Rule is, Generalis clausula non
porrigitur ad ea quae antea specialiter sunt comprehensa. 8 Co. 154. b.


These words do also Release not only such Actions which he had in his own
Right, but also as Executor to Mr. Lawford.

If a Man has a Lease in right of his Wife, as Executrix to her former
Husband, and he grants all his Right and Title therein; by this Grant the Right
which he had by his Wife does pass, for the word His does imply a propriety in
possession.

But per totam Curiam, Curia.
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

If an Executor has Goods of the Testators, and also other Goods in his own
Right, and then grants omnia bona sua, in strictness the Goods which he has as
Executor do not pass, because they are not bona sua, but so called because of
the Possession which he has, and therefore it must be a great strein to make
general words which are properly applicable to things which a Man has in his
own Right, to extend to things which he has as Executor.

It was never the intent of the Party to release more than what he had in his
own Right, and that appears by the Recital of the Legacy of 5 l. and therefore
the words which follow must have a construction according to the intent of
Donning at the time of the making the Release, and shall be tied up to the
foregoing words, and then nothing will be discharged but the Legacy.

As if a Lease for years be made, Dyer 255.
and the Lessor enters into a Bond, that he will suffer the Lessee quietly to
enjoy during the Term, without trouble of the Lessor, or any other person; if
an Entry should be made upon the Lessee, without the procurement or knowledge
of the Lessor, the Condition is not broken, for the last words are tied up to
the word suffer.

If the Legacy had not been released by particular words, it would not have
been discharged by a Release of all Actions and Demands whatsoever; and
therefore there would be a great inconvenience if these general words should be
construed to Release any thing besides this Legacy; for suppose there are two
Executors and one refuses to Administer, but meeting with a Debtor of the
Testator, gives him a Release of all Actions; will this amount to an acceptance
of the Administration? Certainly it will not.

The words in this Case are not of that extent as to Release Actions as an
Execuror; for it is a Release which goes to the right.

It Is like the Case where one of the Avowants released the Plaintiff after the
taking of the Cattle, 1 Roll. Rep. 246.
which was adjudged void upon a Demurrer, because he had not then any Suit or
Demand against the Plaintiff, but had distreined the Beasts as Bailiff, and in
right of another.

Justice Dolben cited a Case adjudged in B. R. in the year 1669. it was between
Stokes and Stokes.

The Plaintiff released all which he had in his own Right, there was a Bond in
which his Name was used in Trust for another; and afterward he brought an
Action of Debt upon that Bond, to which the Release was pleaded.

The Plaintiff replied that the Release was only of all such Actions which he
had in his own right, and not such which he had in the right of another; upon
this they were at Issue, and the Plaintiff had a Verdict, and Mr. Sympson moved
in Arrest of Judgment, that this Bond must be in his own Right: But the Court
affirmed the Judgment.

Anonymus.
AN Action on the Case was brought for these words, Words, where actionable
without a Colloquium.
viz. He stole the Colonel's Cupboard-Cloth. It was made a Question whether
these words were actionable, there being no precedent discourse laid in the
Declaration, either of the Colonel or his Cupboard-Cloath.

But the Court held the words actionable, for it is a charge of Felony, and if
such words, as now laid in this Declaration, are not actionable, any person may
be scandalized; for it is and must be actionable to say of a Man, that he stole
my Lord's Horses, or the Parson's Sheep, though it does not appear to what Lord
or Parson they did belong.

Rex versus Silcot.
THE Defendant was convicted before a Justice of the Peace, Conviction for
keeping a Gun, not having a 100 l. per Annum, and does not say when. 33 H. 8.
c. 6.
upon the Statute of H. 8. for keeping of a Gun, and upon proof it did appear
that he had not 100 l. per Annum.

The Record of the Conviction was removed into B. R. and this Exception was
taken to it, viz. non habuisset 100 l. per Annum, but does not say when, for it
may be that he had one hundred pound per Annum at the time when he kept a Gun,
but not when he was Convicted.

It was answered that the words non habuisset, shall relate to all times past,
and is as much as to say nunquam habuit, and the conclusion being contra formam
Statuti, must explain such words which seem to be doubtful.

This was compared to the Case where Debt was brought upon the Statute of R. 1
R. 3. c. 3.
3. for taking away of Goods before the Plaintiff was convicted of the Felony
laid to his charge, contra formam Statuti, he being only committed upon
suspicion; now though he did not allege that the Goods were taken, Cro. Eliz.
749.
for this cause it shall be intended they were so taken when no other cause is
showed.

Curia. This is a conviction before a Justice of the Peace, and therefore the
time when the Offense was committed should be certainly alleged, viz. that the
Defendant praedict. Anno
die and had not 100 l. per Annum, for which reason it was quashed.

Bisse versus Harcourt, Hill. 1 Gulielmi Rot. 217.
THE Plaintiff brought an Action for 400l. Replication not well concluded.
for so much Money had and received of him by the Defendant.

The Defendant pleaded an Attainder of High Treason in Abatement, and therefore
ought not to answer the Declaration.

The Plaintiff replied, that after he was Attainted, and before this Action
brought he was pardoned, and concludes thus, Unde petit Judicium and dampna sua.

The Defendant demurs, and for cause showed, Rast. Ent. 663. b. 681. Co. Ent.
160.
that the Replication is not well concluded, for dampna sua ought to be left
out, and of that Opinion was the Court, and therefore a Rule was made that he
might discontinue this Action without Costs.

Mordant versus Thorold. Hill. 1 and 2 Gulielmi, Rotulo 340.
THE Plaintiff brought a Scire Fac. upon a Judgment. The Case was thus, Viz.
Ann Thorold recovered in Dower against Sir John Thorold, in which Action
Damages are given by the Statute of Merton. 20 H. 3. c. 1.


Sir John Thorold brought a Writ of Error in B. R. and the Judgment was
affirmed.

Then the Plaintiff in Dower brought a Writ of Enquiry for the Damages, and
married Mr. Mordant, and died before that Writ was executed.

Mr. Mordant takes out Letters of Administration to his Wife, and brought a
Sci. Fa. upon the Judgment, and the question was whether it would lie.

This depended upon the construction of the Statute of King Charles the II.
which enacts, That in all personal Actions, 17 Car. 2. c. 8.
and real and mixed, the death of either party between the Verdict and the
Judgment shall not hereafter be alleged for Error, so as such Judgment be
entered within two Terms after such Verdict.

Sergeant Pemberton insisted that this was a judicial Writ, and that the
Administrator had a right to it, though the Wife died before the Profits were
ascertained by the Writ of Enquiry; it is no more than a plain Sci. Fa. upon a
Judgment, which an Executor may have, and which was never yet denied, though
this seems to be a Case of the first Impression.

The Council on the other side argued, that it is true, an Executor may have a
Scire Facias upon a Judgment recovered in the life of the Testator by reason
only of such Recovery, but this Scire Facias is brought for what never was
recovered, because the Wife died before any thing was vested in her; for the
Judgment will stand so as to effect the Lands, but not for the Damages.

Curia. When a Statute which gives a remedy for mean Profits is expounded, it
ought to be according to the Common Law. Now where entire Damages are to be
recovered, and the Demandant dies before a Writ of Enquiry executed, the
Executor cannot have any remedy by a Scire Facias upon that Judgment, because
Damages are no duty till they are assessed. Sed adjornatur.

DE Term. Sanctae Trin. Anno 2 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae in Banco
Regis, 1690.
Shotter versus Friend and Vxor'.
Hill. 2 Willielmi Rot. 39.
THE Plaintiff and his Wife declared upon a Prohibition setting forth, Proof by
one Witness good in the Spiritual Court.
that John Friend on the 13th of October, 22 Car. 2. made his Will, by which he
bequeathed to Mary Friend 10 l. to be paid to her within two years after his
decease, and that he made Jane, the Wife of the Plaintiff Shotter, Executrix,
and dyed; that the said Executrix whilst sole and unmarried, paid the said
Legacy to Mary Friend, who is since dead; that Thomas Friend, the Husband of
the said Mary, did after her death demand this Legacy in the Consistory Court
of the Bishop of Winton; that the Plaintiff pleaded payment, and offered to
prove it by one single Witness, which Proof that Court refused though the
Witness was a person without Exception, and thereupon Sentence was given there
against the Plaintiff, which Sentence was now pleaded, and upon Demurrer to the
Plea,

The Question was, whether upon the whole matter the Defendant should have a
Consultation, or whether a Prohibition should be granted, because the proof by
one Witness was denied by that Court.

It was argued that the Defendant should not have a Consultation, because
Matters Testamentary ought to have no more favor than things relating to
Tithes, in which Cases the Proof by one Witness has been always held good.

So it is in a Release to discharge a Debt, which is well proved by a single
Testimony, and it would be very inconvenient if it should be otherwise; for
Feoffments and Leases may come in question, which must not be rejected, because
proved by one Witness.

A Modus decimandi comes up to this Case, upon the Suggestion whereof
Prohibitions are never denied, and the chief reason is, because the Spiritual
Court will not allow a Modus to be any discharge of Tithes of Kind.

The Courts of Equity in Westminster Hall give Relief upon a Proof by one
Witness, so likewise do the Courts of the Common Law if the Witness is a good
and credible person.

It Is true, a Prohibition shall not go upon a Suggestion that the
Ecclesiastical Court will not receive the Testimony of a single Witness: If the
Question is, upon Proof of a Legacy devised, or Marriage or not, or any other
thing, which originally does lie in the Cognizance of that Court; but payment
or not payment is a matter of Fact triable at the Law, and not determinable
there; if therefore they deny to take the Evidence of a single Witness a
Prohibition ought to go. 2 Inst. 608.


2. The Sentence is no obstacle in this Case, because the Plaintiff had no
Right to a Prohibition until the Testimony of his Witness was denied, and
Sentence thereupon given; and this is agreeable to what has been often done in
cases of like nature.

As for instance, Cro. Eliz. 88. Moor 907.
Prohibitions have been granted where the Proof of a Release of a Legacy by one
Witness was denied.

So where the Proof of payment of Cythes for Pigeons was denied upon the like
Testimony. Cro. Eliz. 666. Moor 413. 2 Roll. Rep. 439. 2 Roll Abr. 300. pl. 9.
299 pl. 14, 17. Yelv. 92. Latch. 117. 3 Bulst. 242. Hutt. 22.


So where a Suit was for Subtraction of Cythes, and the Defendant pleaded that
he set them out, and offered to prove it by by one Witness, but was denied, a
Prohibition was granted.

And generally the Books are, that if the Spiritual Court refuse such Proof,
which is allowed at the Common Law, they shall be prohibited.

There is one Case against this Opinion, which is, that of Roberts in 12 Co. 12
Co. 65.
Rep. but it was only a bare Surmise and of little Authority.

Those who argued on the other side held that a Consultation shall go, E contra.
and that for two Reasons.

1. Because a Prohibition is prayed after Sentence.

2. Because the Ecclesiastical Court have an original Jurisdiction over all
Testamentary things.

As to the first Point, It Is plain that if that Court proceed contrary to those
Rules which are used and practiced at the Common Law, yet no Prohibition ought
to go after Sentence, but the proper remedy is an Appeal.

2. It cannot be denied, but that that Court had Cognizance of the principal
matter in this Case, which was a Legacy, and Payment or not is a thing
collateral. Now wherever they have a proper Jurisdiction of a Cause both that
and all its dependences shall be tried according to their Law, which rejects
the Proof by a single Witness.

This was the Opinion of Justice Popham and Williams in those times, when most
of the Cases cited on the other side were under debate.

In the Case of Brown and Wentworth a Revocation of a Will was offered to be
proved by a single Witness in the Spiritual Court, which being denied a
Prohibition was prayed in B. R. Yelv. 92.
but denied, because the Will being the principal matter of which that Court
had an original Jurisdiction, therefore the Revocation thereof, which was a
collateral matter, but depending upon the Principal, shall be tried there; for
when the Original belongs properly to their determination, all dependences
thereon shall follow it, and be tried by them according to their Law.

In Easter-Term 4 Car. 1. this came to be a Question again; 2 Cro. 264. 12 Co.
67.
it was upon a Libel for a Legacy, and Plene administravit pleaded, which they
endeavored to prove by the Testimony of a single Witness and denied: In that
Case Croke and Yelverton Justices were against the Prohibition, because a Suit
for a Legacy was a thing merely Spiritual, and Payment thereof is of the same
nature; so that the Ecclesiastical Court has a proper Jurisdiction both of the
Matter and the Proof.

By these Instances it may be seen that it is not yet a settled Point that a
Proof by one Witness in that Court is good; Her. 87. Sid. 161.
for Prohibitions have been both granted and denied.

It cannot be a reason to grant a Prohibition to the Spiritual Court for
refusing such Proof which is allowed at the Common Law, because though the
Proof by a single Witness is allowed at the Law, yet it is not a conclusive
Evidence, because the Jury who are of the Vicinage are supposed to know the
Fact and may give a Verdict upon that knowledge without Proof or Witness, as
well as where there is but one.

In Michaelmas-Term following the Court were all of Opinion that no
Consultation ought to go, for as where the Ecclesiastical Court proceeds upon
things merely Spiritual no Prohibition is to be granted as in Suits about
Probates of Wills, etc. so where they meddle with Temporal Matters or refuse to
admit such Proof which is allowed at the Common Law, no Consultation shall go.

If the Law should be otherwise it would be inconvenient for all Executors and
Administrators, for if they should be compelled to prove payment of Debts by
two Witnesses they might often fail of that Proof, and so pay the Money twice.

Such Proof which is good at the Common Law ought to be allowed in their Court,
and at the Common Law it is not necessary to prove a Payment of a Debt by two
Witnesses.

They may follow their own Rules concerning things which are originally in
their Cognizance; but if any collateral Matter does arise, as concerning a
Revocation of a Will, or Payment of a Legacy, if the Proof be by one Witness
they ought to allow it.

Tithes are of Ecclesiastical Cognizance; now if a Libel should be brought for
Subtraction of Tithes, and the Defendant proves by one Witness, that he set
them out from the nine parts though the Parson had not any notice of it (which he
is not to have at the Common Law, though it is otherwise by their Law) that
Court must allow this Proof otherwise a Prohibition must go.

2. As to the other Point a Prohibition may be granted as well after as before
Sentence, but the Sentence in this Case is the very ground of the Prohibition.

Justice Dolben cited a Case between Richardson and Desborow in B. R. Hill.
1675. which was a Devise of a Legacy of 100 l. The Executor was sued, who
pleaded, that the Testator owed another person the like Sum of 100 l. upon
Bond, which being paid he had not Assets ultra: And upon Proof in the Spiritual
Court it appeared there was but one Witness to the Bond, which not being a good
Proof of it in their Law, there was a Sentence for the Payment of the Legacy,
and afterward a Prohibition was granted upon the suggesting of this Matter.

Ashcomb versus Inhabitants Hundredi de Elthorn.
Hill. 1. Rot. 901.
AN Action was brought upon the Statute of Winton for a Robbery done in the
Parish of Hamonsdworth in Longford Lane in the said Hundred: The Case was thus,
viz. A person was robbed who refused to make Oath whether the Hundred may be
sued.


The Plaintiff employed one Coxhead his Servant to sell fat Cattle in
Smithfield, who sold them for 106 l. which Money he delivered up in two Bags to
one Strange a Quaker, who was robbed in the Company of Coxhead, he being also
robbed of 12 s.

They both gave notice of this Robbery to the Inhabitants of the next Village,
and Coxhead was examined by the Justice of the Peace dwelling in the County and
Hundred where the Robbery was committed, pursuant to the Statute, etc. before
whom he made Oath, that he did not know any of the Robbers; 27 El. c. 13.
but Strange being a Quaker refused to be examined upon Oath.

Mr. Ashcomb the Master brought an Action against the Hundred, and all this
Matter was found specially.

Now the Question was whether the Action was well brought in the name of the
Master; and so whether the Hundred should be liable to pay the Money of which
the Quaker was robbed, he refusing to be examined upon Oath.

In this Case the Statute of Queen Elizabeth was considered, which was made in
favor of the Hundred; for it enacts, That the Party robbed shall not maintain
any Action against the Hundred, except he give notice of the Robbery with
convenient speed to the Inhabitants of some Town, Vill or Hamlet near the place
where he was robbed; and except within twenty days next before the Action
brought he be examined upon Oath before a Justice of the County inhabiting in
the Hundred where the Robbery was committed, or near the same, whether he knew
the Parties who robbed him or either of them.

It was agreed that the Master may have an Action for a Robbery committed upon
the Servant, but that is by virtue of the Statute of Winton. Mich. 1658.
The Case of Jones against the Hundred of Bromley is to that purpose, which was
a Robbery upon himself, Wife and Servant, the Money being taken from the
Servant, and the Master made Oath that he did not know any of the Robbers, but
it happened the Servant did know one of them whose Name was Leonard, of which
he did then inform his Master; and this Matter appearing to the Jury it was
found specially, and upon the Argument of that special Verdict these Points
were resolved.

1. That the Oath of the Master without the swearing of his Servant is good,
because the Servant had only the bare Custody of the Money.

2. That the Information then given by the Servant to the Master of his
Knowledge of one of the Robbers did not oblige the Master, because the Money
shall be said to be in his possession and not of the Servant, the Master being
then present, which is all the difference between that Case and this at the
Bar; so that the Master is the person robbed within the meaning of the Statute
of Winton although the Money be in the hands of the Servant.

Suppose the Servant had received 1000 l. and not being able to carry it
himself had employed ten Men, each to carry 100 l. and they had been all
robbed, the Owner may have an Action against the Hundred upon the Affidavit of
one of the persons robbed; the reason is, because the possession shall follow
the property, and the possession of the whole will follow every part.

There are Authorities to prove that if the Servant is robbed the Master may
give Evidence what Money was delivered to him, 2 Roll. Abr. 685.
though that might be as well proved by another Witness.

Now though all this be admitted, yet an Action will not lie against the
Hundred by the Master in the Case at the Bar; for the Statute of Queen
Elizabeth being made so much in favor of the Hundred ought to be pursued.

The Reasons why an Oath is enjoined by that Statute are:

1. That the person robbed should enter into a Recognizance to prosecute the
Robbers, if he knew them or any of them.

2. That the Hundred might be excused upon the Conviction of such person or
persons.

3. To prevent a Robbery by Fraud.

Now suppose the Servant is entrusted with Money, and robbed by Confederacy,
shall the Hundred be answerable because the Servant has broke his Trust? Cro.
Eliz. 142. 1 Leon. 323.
No, the Servant ought to be sworn for the purposes mentioned in that Act,
which if he refuse the Master has lost his Action.

But if the Servant is robbed in the Company or presence of his Master the Money
is still in Judgment of the Law in the possession of the Master, Styles 156, 319
and that was the reason of the Judgment in Jones's Case.

This is not like the Case of a common Carrier, who though he may be said to be
a Servant, yet he is entrusted by this Law.

Curia. This Action might have been well brought for the whole by Coxhead alone
(but it is now too late, the year being expired) for where a Servant is robbed
of part of his Master's Goods and part of his own he may have an Action,
Brownl. 155.
and recover Judgment for the whole; and therefore at another day the Plaintiff
had Judgment for 26 s. only.

Pain versus Patrick, and others.
Pasch. 2 Gulielmi Rot. 43.
THIS was a Special Action on the Case brought by Isaac Pain against Edward
Patrick and William Boulter for hindering the Plaintiff to go over a Ferry:
Action on the Case will not lie for disturbing or hindering a passage in a
Common Highway, but it must be by Indictment.
The Declaration sets forth that the Vill of Littleport in the Isle of Ely is
an ancient Vill within which there is a River called Wilner River, over which
there was an ancient passage in a Ferry-Boat from the North East part of the
said Vill to the end of Ferry-Lane, and from thence to another place called
Adventurers Bank; that this passage was for all People at a certain price, etc.
excepting the Inhabitants of Littleport living in ancient Houses there, who by
reason of an ancient Custom in the said Vill were to pass ad libitum suum with
paying Coll, etc.

That the Plaintiff was an Inhabitant in an ancient Mesuage in the said Vill,
and that there was an ancient Ferry-Boat kept there by the Owners thereof till
the first day of May in such a year; after which day the Defendants did not
keep the same per quod the Plaintiff lost his Passage, etc.

The Defendants protestando that the Passage was not in a Ferry-Boat,
protestando etiam that there was no such Custom, etc. and that the Plaintiff
was not an Inhabitant in an ancient Mesuage in Littleport; Pro Placito dicunt
that before the exhibiting of the Bill they did erect a Bridge over the said
River, where the Passage was anciently, and this was done and maintained at
their own Costs, and that the Plaintiff melius and celerius could pass over the
said Bridge, etc. This was pleaded in Bar.

The Plaintiff replied, that he per aliquem Pontem libertatem passagii trans
and ultra Rivum praedict' secundum consuetudinem praed. in narratione
mentionat' habere non permissus fuit contra consuetudinem praed. Et hoc paratus
est verificare, etc.

The Defendants demurred, and the Plaintiff joined in Demurrer.

The Questions were:

1. Whether this was a good Custom, as laid in the Declaration, for the
Inhabitants of a Vill to claim to be discharged of Coll ratione comorantiae.

2. If the Custom is good, then whether the Defendants Plea in Bar is also
good to discharge themselves from keeping of the Boat.

3. Whether the Plaintiff can maintain this Action.

This Case was argued now, and in Easter-Term following by Council for the
Defendants, and in the same Term by Council for the Plaintiff.

Those who argued for the Defendants said, that as to the first Point, though
this is set forth by way of Custom, yet it is in the nature of a Prescription
which is always alleged in the person, but here it is for the Inhabitants of a
Vill, etc.

Now this cannot be good by way of Prescription, because in such Case there
must be a certain and permanent Interest abiding in some person, which cannot
be here; for a mere Habitation or dwelling in an House will not give a Man such
an Interest.

That which makes a Prescription good is Usage and reasonableness, 1 Leon. 142.
3 Leon. 41.
but it cannot be ex rationabili causa to prescribe ad libitum suum, for the
Ferry-Man has neither any consideration or recompense for the keeping of his
Boat, when the Inhabitants may pass over at their pleasure without paying Toll.

It Is true, a Man may prescribe to have Common sans nombre, which in strictness
is to put in as many Cattle, as he will; but if he lays his prescription ad
libitum suum, it is not good.

If therefore this is not good by way of Prescription it cannot be supported by
Custom, because that also must extend to what has some certainty, and which
must likewise have a reasonable beginning.

Now there can be no certainty in this Custom, Hob. 86. 6 Co. 60.
because the Plaintiff claims it only during his Comorancy in a Mesuage, in
which he had neither a certain time or Estate, and this is such a transitory
interest, which is not allowed in the Law.

And therefore it has been adjudged that a Custom for an Infant to sell his
Lands when he can measure an Ell of Cloth is void, 1 Roll. Rep. 32.
because it is uncertain of what Age he may then be, and it is equally as
uncertain, how long a Man may live in one of these ancient Houses.

Such a Custom might be good in point of Tenure, for it might have a reasonable
commencement between Lord and Tenant; but this cannot be good as laid in this
Declaration, for several Reasons.

1. Because it is not alleged that the Defendants of right ought to keep a Boat
there, or that it was necessary for them to be always attending, for possibly
it might require the use of skilful Men; and therefore in all Actions brought
for not repairing of Ways it is alleged that the Defendant reparare debuit.

2. Because it brings a Charge without any recompense, 8 E. 4.18. Br. Tit.
Customs pl. 46.
and this must be very unreasonable. It Is true, that a Custom for Fishermen to
dry their Nets upon another Man's Ground is good, which may seem to be a Charge
upon the Land without any Reward; but the reason is, because the catching of
Fish is for the public benefit, and every man may have advantage by it.

A Custom to have solam and separalem pasturam has been formerly doubted
whether good or not; but it is now held to be good because the Lord of the Soil
might have some other Recompense for it.

3. Because it is unlimited, for the Tenants may pass and repass ad libitum
according to this Custom, but it ought to be laid for their necessary
occasions, for otherwise the Defendants may be deprived of their Freehold,
because the Tenants may always keep the Boat in use.

The 2d. Point was not much insisted on, which was, as to the matter of the
Plea; only it was said, that it was not so well to take away the whole
Prescription, that the Plea might have been good if it had been quousque the
Bridge fall or decayed, then the Prescription does revive again.

The 3d. Point. Then supposing the Declaration to be sufficient, yet as this is
upon the Record the Plaintiff could not have this Action, because he had set
forth this to be a public and common Ferry for all People to pass, and that he
was hindered, but does not show any particular damage, and therefore can have no
cause of Action.

It Is like the Case of a common Highway which is out of repair, 27 H. 8. 27.
a. 1 Inst. 56. Moor 108. Cro. Eliz. 664. 5 Co. 104.
for which no man can bring an Action unless he has a particular damage or
loss more than the rest of the People passing that way, but the Party ought to
be indicted, and this is to prevent multiplicity of Suits; for if one man may
have an Action every person traveling that way may have the like.

Another Exception was taken to the Declaration, viz. that all the Custom is
laid to be for the Inhabitants of an ancient Vill to pass Toll-Free from
Ferry-Lane to Adventurers-Bank, and they do not allege that Bank to be within
the Vill.

Those who argued for the Plaintiff held this to be a good Custom, E contra.
as set forth by him, and as such it is not confined to the same Rules with a
Prescription, which must have a lawful commencement; but it is otherwise in a
Custom, for it is sufficient if it be certain and reasonable.

The Cases cited on the other side are not to this purpose, because they
concern only such Customs which relate to some Interest or profit in the Land
of another person, but this Custom is only in a matter of exemption and easment.

This was the very difference taken by the Judges in Gatewood 's Case, 6 Co.
where it was held to be a good Custom for every Inhabitant of a particular
Town to have a Way over such Lands to go to Church or Market, because this was
matter of easement and no profit.

Now a Passage over a River is no more than a way, and may be tied up to one or
more persons according to their comorancy.

Since therefore no Interest is claimed by the Plaintiff, but only an easment,
this Prescription need not be laid in the Owners, but in the Inhabitants of the
Vill of Littleport. It may be compared to a Case where a Custom was laid for
the Inhabitants of a Town to pay a Modus in discharge of Tithes; Hob. 118.
Yelv. 163.
this was held good, because it was by way of discharge in the persons Lands,
without claiming any profit in that of another.

It Is also like the common Case of a Market, when a Man has pitched his Stall,
there no person can remove it, for he has a right ratione comorantiae.

Then as to the first Objection upon the first Point, That a Custom to pass and
repass, ad libitum, cannot be good; it was answered, this passage was in the
nature of a High way, over which a Man may pass as often as he will; and
therefore it is well enough as laid in the Declaration.

2. As to the Objection, that it ought to be laid in some person, and not in
the Inhabitants, it was said this was an easment to the Plaintiff, and no such
thing can be to one man but it makes another a Crespasser, and it is no Interest
in the Plaintiff to be discharged of a Charge.

A Custom to grind at the Lords Mill discharged of Toll, rules this Case; for
is it not as much charge for a Lord of a Manor to keep a Mill as for the
Defendant to keep a Boat?

If the Plaintiff had prescribed, then this had come within the the Rules of
Gatewood 's Case.

But he has alleged a Custom, and when such Allegations are made, they ought
not to be too narrowly searched for: No reason can be given why an Infant at 15
years of Age shall be capable to make a Feoffment in one Town and not in
another? 18 Ed. 4.3.


3. Then as to the third point, that this being laid to be a Common Ferry, the
Plaintiff ought to show some special damage to maintain an Action.

To which it was answered that the right was on the Plaintiff's side, and that
was sufficient to maintain the Action.

It Is not like the Case of a Common-High-way, as mentioned on the other side,
because this Action is confined to Littleport alone, and no Man is entitled to
it, but such who inhabit that Vill, so that every Man cannot bring an Action.

As to the Exception to the form of the Declaration, that Adventurers-Bank is
not laid to be in the Vill, it was said that the Plaintiff only claimed a right
of passage over the River, which is laid to be in the Vill of Littleport, 2
Cro. 555, 557.
the Bank is only the terminus ad quem; it is like the Case where the Defendant
covenanted to repair a Mill and the Watercourse in a Parish, and also the
Banks belonging to the Mill, in which Case the Plaintiff had Judgment, though he
did not show in what Vill the Banks were, because it shall be intended to be in
the same Vill where the Mill was.

Afterward in Trinity- Term, 3 Willielmi, Judicium.
Judgment was given for the Defendant, absente Dolbin Justice, who was also of
the same Opinion.

It was held that the Custom was well alleged, both as to the manner and
matter; it is true, all Customs must have reasonable beginnings, but it would be
very difficult to assign a lawful commencement for such a Custom as this is, so
it would be for the Custom of Gavelkind, or Borough English, which are
circumscribed to particular places; and since it is sufficient to allege a
Custom, by reason of the place where it is used; it may be as reasonable in this
Case to say that there has been an ancient Ferry-Boat kept in this place; it is
but only an inducement to the Custom, which did not consist so much in having a
Right to the Passage, as to be discharged of Toll.

This might have a lawful beginning, either by a Grant of the Lord to the
Ancestors of the Defendant, or by the agreement of the Inhabitants.

A Custom alleged for all the Occupiers of a Close in such a Parish to have a
Foot-way, Cro. Car. 419. Co. Lit. 110. b. Cro. Eliz. 746. 1 Roll. Rep. 216.
etc. is not good; the reason is because the Plaintiff ought to prescribe in
him who has the Inheritance; but where a thing is of necessity, and no manner
of profit or charge in the Soil of another, but only a thing in discharge, or
for a Way to a Market, or to be quit of Toll, in such cases not only a
particular person, but the Inhabitaints of a Vill may allege a Prescription.

This may be as well alleged, as a Custom to turn a Plow upon another man's
Land, or for a Fisherman to mend his Nets there.

It Is good as to the matter, for it is only an easment; it is like a Custom
alleged for a Gateway or Watercourse, and for such things Inhabitants of a
Vill, Cro. Eliz. 441.
or all the Parishioners of a Parish may allege a Custom or Usage in the
place.

2. Point. But as to the Plea in Bar, it is not good, because the execting of a
Bridge is but laying out a Way; it is a voluntary act, and no man by reason of
his own act can be discharged of what he is to do, upon the interest he has in
the Ferry.

If the Defendant had petitioned the King to destroy the Ferry, and got a
Patent to erect a Bridge, and had brought a Writ ad quod dampnum, and it had
been found by inquisition to be no damage to the People, then he might safely
have built this Bridge.

3. But notwithstanding the Plea is not good, yet the Plaintiff can have no
advantage of it, because he cannot have an Action on the Case for this matter,
for by his own showing, it is a common Passage, Cro. Car. 132, 167. 1 Inst. 56.
a. Cro. Eliz. 664. 13 Co. 33. Davis 57.
which is no more than a common Highway; now for disturbing him in such a
Passage, no Action on the Case will lie, unless he had alleged some particular
damage done to himself; for if he could maintain such an Action, any other
person is entitled to the like, and this would be to multiply Suits, which the
Law will not allow, but has provided a more apt and convenient remedy, which
is by presentment in the Leet.

If Toll had been extorted from him, F. N. B. 94. 22 H. 6.12.
then an Action on the Case had been the proper remedy, but no such thing
appeared upon this Declaration.

Prince 's Case.
THE Suggestion in a Prohibition was, that Prince was seized of the Rectory of
Shrewsby, ut de feodo and jure, and that he being so seized, de jure, ought to
present a Vicar to the said place, but that the Bishop of the Diocese had, of
his own accord, appointed a person thereunto.

This Exception was taken to it, viz. He does not say that he was Impropriator,
but only that he was seized of the Rectory in Fee, so it not appearing that he
had it Impropriate, he ought no to present the Vicar.

Justice Dolben replied, That in several places in Middlesex, the Abbots of
Westminster did send Monks to say Mass, and so the Vicaridges were not endowed,
but he put in and displaced whom he pleased.

That he had heard my Lord Chief Justice Hales often say, that the Abbot had as
much reason to displace such Men, as he had his Butler or other Servant.

Curia. Declare upon the Prohibition, and try the Cause.

Harrison versus Hayward.
Pasch. 2 Gulielmi, Rot. 187.
AN Agreement was made to assign a Stock upon Request, When a thing is to be
done upon request, the performance must be when the person requires it, and the
Defendant cannot plead that he was ready to assign after the promise made.
and for nonperformance an Action was now brought, setting forth the
Agreement, and that the Plaintiff did request the Defendant at such a time, etc.

The Defendant pleaded that he was ready to assign the Stock after the promise
made, etc. and upon a Demurrer it was ruled if the thing was not to be done
upon Request, then the Defendant was bound to do it in a convenient time after
the promise, but it being to be done upon request, the time when the Plaintiff
will require the performance of the Agreement, is the time when the Defendant
must do it.

Judgment pro Quer.

Thompson versus Leach.
WRit of Error upon a Judgment in Ejectment given in the Common Pleas;
Surrender not good without acceptance of the Surrendree. 2 Vent. 198.
the Case upon the special Verdict was thus: Viz.

Simon Leach was Tenant for Life of the Lands in question, with Remainder in
contingency to his first, second and third Son in Tail Male, Remainder to Sir
Simon Leach in Tail, etc. This Settlement was made by the Will of Nicholas
Leach, who was seized in Fee.

The Tenant for Life, two months before he had a Son born, did in the absence
of Sir Simon Leach, the Remainder man in Tail, seal and deliver a Writing, by
which he did Grant, Surrender and Release the Lands which he had for Life, to
the use of Sir Simon Leach, and his Heirs, and continued in possession five
years afterward, and then, and not before, Sir Simon Leach did accept and
agree to this Surrender, and entered upon the Premises.

But that about four years before he thus agreed to it, Simon Leach the Tenant
for Life, had a Son born named Charles, Lessor of the Plaintiff, to whom the
Remainder in contingency was thus limited.

The Tenant for Life died, then Sir Simon Leach suffered a Common Recovery in
order to bar those Remainders.

1. The Question was, whether this was a legal and good Surrender of the
Premises, to vest the Freehold immediately in Sir Simon Leach, without his
Assent, before Charles Leach the Son of Simon Leach the Surrenderor was born,
so as to make him a good Tenant to the Precipe, upon which the Recovery was
afterward suffered.

If so, then the contingent Remainders to the first and other Sons is
destroyed.

2. If the Estate was not vested in the Surrendree till his actual assent, such
assent shall not relate (though after the execution of the Deed) so as to pass
the Estate at the very time it was sealed and delivered.

Judgment being given in the Common Pleas, by the Opinion of three Justices,
against Justice Ventris, that the contingent Remainder was not destroyed by
this Surrender, because it was not good without the acceptance, and till the
actual assent of the Surrendree, this Writ of Error was now brought upon that
Judgment.

This Case depended several Terms, and those who argued to maintain the
Judgment insisted that here was neither a mutual agreement between the Parties,
or acceptance or entry of the Surrendree, which must be in every Surrender,
these being solemn acts in such Cases required to the alteration of
Possessions, and to prevent Frauds.

That the Law has a greater regard to the transmutation of Possessions, than
to the alteration of Personal things, and therefore more Ceremonies are made
requisite to that, than to transfer a Chattel from one to another.

In all Feoffments there must be Livery and Seisin, Quaere, For if Tenant for
Life surrender to him in Reversion, the Surrendree has a Freehold in Law,
before Entry. Co. Lit. 266. b. 1 Inst. 266. b.
so in Partitions and in Exchanges, which are Conveyances at the Common Law, no
Estate is changed until an actual Entry, though in the Deed it self such Entry
is fully expressed.

Here the Surrendree is a Purchaser of the Estate, and yet did not know any
thing of it, than which nothing can be more absurd.

It Is admitted that every Gift and Grant enures to the benefit of the Donee and
Grantee, but not where the assent of the Parties is required to complete the
act.

Assent and Dis-assent are acts of the Mind; now it is impertinent to say that a
Man gave his Assent to a thing which he never heard.

A Lease for years is not good without Entry, nor a Surrender without
Acceptance. Lane 4. 3 Cro. 43.


It Is no new thing to compare a Surrender to a resignation of a Benefice; 2
Cro. 198. Dyer 294. Br. Abr. tit. Bar 81. Yelv. 61. Sid. 387.
now if an Incumbent should resign to the Ordinary, and the Patron should
afterward present to that Living such presentation is void if the Ordinary had
not accepted the resignation, the reason is, because a resignation does not
pass the Freehold to the Bishop, but puts it only in Abeyance till his
acceptance; and it is not an Objection to say that this is grounded upon an
Ecclesiastical Right, and not at the Common Law, or that a Formedon will not
lie of a Rectory; for though it is of Ecclesiastical Right, yet it is of Temporal
Cognizance, and shall be tried at Law.

The president in Rastal may be objected, where the surviving Lessee for years
brought an Action of Covenant against the Lessor for disturbing of him in his
possession, Rast. Ent. tit Covenant 136. b. Owen 97. Dyer 28. Rast. Enttit.
Debt. 183, 176. b. 177. a. Br. Sur. 39. Cro. Car. 101. Fitz. Abr. tit. Bar 262.
Co. Ent. 335.
and the Lessor pleaded a Surrender to himself without an acceptance; but the
Plaintiff in that Case said nothing of a Surrender.

In the same Book a Surrender was pleaded ad quam quidem sursum redditionem the
Plaintiff agreavit: so in Fitzherbert 's Abridgment issue was joined upon the
acceptance, which shows it is a material point.

No inconvenience can be objected that an Assent is made a Legal Ceremony to a
Surrender, for it is not inconvenient even in the Case of an Infant, who by
reason of his nonage is not capable to take such a Conveyance, because he
cannot give his assent, but he may take the Land by way of Feoffment, or Grant,
or any Conveyance of like nature, without his Assent.

By the very definition of a Surrender, Co. Lit. 337. b. Bro. tit. Surrender
pl. 45. Dyer 110. b. Fitz. 39.
it plainly appears that there must be an assent to it; for it is nothing else
but a yielding up of an Estate to him who has the immediate Reversion or
Remainder, wherein the Estate for Life or Years may drown by mutual Agreement
between the Parties.

It Is true, an Agreement is not necessary in Devises, nor in any other
Conveyances, which are directed by particular Statutes, or by Custom; but it is
absolutely necessary in a Surrender, which is a Conveyance at the Common Law;
it is such an essential Circumstance, that the Deed it self is void without it,
it is as necessary as an Attornment to the Grant of a Reversion, or an Entry to
a Deed of Exchange, which are both likewise Conveyances at the Common Law.

There are various Circumstances in the Books which declare what acts shall
amount to an Acceptance or Agreement, Cro. Eliz. 488. Owen 97. 31 Ass. pl. 26.
but it was never yet doubted, but that an acceptance was necessary to a
Surrender.

So in the Entries, Fitz. tit. Debt 149. 9 E 3.7. b. contra. Rast. Ent. 136.
a Surrender is sometimes pleaded without an Acceptance; but it is always that
the Surrendree by virtue of the Surrender expulit and ejecit the Plaintiff,
which amounts to an Agreement.

The Law is so careful in these Conveyances, Kelwway 194, 195. Dyer 358. pl. 48.
that it will not presume an assent without some act done; if therefore a Deed
cannot operate as a Surrender without an acceptance, then in this Case no such
shall be presumed, because the Jury have found it expressly otherwise; then by
the birth of Charles Leach, the contingent Remainder is vested in him, which
arising before the Assent of the Surrendree, makes such assent afterward void,
for there can be no intermediate Estate.

Besides, if an Assent should not be necessary to a Surrender, this
inconvenience would follow, viz. if a Purchaser should take in several
Mortgages and Extents, and keep them all on foot in a third persons name (which
is usual) to prevent mean encumbrances, and the Mortgagor should afterward
Surrender his Estate without the assent of the Purchaser, if this should be
held a good Conveyance in Law, it would be of very mischievous consequence.

2. If the Estate is not immediately transferred to the Surrendree at the
sealing of the Deed, without the assent of the Surrenderor, it shall not pass
afterward when he gives his consent, and that by way of Relation, for if that
should be allowed then the Surrenderor might have kept the Deed in his Pocket,
as well fifty as five years after the execution thereof, which would be so
prejudicial, that no Man could be assured of his Title.

It Is true, when a Bargain and Sale is made of Land, 2 Inst. 675. 3 Co. 36.
such a day, etc. and two days afterward the Bargainor enters into a
Recognizance; then the Deed is enrolled, within the six Months, by this means
the Conusee of the Statute is defeated; for after the inrollment the Land
passes ab initio, and the Bargainee in Judgment of Law was seized thereof from
the delivery of the Deed, but not by way of Relation, but by immediate
Conveyance of the Estate, by virtue of the Statute of Uses.

But the Law will not suffer contingent Remainders to waver about, and to be so
uncertain that no Man knows where to find them, which they must be, if this
Doctrine of Relation should prevail.

Now suppose the Surrendree had made a Grant of his Estate to another person,
before he had accepted of the Surrender, and the Grantee had entered, would this
subsequent assent have divested this Estate and made the Grant of no effect? if
it would, then here is a plain way found out for any Man to avoid his own acts,
and to defeat Purchasors.

Therefore it is with great reason that the Law provides that no person shall
take a Surrender but he who has the immediate Reversion, and that the Estate
shall still remain in the Surrenderor until all acts are done which are to
complete the Conveyance.

Those who argued against the Judgment, E contra.
held that the Estate passed immediately without the assent of the Surrenderor,
and that even in Conveyances at the Common Law, it is divested out of the
person, and put in him to whom such Conveyance is made without his actual
assent.

It Is true, in Exchanges the Freehold does not pass without Entry, nor a Grant
of a Reversion without an Attornment, but that stands upon different Reasons
from this Case at the Bar; for in Exchanges the Law requires the mutual acts of
the Parties exchanging, and in the other there must be the consent of a third
person.

But in Surrenders the assent of the Surrendree is not required, for the Estate
must be in him immediately upon the execution of the Deed, if he does not show
some dissent to it.

If a Man should plead a Release without saying ad quam quidem relaxationem,
the Defendant agreavit, yet this Plea is good, because the Estate passes to
him upon the execution of the Deed.

It may be a Question, whether the actual assent must be at the very time that
the Surrender was made; for if it should be afterward, it is well enough, and
the Estate remains in the Surrendree, till dis-agreement.

Presumption stands on this side, for it shall never be intended that he did
not give his Assent, but on the contrary, because it is for his benefit not to
refuse an Estate.

Therefore where a Feme Sole had a Lease and married, Hob. 203.
the Husband and Wife surrendered it to another in consideration of a new Lease
to be granted to the Wife and her Sons, etc. this Estate vests immediately in
her, though a Feme Covert, and that without the assent of her Husband, for the
Law intends it to be her Estate till he dissent; it is true, in that Case his
assent was held necessary, because the first Lease could not be divested out of
him, without his own consent.

So a Feoffment to three, 2 Leon. 224.
and Livery made to one, the Freehold is in all 'till disagreement.

So if a Bond be given to a Stranger for my use, and I should die before I had
agreed to it, my Executors are entitled to an Action of Debt, and will
recover.

A Feme Covert and another were Ioint-tenants for Life; 1 Roll. Rep. 401, 441.
she and her Husband made a Lease for years of her moiety, reserving a Rent,
during her Life, and the Life of her partner, then the Wife died: this was held
to be a good Lease against the surviving Ioint-tenant till disagreement, which
shows that the agreement of the Parties is not so much requisite to perfect a
Conveyance of this nature, as a disagreement is to make it void.

And this may serve as an answer to the second point, which was not much
insisted on, that Men's Titles would be uncertain and precarious if after the
assent of the Surrendree, the Estate should pass by Relation, at the very time
that the Deed was executed, and that it was not known where the Freehold was
in the mean time, for if he had agreed to it immediately, it had been
altogether as private.

Then as to the Pleadings, it is true, that generally when a Surrender is
pleaded, it is said, ad quam quidem sursum redditionem, the Party adtunc and
ibidem agreavit, which implies that the Surrendree was then present; and in
such Case he ought to agree or refuse. Besides those Actions to which an
Agreement is thus pleaded were generally brought in disaffirmance of
Surrenders, and to support the Leases; upon which the Plaintiffs declared, and
then the proper and most effectual Bar was to show a Surrender and express
Agreement before the Action brought.

It might have been insufficient pleading not to show an Acceptance of the
Surrendree, but it is not substance; for if Issue should be taken, whether a
Surrender or not, Cro. Eliz. 249.
and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, that defect of setting forth an Acceptance is
aided by the Statute of Ieofails.

In this Case there is not only the Word Surrender but * Grant and Release
which may be pleaded without any consent to it, and a Grant by operation of Law
turns to a Surrender, because a Man cannot have two Estates of equal dignity in
the Law at the same time.

Neither can it be said that there remained any Estate in Simon Leach after
this Surrender executed; for it is an absurd thing to imagine that when he had
done what was in his power to complete a Conveyance, and to divest himself of
an Estate, yet it should continue in him.

Therefore the Remainder in Contingency to the Lessor of the Plaintiff was
destroyed by this Surrender of the Estate to him in reversion, for by that
means when it did afterward happen there was no particular Estate to support
it.

But notwithstanding the Judgment was affirmed, and afterward Anno quarto
Gulielmi and Mariae upon a Writ of Error brought in the House of Lords it was
reversed.

Idem versus Eundem.
THIS Point having received a legal determination the same Plaintiff brought
another Action of Trespass and Ejectment against the same Defendant; Surrender
by a person Non compos is void.
and at a Trial at the Bar in Easter Term nono Gulielmi Regis another special
Verdict was found, upon which the Case more at large was, viz.

That Nicholas Leach being seized in Fee of the Lands in question made his Will
in these Words, viz.

In the Name of God, Amen, etc. I devise my Manors of Bulkworth, Whitebear and
Vadacot in Devonshire, and Cresby Goat and Cresby Grange in Northallerton in
Yorkshire unto the Heirs Males of my Body begotten, and for want of such Issue
Male, I devise the same unto my Brother Simon Leach for Life, and after his
decease to the first Son of the Body of the said Simon Leach, my Brother
lawfully to be begotten, and to the Heirs Males of the Body of such first Son
lawfully to be begotten, with like Remainder in Tail Male to the second, third,
fourth, etc. Sons; and for default of such Issue to Sir Simon Leach, my
Kinsman, being Son and Heir of Simon Leach of Cadley in the County of Devon'
Esquire deceased, and to the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully to be begotten;
and for default of such Issue to the right Heirs of me the said Nicholas Leach
for ever.

They find that Nicholas Leach died without Issue; that Simon Leach his Brother
and Heir with Remainder over in Contingency as aforesaid entered, and
afterward married Anne, the Daughter of Unton Croke, and that after the said
Marriage, viz. 20 August 25 Car. 2. he executed a Deed purporting a * Two
months before a Son was born.
Surrender of the said Lands and Tenements to Sir Simon Leach in manner
following, viz.

To all Christian People, etc. I Simon Leach of Elsefield in the County of Oxon
Esquire send greeting, Know ye that I the said Simon Leach for diverse good
Causes and valuable Considerations me hereunto moving, have granted,
surrendered, remised, released and for ever quit claimed and confirmed, and by
these Presents do grant, surrender, remise, release and for ever quit claim and
confirm unto Sir Simon Leach of Cadley in the County of Devon, Knight of the
Bath, and his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all and every the Manors, etc. To
have and to hold the same to the said Sir Simon Leach for ever.

They find that Simon Leach, Brother of the Testator, was not compos mentis at
the time of the sealing and delivery of the said Surrender.

That on the 10th day of November 25 Car. 2. (which was two Months after this
Surrender made) the said Simon Leach had Issue of his Body Charles Leach, who
is his Son and Heir; that he after the death of his Father entered and made a
Lease to Tompson, by virtue whereof he was possessed until the Defendant, Sir
Simon Leach entered upon him, etc.

Two Questions were made upon this Special Verdict.

1. Whether this Surrender by a person Non compos mentis, was void ab initio
and so could pass no Estate to the Surrendree; for if so, then though the Idiot
himself is estopped by his own Act, yet that can be no Bar to him in the
Remainder, because the Act being void the Estate in Law still remains in him.

2. If it is not void in its self, then whether it is voidable after the death
of the Party by Charles Leach, he claiming by virtue of a collateral Remainder,
and not as Heir at Law to the Devisor.

As to the first Point it was argued, that the Cases of Lunaticks and Infants
go hand in hand, and that the same Reasons govern both; that the Law is clear
that a Surrender made by an Infant is void; therefore a Surrender made by a
person Non compos mentis is also void; Fleta lib. 1. c. 11. number. 10.
the reason is because they know not how to govern themselves. And as Fleta
says, Semper judicabuntur infra aetatem; F.N.B. 202. a. Regist. 238. b.
if he makes any Conveyance of his Land the Law has provided a remedial Writ
even for himself to avoid his own Alienation.

His Feoffments are void, 39 H. 6.42. Bract. fol. 12. no. 5. fol. 100, 120.
Brit. cap. 34. fol. 88. Perk. 5. pl. 21.
and if Warranties are annexed those they are also void; if he grants a
Rentcharge out of his Land that is likewise void; and if the Grantee should
distrain for this Rent after the death of the Grantor his Heir shall have an
Action of Trespass against him, and therefore by parity of Reason this Surrender
must be void.

In Fitzherbert Tit. Grantee pl. 80. there is a Case to this purpose, viz. An
Assize was brought against the Tenant supposing that he had no right of Entry
unless under a Disseisor by whom the Brother of the Demandant was disseised.

The Tenant pleaded that the supposed Disseisor was the Father of the
Demandant, whose Heir he then was, and that his said Father made a Feoffment of
the Land to the Tenant with Warranty, and demanded Judgment, etc.

The Demandant replied, that his Father at that time was Non compos mentis, and
the Tenant was compelled to rejoin and take Issue upon the Insanity, which
shows that if he was Non compos he could not have made such a Feoffment.

So if he makes a Feoffment in Fee and afterward takes back an Estate for
Life, Fitz. Remitter pl. 23.
the Non compos shall be remitted to his ancient Title, which shows likewise
that such Feoffment was void, for the Remitter supposes a former Right.

It Is incongruous to say, that Acts done by persons of no discretion shall be
good and valid in the Law, such are Infants and Lunaticks; and it stands with
great reason that what they do should be void, especially, when it goes to the
destruction of their Estates.

Therefore it is held, that if a person Non compos releaseth his right that
shall not bar the King in his Life time, but he shall seize the Land; and if
he die, his Heir may bring the Writ Dum non fuit compos mentis, and may enter.

It Is for this reason that a Release made by an Infant Executor is no bar,
because it works in destruction of his Interest; 5 Co. 27. Russel 's Case. 34
Ass. pl. 10.
the reason is the same where a person Non compos makes a Feoffment, for that
likewise destroys his Estate.

So likewise an Infant can neither surrender a future Interest by his
acceptance of a new Lease, Cro. Car. 502.
nor make an absolute Surrender of a Term of which he is possessed, for such a
Surrender by Deed is void.

It Is agreed, that if a Man Non compos makes a Feoffment by Letter of Attorney
it is merely void, because it is not delivered to the Feoffee by the hands of the
Feoffor; but it is said that if it be delivered by him in person then it is only
voidable at any time by Action or Entry: Finch 's Law. 102.
And of this Opinion was Sir Henry Finch in his Discourse of the Law, who in
the Margen of his Book quotes several Authorities in the Year Books to justify
this Opinion; and amongst the rest he cites Sir Anthony Fitzherberts Natura
Brevium, 35 Ass. pl. 10.
who taking notice of the old Authorities seems to reject their Reasons, who
affirm a person Non compos shall not avoid his own Act when he recovers his
memory, because he cannot then tell what he did when he was in his former
Condition.

But certainly when he recovers his Judgment, he is then of Ability to consider
what was done during his Insanity, and to avoid such Acts by showing how his
indisposition came by the visitation of God, by which he was disabled for a
time to do any reasonable thing whatsoever; and this may be as well done as to
plead duress from Men which the Law allows to make compulsary Acts void.

My Lord Coke in Beverly's Case taking notice of the great reason of the Civil
Law in Cases of this nature, 4 Co. 123.
which makes all Acts done by Idiots void without their Curator's concurrence;
and that it was objected as a defect in the Common Law, that Tutors were not
assigned to such persons; he answers, that our Law has given the custody
both of them and their Lands to the King, which is directly contrary to his own
Opinion in his 2d. Institutes, 2 Inst. 14.
where paraphrasing upon the fourth Chapter of Magna Charta, which prohibits
Wast in the Land of Wards, from thence he inferrs that at that time the King
had no Prerogative to entitle him to the Lands of Idiots, for if he had, that
Act would have as well provided against Wast in their Lands as in those of
Wards: He farther adds that the Guardianship of Idiots did belong to the Lords
according to the course of the Common Law.

Be it how it will, it is clear by all the Books that both by the Common and
Civil Law their Acts are void; and my Lord Coke esteemed it as a very
unreasonable thing that they should not be avoided even during the life of the
Party himself; but it was never yet denied that they may be avoided after his
death by his Heir or Executor, and by parity of reason the Law will prevent
Strangers from being prejudiced by such Acts.

There is an Objection, that some Acts done by Idiots are unavoidable, as Fines
levied by them, etc.

It Is true, such are not to be avoided, not because they are good in
themselves, but the reason is, because they are upon Record, against which the
Law will not suffer any Averment to be made, presuming that the Courts and
Judges in Westminster Hall would not admit an Idiot or Infant to levy a Fine.

This being therefore a void Surrender by a person Non compos the Estate is
still in the Surrenderor, and so the contingent Remainder upon his death is
well attached in Charles Leach the Lessor of the Plaintiff.

But supposing it is not void, yet there will be scintilla juris left in Simon
Leach to support the Contingency; and to prove this the Case of Lloyd and
Brookin was relied on, which was this, viz. Thomas Bradshaw was Tenant for
Life, 1 Mod. 92. 1 Vent. 188. 2 Keb. 881.
the Remainder in Tail to his first Son, etc. the Remainder to Paul for Life,
the Remainder to his first, second and third Sons in Tail.

Thomas accepted a Fine from Paul, who had then a Son born, then he made a
Feoffment, and afterward Paul had another Son born.

His eldest Son died without Issue, and it was adjudged that the contingent
Remainder to his second Son was not destroyed by this Feoffment, because it was
preserved by the right of Entry, which his elder Brother had at the time it was
made.

2. If this Surrender, is only voidable then whether Charles Leach claiming by
a collateral Title can avoid it?

It was argued that he may, for it would be absurd, that he should have a Right
to the Remainder, and yet have no Remedy to recover it.

My Lord Coke in Beverly's Case tells us that there are four sorts of Privities.

1. In Blood, as Heir.

2. In Representation, as Executor.

3. In Estate, as Donee in Tail, the Reversion or Remainder in Fee.

4. In Tenure, as Lord by Escheat.

He affirms that the two first may show the Disability of their Ancestor and
Testator, and avoid their Grants.

It Is true, in the third Article he is of Opinion that Privies in Estate shall
not avoid the Acts of their Ancestors, and he puts the Case of a Donee in Tail
making a Feoffment in Fee within age, and dying without Issue, the Donor shall
not enter, because no Right did accrue to him by the death of the Donee, there
being only a Privity of Estate between them.

But this Opinion is denied to be Law by Justice Dodderidge in his Argument of
the Case between Jackson and Darcy, Palm. 254.
who said that the Donor might enter, because otherwise he would be without
remedy, for he could not maintain a Formedon, because the Feoffment made by the
Infant was no Discontinuance.

Besides, it is not possible there should be any Privity in Blood between the
Donee in Tail and the Reversioner in Fee, so that Article must be intended
where they are Strangers in Blood and Privies in Estate, which does not at all
concern the Case in question, because William Leach is privy in Blood to his
Father, who made the Surrender; and my Lord Coke tells us in the first Article
of his distinction, that such a Privy may avoid the Acts of his Ancestor.

It may be objected that this distinction was not then the Judgment of the
Court; for it was not material to the Point in Issue, which was no more than
thus, viz.

Snow gave Bond to Beverley, and exhibited his Bill in the Court of Requests to
be relieved against it, because at the time of the sealing and delivery thereof
he was Non compos mentis.

But the like distinction was made in Whittingham 's Case many years
afterward, 8 Co. 42.
which was thus, viz.

Whittingham being seized of Lands held of the Queen in Soccage devised the
same to Prudence, his Bastard Child and her Heirs, she during her Infancy made
a Feoffment thereof to another, and died in her Nonage without Issue; the
Question then was, whether that Feoffment should prevent the Queen of the
Escheat? And adjudged it should not.

In which Case it was held that Privies in Blood inheritable shall take
advantage of the disabilities of their Ancestors, as if an Infant who is seized
in Fee makes a Feoffment and afterward dies, his Heir may enter and avoid it.

The Law is the same in the Case of one Non compos mentis, as in that of an
Infant, as to the avoiding of the Acts of their Ancestors; so that Mr. Leach
being privy in Blood according to my Lord Coke's Opinion in those Cases shall
avoid the Acts of his Father, he being Non compos at the executing of this
Surrender.

If it should be objected, that this part of the distinction ought to be taken
restrictively, and must be tied up to such an Heir at Law, who takes an
immediate possession by descent from his Ancestor; the Answer is, that if this
Surrender is avoided Mr. Leach will take by immediate descent from his Father;
for though nothing but a Reversion in Fee descended to him, yet he is a
complete Heir.

But after all, this distinction made by my Lord Coke is founded upon no manner
of Authority; it is only his extrajudicial Opinion; for there is no reason to be
given why Privies in Estate should not avoid such Acts done by their Ancestors
as well as Privies in Blood, because the Incapacity of the Grantor goes to both.

Those who argued on the other side held that the Acts of Infants and persons
non compos were not void in themselves but only voidable. E contra.


It Is true, some Deeds made by an Infant are void not merely, Cro. Car. 502.
because executed by him, for some are good, and those only are void which are
made to his prejudice.

Such also are void which give Authority to a third person to do an Act; as if
an Infant enter into a Bond, Perk. Sect. 139. March. 141.
and give it to a Stranger to deliver to the Obligee, when he shall attain his
full Age, this is void, because the person derived his Authority from an Infant
who by reason of his Nonage could not give such a Power; but if the Infant
himself had delivered the Bond to the Obligee it had been only voidable. Lit.
Sect. 259.


The Father of the Demandant was an Infant when he sold his Estate, 46 E. 3.34.
his Son brought the Writ Dum fuit infra-aetatem against the Alienee, and it
was held good, which would not have been allowed if the Grant had been void.

All the old Authorities prove that the Acts of Infants and Idiots are not void
but voidable.

If an Infant is bound in an Obligation it is not void, Cro. Eliz. 127. 2 Inst.
483.
for he may agree to it when of Age; he cannot plead Non est factum, and he may
refuse to plead his Infancy.

If he be entitled to a Term for years, Cro. Eliz. 126. Cro. Car. 502.
and makes a Surrender by the acceptance of a new Lease, it is good if it is for
his advantage, either by the lessening of the Rent or the increasing of the
Term; but if he has no benefit by it it is voidable only.

So he may purchase Lands, because the Law intends it for his benefit, and he
can receive no damage by such a Purchase, for he may either perfect or avoid it
at his full Age, which shows that such Acts are not voidable ab intio, but only
voidable as the Case shall require.

The Statute of 23 H. 6. Enacts, 23 H. 6. c. 10.
That Sheriffs shall take no Bonds upon an Arrest, but for the Appearance of
the Party, and to themselves only, and that a Bond otherwise taken color
officii shall be void (that is) not in its self, but by pleading the Statute,
for it is not to be avoided by pleading Non est factum.

So upon the Statute of Additions, 1 H. 5. c. 5. 3 Co. 59. a.
where a Man is outlawed without the addition of his condition or place of
abode in the original Writ, such Outlawry shall be void, not of its self, but
it may be avoided by Writ of Error,

In like manner there are many Authorities to prove that the Acts of a person
non compos are not void, but voidable.

So is the first Resolution in Beverly 's Case, that a Deed or Feoffment made
by him is to be avoided by any other person, but not by himself.

Thus stood the Law in the time of E. 35 Ass. pl. 10.
3. For in an Assize the Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff had released to
him by Deed, who replied that at the time of the making of the Deed, he was Non
compos. The Court of Common Pleas seemed then to be of Opinion that the
Replication was not good, which shows that the Deed in its self was not void;
it is true, the Assize was then adjourned, because that Opinion was directly
against the Register, which is, that the Writ of Dum non fuit compos may be
brought by the person himself notwithstanding his own Alienation.

But this has since been denied to be Law; Cro. Eliz. 398.
for in Debt upon Bond the Defendant pleaded that he was Non compos; and upon a
Demurrer the Plea was overruled.

And of this Opinion was Sir William Herle Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in
5 E. 5 E. 3.70.
3. which was long before the Book of Assize.

So the Law continued till the Reign of H. 35 H. 6. f. 42.
6. viz. that the person himself could not avoid his own Feoffment either by
Entry or Action.

The Writs de Ideota inquirendo and Dum non fuit compos import the same thing,
viz. that Acts done by them are not void, for the first recites that the Idiot
alienavit; and the other, that the Lunatic * Dimisit is there intended where
the Estate is conveyed by Livery or for life, and Alienavit is a Conveiance by
Feoffment. 17 E. 2. Stamf. Praerog. 34.
Dimisit terras. Now if their Acts had been void ab initio, then they cannot be
supposed either to alien or lease their Lands which shows that such Acts are
only voidable.

And as a farther Argument to enforce this, the Statute de Praerogativa Regis
was mentioned, which gives the Custody of the Idiots Lands to the King during
their Lives, provided that afterward it be given to their right Heirs ita quod
nullatenus per eofdem fatuos alienetur. Now to what purpose were these Words
added if such an Alienation was void in it self?

Besides, the Cases of Idiots (mentioned on the other side) and Lunaticks are
not parellel; for an Idiot has a different incapacity from one Non compos;
it is perpetual in an Idiot; and for that reason the Law gives the King an
Interest in him.

But a person non compos may recover his Senses, Co. Lit. 2. b. Fitz. tit.
Issue 53.
he may purchase Lands, may grant a Rentcharge out of his Estate, and shall
not plead his insanity to defeat his own act.

If therefore this Surrender was not void at the time of the execution thereof,
but voidable only during the Life of the Surrenderor by office found; then the
Question cannot properly be, whether the Lessor of the Plaintiff shall avoid
it, for that would be to revest the Estate in some body; but the Surrender was
good, and the Estate for Life was utterly determined, so that nothing being
left to support the contingent Remainders, those are also destroyed.

And to prove this Chudleigh 's, Case was relied on, which was; Co. 120.
Sir R. C. was seized in Fee of the Manor of Hescot in Devon, and having Issue
Christopher, and three other Sons, made a Feoffment to the use of himself and
his Heirs, on the Body of Mary, then the Wife of Mr. Carew, to be begotten, and
for default of such Issue, then to the use of his last Will, etc. for ten
years, and after the Expiration of that Term, then to his Feoffees and their
Heirs, during the Life of Christopher; Remainder to the Issue Male of
Christopher in Tail, with like Remainder to his other Sons, Remainder to his
own right Heirs.

He died without Issue by Mrs. Carew.

But before Christopher had any Son born, the said Feoffees made a Feoffment of
the Land in Fee, without any consideration; afterward Christopher had Issue
two Sons.

Now the Uses limited by the Feoffment of Sir R. C. being only contingent to
the Sons of Christopher, and they not being born when the second Feoffment was
made to their Father; the Question now was, whether they shall be destroyed by
that Feoffment, before the Sons had a Being in Nature, or whether they shall
arise out of the Estate of the Feoffees after their Births?

And it was adjudged in the Exchequer- Chamber, that the last Feoffment had
divested all the precedent Estates, and likewise the Uses whilst they were
contingent, and before they had an existence; and that if the Estate for Life
which Christopher had in those Lands had been determined by his death, before
the birth of any Son, the future Remainder had been void, because it did not
vest whilst the particular Estate had a being, or eo instanti that it
determined.

So in this Case Mr. Leach cannot have any future Right of Entry, for he was
not born when the Surrender was made, so that the contingency is for ever gone.

Suppose a Feoffment in Fee, to the use of himself and his Wife, and to the
Heirs of the Survivor.

The Husband afterward makes another Feoffment of the same Lands, Cro. Car.
102.
and dies, and the Wife enters, the Fee shall not vest in her, by this Entry,
for she had no right, the Husband has destroyed the contingent use by the last
Feoffment, so that it could not accrue to her at the time of his death.

Nay, though the particular Estate in some Cases may revive, yet if the
contingency be once destroyed, it shall never arise again.

As where the Testator being seized in Fee of Houses, 2 Sand. 380.
devised the inheritance thereof to such Son his Wife should have (after her
Life) if she baptized him by his Christian and Surname, and if such Son dye
before he attain the Age of 21 years, then to the right Heirs of the Devisor.

He died without Issue, the Widow married again, then the Brother and Heir of
the Testator, before the birth of any Son, conveyed the Houses thus: Viz.

To the Husband and Wife, and to their Heirs, and levied a Fine to those uses.

Afterward she had a Son baptized by the Testator's Christian and Surname.

Then the Husband and Wife sold the Houses to one Weston and his Heirs, and
levied a Fine to those Uses.

It was adjudged that by the Conveyance of the Reversion by the Brother and
Heir of the Testator to the Baron and Feme, before the Birth of the Son, her
Estate for Life was merged; and though by reason of her Coverture she might waive
the Jointtenancy, 2 Roll. Abr. 796. Wigg versus Villiers.
and reassume the Estate for Life, yet that being once merged, the contingent
Remainders are all destroyed.

Curia. Cro. Car. 502.
The Grants of Infants, and of persons non compos, are parallel both in Law and
Reason, and there are express Authorities that a Surrender made by an Infant is
void, therefore this Surrender by a person non compos, is likewise void.

If an Infant grants a Rentcharge out of his Estate, it is not voidable, but
ipso facto void; for if the Grantee should distrain for the Rent, the Infant
may have an Action of Trespass against him.

In all these Cases which have been cited, where it is held that the Deeds of
Infants are not void but voidable, the meaning is, that non est factum cannot
be pleaded, because they have the form, though not the Operations of Deeds, and
therefore are not void upon that account, without showing some special matter
to make them of no efficacy.

Therefore if an Infant makes a Letter of Attorney though it is void in it self,
yet it shall not be avoided by pleading non est factum, but by showing his
Infancy.

Some have endeavored to distinguish between a Deed, which gives only
authority to do a thing, and such which conveys an interest by the delivery of
the Deed it self, that the first is void, and the other voidable.

But the reason is the same to make them both void only where a Feoffment is
made by an Infant it is voidable, because of the solemnity of the Conveyance.

Now if Simon Leach had made a Feoffment in Fee, there had still remained in
him such a Right which would have supported this Remainder in Contingency.

This Surrender is therefore void, and all persons may take advantage of it.

Afterward a Writ of Error was brought to reverse this Judgment in the House
of Lords, but it was affirmed. Cases Adj. 150.


Hall versus Wybank.
THE Statute of Limitations is, Statute of Limitations whether it extends to
the Defendant being beyond Sea six years. 21 Jac. cap. 16.
that if any person be entitled to an Action, and shall be an Infant, Feme
Covert, Imprisoned, or beyond Sea, that then he shall bring the Action at full
Age, Discovert, of save Memory, at large, and returned from beyond Sea.

The Plaintiff brought an Indebitatus Assumpsit, to which the Defendant pleaded
non assumpsit infra sex Annos.

The Plaintiff replied that the Defendant was all that time beyond Sea, so that
he could not prosecute any Writ against him, etc.

And upon a Demurrer Sergeant Tremaine argued that the Plaintiff was not barred
by the Statute which was made to prevent Suits, by limiting personal Actions to
be brought within a certain time, and it cannot be extended in favor of the
Defendant, who was a Debtor and beyond Sea, because it is uncertain whether he
will return or not; and therefore there is no occasion to begin a Suit till his
return.

It Is true, the Plaintiff may file an Original, and Outlaw the Defendant, and
so seize his Estate, but no Man is compelled by Law to do an act which is
fruitless when it is done, and such this would be, for if the Plaintiff should
file an Original, it is probable the Defendant may never return, and then if the
Debt was 1000 l. or upwards, he would be at a great Expense to no purpose, or
if the Party should return, he may reverse it by Error.

It Is a new way invented for the payment of Debts, for if the Debtors go beyond
Sea and stay there six years, their Debts would by this means be all paid.

The words of the Statute do not extend to this Case, for the Proviso is, That
if the Plaintiff be beyond Sea when the cause of Action does accrue, Cro. Car.
246. 333.
that then he have shall liberty to continue it at his return; yet it is within
the equity of Law for him to bring his Action when the Defendant returns, who
cannot be sued 'till then.

That Statutes have been expounded according to Equity, is not now a new
Position; 2 Roll. Rep. 318.
for Constructions have been made according to the sense and meaning, and not
according to the Letter of many Statutes.

As the Statute of Westminster. W. 2. c. 11.
2. which gives an Action of Debt against a Jailer for an Escape, and that per
breve, yet by the Equity thereof it has been adjudged that a Bill of Debt will
lie.

For the Statute of R. 1 R. 2. c. 12.
2. gives the like Action against the Warden of the Fleet, for the Escape of a
Prisoner in Execution, which by Construction has been adjudged to extend to
all Goalers and Sheriffs. 1 Sand. 38.


If this Statute should not be expounded according to Equity, then if the
Plaintiff himself should be beyond Sea six years after the cause of Action, and
die there, his Executor or Administrator cannot sue for a Debt.

Curia. This Case is out of the Equity of the Statute, which provides a remedy
when the Plaintiff is beyond Sea, but not when the Defendant is there, it was
never intended to make any Provision for him, since the Plaintiff might file an
Original, and sue him to the Outlawry.

But Justice Dolben making some doubt. Adjornarur.

DE Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 2 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae, in Banco
Regis, 1690.
Hobbs, qui tam, etc. versus Young.
AN Information was brought upon the Statute of the 5th of Eliz. for exercising
the Trade of a Cloth-Worker, Employing Workmen in a Man's own House, he being
not Apprentice to the Trade, is an exercising that Trade within the Statute. 5
Eliz. 4.
not being an Apprentice to the same, and likewise for setting people to work
at that Trade, not having served an Apprentiship to it.

Upon Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury found a special Verdict to this purpose, Viz.

That the Defendant was a Merchant, who Exported Cloth to Turkey, and that for
the space of a Month, he had employed Men in his House, in the Trade of a
Cloath-Worker, which Men had been educated in the said Mystery for the space of
7 years, that he provided Materials for them, and paid them weekly Wages, but
that he himself was not an Apprentice to the said Trade.

That it was a Trade at the time of the making of the Statute, etc.

The Question was, Whether this should be accounted exercising of a Trade
within the meaning of the Statute or no?

Those who argued for the Plaintiff said, that true it is, any Man might
exercise what Trade he thought fit at the Common Law, but this confusion had
been remedied by several Statutes.

The first is the Statute of Edw. 3. 37 E. 3. c. 5.
that Merchants shall not engross Goods to enhance the Prices, nor use but one
sort of Merchandise.

Afterward in the 38th of Edw. 3. 38 E. 3. c. 2.
the former Statute was repealed, and liberty given to Merchants only to use
what Merchandise they would.

Then comes the Statute of Queen Elizabeth, and the Remedies intended by that
and the former Acts were, Viz.

1. The restraining of ignorant pretenders to Trade.

2. To make a distinction of Trades, and to fit them to different ranks of Men.

3. To encourage those who had undergone an Apprentiship, by prohibiting others
to exercise their Trades.

The words of this latter Statute are, That no person, other than such who do
now lawfully use or exercise any Art or Mystery, or Manual Occupation, shall
exercise any Craft, Mystery, or Manual Occupation, now used within this Realm,
except he shall be brought up therein seven years at the least, as an
Apprentice, nor set any person on work in such Mystery, etc. being not a
Workman at the time of making the Statute, except he shall have been an
Apprentice, as aforesaid, or else having served as an Apprentice, shall become
a Journy-Man, or hired by the Year, under the pain of 40 s. per Month.

It Is plain by this Law, that he who cannot use a Mystery himself, is
prohibited to employ other Men in that Trade, for if this should be allowed,
then the care which has been taken to keep up Mysteries, by erecting Guilds
and Fraternities, would signify little.

In the Case of Morstyn and Nightingale, 3 Jac. 2. upon this Statute, it was
proved that the Defendant employed none but Pinmakers, in that Trade; yet not
having served an Apprentiship himself, the Plaintiff had a Verdict.

It was insisted on the Defendants behalf that as this Offense is laid in the
Information, E contra.
it was not within the first branch of that Clause in the Statute; for no Man
will say that when the Defendant sets other persons to work such employing them
was an exercising the Trade within the first branch of that Paragraph.

Neither is it within the second Branch, the meaning whereof is, that no person
shall be employed but such as have served an Apprenticeship, etc.

Now the person who sets such People to work is not punishable by this Law, but
the Men themselves who do work not being qualified, and those are not
punishable in this Case, because the Verdict has found that they were
Apprentices and had served seven years to the Trade.

It Is not material to say that the Men thus employed by the Defendant in this
Trade are his Servants, and that by their working the Company of Clothworkers
may be damnified, for the Act is not restrained to particular Companies, but
takes care in general that the work should be well done.

No Man will say that a Merchant is within this Statute, for the Preamble it
self shows it is for the Reformation of Trades and Manual Occupations; so that
as a Merchant is not within the Letter, neither is he within the meaning of the
Law, because he is of a superior Order and Degree of Men.

The chief design therefore of this Law being that unskilful Men should not
employ themselves in Trades, and the Defendant having set none to work but such
who were of that Trade, and Artists in it, the meaning of the Act is fully
pursued, and no injury is done to any person.

Besides, it does not appear by this Verdict that any thing was done by the
Defendant but in his own Family, and probably it might be for their use, and
then it is no offense.

But if it is a Crime in the Defendant, then all the Petty-Chapmen in England
are within this Statute, for they use several goods belonging to particular
Trades, and few of them have been Apprentices to any Trade.

It was said by some of the Council who now argued this Case, that they had
formerly attended my Lord Hales upon the like matter, whose Opinion, was that
such Petty Chapmen were not within the Statute, but that they were warranted by
the Custom of those places where they lived.

Afterward in Trinity-Term 3 Gulielmi and Mariae, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff by the Opinion of three Judges.

The Questions are two:

1. Whether this is a setting up of a Trade within the express words of the
Statute.

2. Whether the working of these Cloths in the Defendant's House will be using
a Trade, etc.

It cannot be denied but that at the Common Law a Man might exercise what Trade
he would, therefore this Statute is penned in the Negative, to prevent many
inconveniences which happened before the making of this Law.

Some Authorities there are where Informations have been brought upon this
Statute, Cro. Car. 347. 1 Sand. 312.
and the Defendants have pleaded the the Custom of London for a Man Educated in
one Trade, to exercise another; and upon Demurrer such Pleas have been
overruled; but reason in this Case is the best Authority.

Iourny-men who work for Hire cannot be within the meaning of this Statute, but
the Defendant by employing such, had an influence upon the Trade, and so it is
found, viz. That he provided Materials, and paid the Workmen, and therefore he
(and not the Master workman, who is but a Iourny-man) is the person who did
exercise the Trade, not being an Apprentice; the management was for his Profit,
the Workmen had no more but their Wages, and it would be very mischievous if
the Statute should be otherwise construed.

A Widow shall not exercise her Husbands Trade, Hutt. 132.
unless she is enabled by the Custom of the place; and possibly she might live
so long with him as to be very skilful in it; but the Act being penned in the
Negative must have a large construction, and therefore an Usage against it will
not take away its force.

Paying the Wages is as much as using the Trade himself; it is properly his
driving the Trade by the Hands and Labor of his Servants: 1 Jac. 1. c. 22.
And it seems plain by the Statute of 1 Jac. 1. that this may be done, for that
Statute Enacts that no person using the Mystery of Tanning Leather by himself,
or any other person, shall exercise the Craft of a Shoemaker, etc. which shows
that the Trade may be carried on by Servants and Workmen.

A Goldsmith never makes his own Plate, he only provides Materials for the
Workmen, but yet he is a Trader within the Statute, because he makes profit of
the Plate.

An Innkeeper who sells Beer, Bread, etc. in his House is not within this
Statute, because it is part of his Trade to provide such things for his Guests;
but if he sells any quantities out of Doors, 2 Bulst. 187.
he is then within the reach of this Law, which ought to have a very beneficial
construction, because it is made to maintain skilful Men in Trades, which is for
the public good of Mankind.

2. It Is plain, that he who uses one Trade cannot exercise another, therefore
a Coach-maker shall not make his own Wheels, if he does, it is exercising the
Trade of a Wheel-right, and so of the Iron and Leather, and the other Materials
which make up a Coach.

In Mr. Noy 133. Hunter versus Moon.
Attorney Noy 's Reports, there is a Case of an Information brought upon this
Statute against the Defendant being a Felt-maker, for dying of his own Hatts,
and it was adjudged for him that it is part of his Trade; but this is but a
single Authority, and many have been against it since that time.

At the Assizes in Cambridge the like Information was tried against a
Comb-maker, for exercisng the Trade of a Horner; it was insisted on, that it
was part of his Trade, for he fitted the Horn for his use in making of Combs;
but there was a Verdict for the Plaintiff, for it was held to be an exercising
of the Trade of an Horner; and the Council for the Defendant who were learned
Men did acquiesce under that Judgment.

He who is a Servant, who undergoes no hazard, but is to have a certain reward
for his labor does not exercise a Trade, but it is the Master who emploies him,
who has all the Profit, and who in this Case sells at the same rate as if he
paid the Clothworker.

The Statute says, That none who has not served as an Apprentice in any
Mystery, etc. shall use the same, etc. Now he who employs Men in his House
uses the Trade, etc. For suppose a Merchant should hire Iourny-men Shoemakers
to work in his House for the Plantations, this can be no other thing than the
exercising of the Trade of a Shoemaker.

Private usage is not within the meaning of this Law, but if what is done be
for profit and gain, and not confined to a particular Family, it is an
exercising of a Trade within the intention of this Statute.

If the Defendant had sold these Cloths in England he had been a Draper, and
having exported them he is a Merchant: Wherefore for these Reasons Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

But Justice Dolbin was of another Opinion, he said that no encouragement was
ever given to Prosecutions upon this Statute, and that it would be for the
common good if it was repealed, for no greater punishment can be to the Seller
than to expose Goods to Sale ill wrought, for by such means he will never sell
more.

In this Case there is no inconvenience to the Company of Clothworkers, because
that Trade is a manual Occupation for hire; the Master Workman is the person
who uses the Trade, and the Defendant has done nothing but what is the proper
work of a Merchant in his own House which cannot be a public use of the Trade.

The intent of the making of this Statute was to prevent Idleness, and that
there might be generally a good Manufacture. Now the Defendant has well
answered both these ends, for he has employed Men in the working, and not only
so, but such Men who were bound Apprentices and served seven years in that very
Trade, such who could work well and to whom he gave good Wages.

It Is the interest of a Merchant that his Cloth be well wrought, but the
Clothworker cares not how it is done so he has his Wages; and by this care and
industry of the Defendant that Trade which was almost lost abroad is, now come
into Reputation again.

Bradburn versus Kennerdale.
Mich. 4 Jac. Rot. 640.
ERror to reverse a Judgment in an inferior Court at Chester in Replevin for
the taking of a Cow. Replication, whether good without a Traverse.


The Defendant made Cognizance as Bailiff to Sir Peter Warburton, setting forth
that before the taking, etc. Sir Peter was seized in Fee of the Manor of
Arkey, of which the locus in quo was parcel, and for that the Cow was there
Damage Feasant he took it, etc.

The Plaintiff in bar to the Avowry confesses, That Sir Peter Warburton was
seized in Fee, etc. but that before that time Sir George Warburton, his Father,
was seized of the said Manor, and likewise of one Mesuage in Fee, etc. and
being so seized made a Lease thereof for three Lives, viz. for the Life of G.
H. the Father, and for the Lives of his two Sons, George and John, and alterius
eorum diutius viventis; that one of them was dead, and that the other entered
and was seized as Occupant and let the Land to the Plaintiff until, etc. Et hoc
paratus est verificare.

The Defendant demurred to this Replication and had Judgment.

The Matter now in Debate was upon Exceptions to the Bar.

1. For want of a Traverse that Sir Peter Werburton was seized in Fee at the
time of the taking. etc.

2. For want of a sufficient Title alleged in the Plaintiff, for that by the
Statue of Frauds all Occupancy is now taken away.

It was argued that the Replication was good without a Traverse, Co. Ent. 504.
for where the Plaintiff has confessed and avoided, as he has done here; if
he had traversed likewise, that would have made his Replication double.

He confesses that Sir P. W. was seized in Fee of the Manor, but afterward
the Seisin was expressly alleged to be in Sir George the Father, and that the
place where was parcel thereof, which is a Confession and an Avoidance.

The Avowant should have traversed this Lease, but the Traverse of the
Plaintiff upon him had made it a worse Issue.

Agreeable to this Case in reason is that which was adjudged in this Court in
Michaelmas-Term 10 Car. 1. It was in Trespass; Cro. Car. 384.
the Defendant pleaded that the locus in quo was the sole Freehold of John,
etc. and justified by his Command.

The Plaintiff replied that the Land was parcel of the Manor of Abbots Anne,
and that W. was seized in Fee, and levied a Fine to the use of himself and Wife
for their Lives, the Remainder to E. for 100 years if he lived so long, who
after the death of the Cognizors entered and made a Lease to the Plaintiff.

And upon a Demurrer to this Replication the same Exception was then taken as
now, viz. that the Plaintiff did not confess and avoid the Freehold of John;
but the Plaintiff had Judgment, for the Bar being at large and the Title in
the Replication being likewise so too, the Plaintiff may claim by a Lease for
years without answering the Freehold.

The not concluding with a Traverse is but a form, and the Court will proceed
according to the Right of the Cause without such form; 27 Eliz. c. 5.
it is a defect which after a Ioinder in Demurrer is expressly helped by the
Statute of Ieofails, which enables the Court to amend defects and want of Forms
other than such for which the party has demurred.

The Case of Edwards and Wooden is in point, Cro. Car. 323. 6 Co. Heyley 's
Case. Dyer 171. b. 1 Leon. 77, 78. contra.
it was in Replevin; the Defendant made Cognizance as Bailiff to Cotton, for
that the place where, etc. was so many Acres parcel of a Manor, etc. that Bing
was seized thereof in Fee, who granted a Rent Charge out of it to Sir Robert
Heath in Fee, who sold it to Cotton, etc.

The Plaintiff in Bar to the Conusance replied, and confessed that the Land
was parcel of the Manor, etc. and that Bing was seized in Fee prout, etc. and
granted the Rent to Sir R. H. but that long before the Seisin of Bing, etc. one
Leigh was seized thereof in Fee, who devised it to Blunt for a Term of years,
which Term by several Assignments came to Claxton, who gave the Plaintiff leave
to put in his Cattle, etc.

And upon a Demurrer to this Replication an Exception was taken to it, for that
the Plaintiff did not show how the Seisin and Grant of Bing to Sir R. H. was
avoided; for having confessed a Seisin in Fee prout, etc. that shall be
intended a Fee in possession, and notwithstanding he had afterward set forth a
Lease for years in Leigh by whom it was devised to Blunt, etc. and so to
Claxton, it may be intended that the Grantor was only seized in Fee of the
Reversion, and therefore the Plaintiff ought to have traversed the Seisin
aliter vel alio modo.

But three Judges seemed to incline that the Replication was good, and that the
Plaintiff had well confessed and avoided that Seisin in Fee which was alleged
by the Defendant, for he had showed a Lease for years precedent to the
Defendants Title, and which was not chargeable with the Rent; and his pleading
that the Grantor Bing was seized in Fee must be only of a Reversion expectant
upon that Lease.

But if his Confession that Being was seized in Fee prout, etc. shall be
intended a Seisin in Fee in possession, yet the Replication is good in
substance, because the Charge against the Plaintiff is avoided by a former
Estate, and in such Case it is not necessary to take a Traverse.

But after all it was held that if it be a defect, it is but want of a Form,
which is aided by the Statute, and that is this very Case now in question.

The want of a Traverse seldom makes a Plea ill in substance, but a naughty
Traverse often makes it so, because the adversary is tied up to that which is
material in it self, so that he cannot answer what is proper and material; and
therefore in Ejectment upon a Lease made by E. I. Yelv. 151. Bedel versus Lull.
the Defendant pleaded that before E. I. had any thing to do, etc. M. I. was
seized in Fee, after whose death the Land descended to his Heir, and that E.
entered and was seized by Abatement.

The Plaintiff replied and confessed the Seisin of M. but says that he devised
it in Fee to E. I. who entered, absque hoc that E. I. was seized by Abatement,
and upon a Demurrer this was held to be an ill Traverse, for the Plaintiff had
confessed the Seisin of M. and avoided it by the Devise, and therefore ought
not to have traversed the Abatement, for having derived a good Title by the
Devise to his Lessor, it is an Argument that he entered lawfully, and it was that
alone which was issuable, and not the Abatement; therefore it was ill to
traverse that, because it must never be taken but where the thing traversed is
issuable.

Then it was said that the Conusance was informal, because the Avowant should
have said that the Locus in quo, etc. contains so many Acres of Ground, etc. he
only says that it was parcel of a Manor; besides, he neither prays Damages,
nor Retorn' Habend'.

2. As to the 2d Point it was said that the Statute of Frauds does not take
away all Occupancy, it only appoints who shall be a special Occupant.

Besides, here is a Title within the Statute, for a Lease for Lives is personal
Assets, so is a Term in the Hands of an Executor de son tort, and in this Case
the entering of one Brother after the death of the other made him an Executor de
son tort; More 126. Sid. 7.
and it was never yet doubted, but that there may be such an Executor of a
Term. Whereupon it was concluded that the Bar was good, both as to the Form
and Title set forth, but no Judgment was then given.

Boson versus Sandford.
THE Plaintiff declared that the Defendant and seven other persons were
Proprietors of a Vessel, Where there are several Proprietors of a Vessel, and
Goods are dampnified by carriage the Action must be brought against them all.
in which they used to carry Goods for a reasonable hire from Port to Port.

That he had loaded the said Vessel with Boards which were agreed to be safely
transported from London to Topsam, and that the Defendant by neglect suffered
them to be dampnified, etc.

Upon Not-Guilty pleaded a special Verdict was found, the substance whereof
was, viz.

That the Plaintiff did load the Ship with Boards, of which Ship the Defendant
and seven other persons were Proprietors; that the said Ship did usually carry
Goods for hire; that the Plaintiff delivered the Goods to Daniel Hull, who was
Master of the Vessel, and that they were loaded therein, but that none of the
Proprietors were present.

That there was no actual Contract between the Plaintiff and the Proprietors,
or any Negligence in them, but the Boards were dampnified by the neglect of the
said Master, etc.

The Questions upon this special Verdict were two:

1. Whether this Action would lie against the Defendant alone as one of the
Proprietors, or whether it must be brought against them all?

2. If the Action ought to be brought against them all, then Not-Guilty was not
a proper Plea, because the Defendant ought to have pleaded in Abatement that
the rest of the Owners super se susceperunt simul cum the Defendant absque hoc
quod he super se suscepit tantum.

It was argued for the Plaintiff that the Action may be well brought against
any single person of the Proprietors, because it is grounded upon a Tort as well
as upon a Contract, which in this Case is only an Inducement to the Action, and
therefore the Plaintiff has liberty to bring it either the one way or the
other, for it is both joint and several.

So it is in Trover, where a Man declares that he was possessed of such Goods,
that the Defendant found them and promised to deliver them, but converted them
to his own use; the Contract is but Iuducement, for the cause of Action arises
upon the Conversion.

This is a remedy given by the construction of the Law, and if so, it must be
certain and effectual to all intents; and therefore it has been ruled in an
Action brought against a common Carrier upon the Assumpsit in Law, Sid. 244.
and likewise upon the Tort, that the Declaration was ill, and though the
Plaintiff had a Verdict, yet the Judgment was arrested, because he had declared
both ways.

Agreeable to this was that Judgment which was given upon the Statute of 2 Ed.
Hutt. 121, 122.
3. for not setting out of Tithes in an Action of Debt brought against two
Tenants in Common, it happened that one of them set out the Tithes and the
other carried them away, and because the Action was brought against both it was
held to be ill, for it lies only against him which did the wrong.

2. If the Action ought to be brought against all, then the Defendant should
have taken advantage of it by pleading, and to have showed who were the
Proprietors with himself; for it is impossible for the Plaintiff to know who
they are; and for this reason the Plea is not good.

E contra. E contra.
The Plaintiff ought to have brought his Action either against the Master alone
or all the Proprietors; it is true, if this had been only an Action of a simple
Trespass he might have brought it against all or one; but this sounds not only
in a Wrong, but it is in Breach of a Covenant or Duty, and so ought to be
commenced against all of them as common Carriers.

Now the great reason why all are liable to an Action is, because they all have
a reward for the Hire of the Vessel; and it seems very unreasonable that one
should bear the burden, and the rest run away with the profit.

The principal Case in Hutton is an Authority directly to this purpose, though
it was otherwise quoted by the Plaintiffs Council; it was Debt upon the Statute
of Ed. 6. brought against one Lessee for not setting out of Tithes, and it
appeared upon the Evidence that two were jointly possessed of the Term, and for
that reason it was held that the Action would not lie against one alone.

2. The Defendant ought not to have pleaded in Abatement that the rest of the
Proprietors super se susceperunt simul cum the Defendant, etc. because such a
Plea would not have been good here; for he shall never be compelled to plead in
Abatement either in Debt or Contract, but in one single Case, and that is where
two are bound jointly, and one is sued, he may plead in Abatement, 5 Co. 119.
but cannot say Non est factum, for the Bond is his Deed since each of them
have sealed it.

Afterward in Hillary-Term the Defendant had Judgment, Judicium.
that the Action ought to be brought against all the Partowners, because they
have all an equal benefit, and the ground of the Action is upon a Trust reposed
in all, and every Trust supposes a Contract; 2 Cro. 202. Palm. 523.
and in all Cases grounded upon Contracts the Parties who are Privies must be
joined in the Action.

The Master of the Ship is no more than a Servant to the Owners, he has no
Property either general or special, but the Power he has is given by the Civil
Law.

There are many Cases where the act of the Servant shall charge the Master; as
for instance, viz.

King Ed. 6. sold a quantity of Lead to Renagre, Dyer 161.
and appointed the Lord North, who was then Chancellor of his Court of
Augmentations to take Bond for payment of the Money.

The Lord North appointed one Benger, who was his Clerk to take the Bond, which
was done, who delivered it to the Lord, and he delivered it back again to his
Clerk in order to send it to the Clerk of the Court of Augmentations.

Benger suppressed this Bond, and it was the Opinion of all the Judges of
England, that the Lord North was chargeable to the King, because the possession
of the Bond by his Servant and by his Order was his own possession.

So where an Officer of the Customs made a Deputy, Dyer 238. b.
who concealed the Duties, and the Master being ignorant of the Concealment,
certified the Customs of that part of the Revenue into the Exchequer upon Oath,
he was adjudged to be answerable for this Concealment of his Servant.

So where the Lessor was bound that the Lessee should quietly enjoy, and it was
found that his Servant by his command, 4 Leon. 123.
and he being present, entered, this was held to be a Breach of the Condition,
for the Master was the principal Trespasser.

Therefore though the Neglect in this Case was in the Servant the Action may be
brought against all the Owners, for it is grounded quasi ex contractu, though
there was no actual Agreement between the Plaintiff and them.

And as to this purpose, 2 Sand. 345. Hob. 206. Hutt. 121. 1 Mod. 198.
it is like the Case where a Sheriff levies Goods upon an Execution which are
rescued out of the hands of his Bailiffs; this appearing upon the Retorn an
Action of Debt will lie against him though there was no actual Contract between
the Plaintiff and him; for he having taken the Goods in Execution there is
quasi a Contract in Law to answer them to the Plaintiff.

2. As to the second Point, it was ruled that Not-Guilty was a good Plea to any
Mis-feazance whatsoever, and that a Plea in Abatement, viz. that the rest of
the Owners super se susceperunt simul cum Defendente absque hoc quod Defendens
super se suscepit tantum had been no more than the general Issue, 3 Cro. 554.
Vering versus More.
but he has not pleaded thus.

Justice Dolben agreed that the Action ought to be brought against all the
Proprietors, it being upon a Promise created by Law; but he was Opinion that
this Matter might have been pleaded in Abatement.

Gold versus Strode.
AN Action was brought in Somersetshire, and the Plaintiff recovered and had
Judgment and died Intestate.

Gold, the now Plaintiff took out Letters of Administration to the said
Intestate in the Court of the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and afterward brought
a Scire Facias upon that Judgment against the Defendant to show Cause quare
Executionem habere non debeat.

He had Judgment upon this Scire Facias, and the Defendant was taken in
Execution and escaped.

An Action of Debt was brought by the said Gold against this Defendant Strode,
who was then Sheriff, for the Escape, and the Plaintiff had a Verdict.

It was moved in arrest of Judgment, and for Cause shown that if the
Administration was void then all the dependencies upon it are void also, and so
the Plaintiff can have no Title to this Action.

Now the Administration is void, because the entering upon Record of the first
Judgment recovered by the Intestate in the County of Middlesex where the
Records are kept, made him have bona notabilia in several Counties, and then by
the Law Administration ought not to be committed to the Plaintiff in an
inferior Diocese, but in the Prerogative Court.

Curia. The Sheriff shall not take advantage of this since the Judgment was
given upon the Scire Fac. and the Capias ad satisfaciendum issuing out against
the then Defendant, directed to the Sheriff, made him an Officer of this Court,
and the Judgment shall not be questioned by him; for admitting it to be a
Recovery without a Title, yet he shall take no advantage of it, till the
Judgment is reversed.

It Is not a void but an erroneous Judgment, and when a person is in execution
upon such a Judgment, and Escapes, and then an Action is brought against the
Jailer or Sheriff, 8 Co. 141.
and Judgment and Execution thereon, though the first Judgment upon which the
party was in execution should be afterward reversed, yet the Judgment against
the Jailer being upon a collateral thing executed shall still remain in force.

The Ca. Sa. 21 E. 4. 23. b. Cro. El. 164. Moor 274. 2 Cro. 3. 1 Roll. Abr. 809
God b. 403. 2 Leon. 84.
was a sufficient authority to the Sheriff to take the Body, though grounded
upon an erroneous Judgment, and that Execution shall be good till avoided by
Error, and no false Imprisonment will lie against the Jailer or Sheriff upon
such an Arrest.

Coghil versus Freelove.
In the Common Pleas.
DEBT for Rent was brought against the Defendant as Administratrix of Thomas
Freelove her late Husband, deceased, Debt for Rent incurred after an assignment
by an Administrator, for the privity of Contract is not determined by the death
of the intestate. 2 Vent. 209.
in which Action the Plaintiff declared, That on the 1st of May, 21 Car. 2. he
did by Indenture demise to the said Thomas Freelove, one Message and certain
Lands in Bushey in Hertfordshire, Habendum from Lady- day then last past, for
and during the term of 21 years, under a yearly Rent; that by virtue thereof he
entered and was possessed: That on the 7th of March 1685. the said Thomas
Freelove died Intestate, and that the next day Administration of his Goods and
Chattels was granted to the Defendant, and that 78 l. was in arrear for Rent
due at such a time, for which this Action was now brought in the Detinet.

The Defendant confessed the Lease prout, etc. and the death of the Intestate,
and that the Administration was granted to her, but says, that before the Rent
was due, she by Articles made between her of the one part, and Samuel Freelove
of the other part, did assign the said Indenture, and all her right, title, and
interest thereunto, and which she had in the Premises, unto the said Samuel
Freelove, who entered and was possessed; that the Plaintiff had notice of this
Assignment before he brought this Action, but nothing was said of his
acceptance.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and the Defendant joined in Demurrer.

And Judgment was given, by the Opinion of the whole Court, for the Plaintiff,
against the Authorities following.

Viz. Cro. Eliz. 555.
It Is true, in Overton and Sydal 's Case, it was resolved that if an Executor
of Lessee for years assign his Interest, Debt for Rent will not lie against
him, after such Assignment, the reason there given was, because the personal
privity of the Contract is determined by the death of the Lessee, as to the
Debt it self; and for the same reason the Executor shall not be liable to the
Rent, after the death of the Lessee, if such Lessee does make an assignment of
his Term, in his lifetime.

My Lord Coke mentioning this Case, 3 Co. 24. a.
in his third Report, affirms, that it was resolved by Popham Chief Justice,
and the whole Court, that if an Executor of a Lessee for years, assign his
Interest, Debt will not lie against him for Rent due after such an Assignment;
Pop. 120.
but my Lord Popham himself in Reporting that very Case, tells us he was of
another Opinion, which was, that so long as the Covenant in the Lease has the
nature and essence of a Contract, it shall bind the Executor of the Lessee, who
as well to that, as to many other purposes, represents the person of the
Testator, and is privy to his Contracts.

It Is true, my Lord Popham held in that Case, that the Action did not lie, but
because it was brought by the Successor of a Prebendary, upon a Lease made by
him in his lifetime, who being a single Corporation, the personal Contract was
determined by his death.

But the same Case reported by others, Moor 251. Latch. 262.
is said not to be adjudged, for the Court was divided in Opinion.

The Case of Marwood and Turpin is the same, Moor 600. Cro. Eliz. 715.
but there the Defendant pleaded the acceptance of the Rent after the
assignment, which was not done here.

Now if both those Cases should be admitted to be Law, Sid. 240, 266. Allen 34,
42. Palm. 118. Latch 260. Noy 97. 2 Cro. 334. Mooo 392.
and parallel with this, yet the later Resolutions have been quite contrary;
for it is now held, and with great reason, that the privity of Contract of the
Testator is not determined by his death, but that his Executor shall be charged
with all his Contracts, so long as he has Assets, and therefore such Executor
shall not discharge himself by making of an Assignment, but shall still be
liable for what Rent shall incur after he has assigned his Interest; nay, if
the Testator himself had assigned the term in his lifetime, yet his Executor
shall be charged in the Detinet, so long as he has Assets.

Newton versus Trigg.
Mich. 1. Jac. Rot. 226.
TRespass for breaking and entering of his Close, Statute of Bankrupts do not
extend to an Inn-kepeer.
treading down of his Grass, etc. and taking away of his Goods.

Upon not Guilty pleaded, a special Verdict was found, That the Plaintiff was
an Innkeeper and a Freeman of the City of London, that he bought Oats, Hay,
etc. which he sold in his Inu, by which he got his Living, that he with others
built a Ship, and he had a Share therein, and a Stock of 50 l. to Trade withal;
that he was indebted to several persons, and departed from his House, and
absconded from his Creditors; that thereupon a Commission of Bankrupcy was
taken out against him, at the Petition of the Creditors, that the Plaintiff was
indebted to Trigg, and that the Commissioners found him to be a Bankrupt; and
by Indenture bearing date the 25th day of June, made a Bargain and Sale of the
Goods of Trigg, who did take and carry them away, etc.

The Question was, whether upon the whole matter the Plaintiff was a Bankrupt
or not?

Sergeant Thomson argued, that he was not within any of the Statutes of
Bankrupcy, for an Innkeeper is under many obligations and circumstances
different from all other Tradesmen; for he is to take care of the Goods of
Travelers, and if he set any unreasonable Price upon his Goods, it is an
Offense which the Justices of Peace and Stewards in their Leets have power to
hear and determine.

2. He does not buy and sell by way of Contract, for most of his Gains arise by
the entertaining and lodging of his Guests, by the attendance of his Servants,
and by the Furniture of his Rooms, and by uttering of Commodities as in other
Trades. Cro. Car. 548.
And therefore by the Opinion of three Judges in the Case of Crisp and Prat, it
was held that an Inn-holder does not get his Living by Buying and Selling; for
though he buyeth Provision, he does not sell it by way of Contract, but utters
it at what gain he thinks reasonable, which his Guests may refuse to give.

Justice Berkley in the arguing of that Case agreed, that he who gets his
Living by Buying and Selling, and not by both, is not within the Statutes, but
the Jury having found that he got a livelihood by both, and using the Trade of
an Inholder, therefore he was a Bankrupt: But the other three Judges were of a
contrary Opinion, because an Innkeeper cannot properly be said to sell his
Goods.

As to his having a Share in a Ship, it is no more than a Stock to Trade, which
may go to an Infant, or to an Executor after his decease, and if either of
these persons should Trade with it, they cannot be made Bankrupts, because it is
in auter droit.

E Contra. E contra.
It was argued that he who keeps an Inn is a Tradesman, and may be properly
said to get his Living by Buying and Selling.

The Goods of a Traveller are not distrainable for the Rent of an Innkeeper,
the reason is because he is more immediately concerned as a Tradesman, for the
benefit of Comerce.

It was the Opinion of my Lord Rolls, 2 Roll. Abr. 84.
that an Innkeeper was a Tradesman, therefore any Man might build a New Inn,
for it was no Franchise, but a particular Trade to keep an Inn.

And as a Tradesman he sells his Goods to his Guests by way of Contract, 39
H. 6.18, 19.
for he is not bound to provide Hay and Dates for the Horses of his Guests
without being paid in hand as soon as the Horses come into the Stable, for the
Law does not oblige him to trust for the payment.

The Case of Crisp and Prat, as Reported by Justice Croke, seems to be against
this Opinion, Jones 437. March 34.
but it is mis-reported; for Jones who mentions the same Case, says, that it
being found that the Innkeeper got his Living by Buying and Selling; it was
the Opinion of two Judges that he was within the Statute; but the other two
Judges, as to this Point, were of a contrary Opinion, for they held that an
Innkeeper could be no more a Bankrupt than a Farmer, who often Buys and Sells
Cattle and other Goods.

Though a Man is of a particular Trade, yet if it does not appear that he got his
Livelihood by Buying and Selling, it is not actionable to call such a person
Bankrupt.

Now certainly if the Plaintiff had declared that he was an Innkeeper, Styles
420. Sid. 299.
and got his living after that manner, and that the Defendant, to scandalize
him, said He was a Bankrupt, the Action would lie as well as for a Dyer,
Farmer, Carpenter, or such like Trades of manual Occupation.

Most of the Innkeepers are Farmers, and if it had been so found in this Case,
it would not have been denied but that he had been within the Statute of
Bankrupts.

Afterward in Trinity- Term, 3 Willielmi, Judgment.
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: for taking the whole matter as found by
this Verdict, it is not sufficient to make him a Bankrupt.

1. That he had a Ship which he let to Freight, this was not much insisted on
at the Bar to make him a Bankrupt, for it is no more than for a Man to have a
Share in a Barge, Hackney-Coach, or Wagon, all which are let for Hire.

Besides, in this Case it is found that the Plaintiff was but a Partner with
another. And as to the 50 l. which he had in this Trade, that is not sufficient
to make him a Bankrupt, Cro. Car. 282. Sid. 411.
for he must be actually a Trader at the time that the Debt was contracted,
which is not found; so it must be to make the word Bankrupt actionable, for it
must be found that he was a Trader at the time of the words spoken.

All the Question of difficulty is, that the Plaintiff was an Innkeeper, and
that he bought Necessaries and uttered them in his House; but this will not
make him a Baukrupt.

Because Inns are of necessity, and under the inspection of the public, and he
cannot refuse to lodge traveling persons; 2 Roll. Rep. 345. Hutt. 100. 2 Roll.
Abr. 64. Dalton 28.
and it is chiefly upon this account that he has several Privileges which
other Traders have not, as to detein a Horse till he is paid for keeping of it,
etc.

They are under the power of the Justices of the Peace, in the places where
they are situated; for if an Inn be erected in an inconvenient place it is a
Nuisance, and may be suppressed by Indictment; it is the same with an Alehouse,
1 Jac. c. 9. 21 Sac. c. 7. 1 Car. c. 14.
and therefore several Statutes which are made to prevent Tippling, and which
appoint at what price Ale shall be sold, have been adjudged to extend to
Innkeepers.

Where a Man Buys and Sells under a Restraint, and particular Limitation, tho
it is for his Livelihood, yet he is not within the Statutes.

Innkeepers do not deal upon Contracts as other Traders do, for a Judge of
Assize may set a price upon his Goods, and if they should set a price
themselves, if it is unreasonable they may be indicted for extortion; what they
buy is to a particular intent, for it is to spend in their Houses, and though they
get their Living by it, it is not ad plurimum, for the greatest part of their
Gains arises by Lodgings, Attendance, dressing of Meats, and other Necessaries
for their Guests.

Ever since the Statute of the 13th of Eliz. all the subsequent Acts relating
to Bankrupts have been penned alike, except the 21st of Jac. I. which is a
little larger, and takes in a Scrivener, and it may still be worth the care of
a Parliament to enlarge it to an Innkeeper, but no Law now in being extends to
him.

He is not taken notice of as a Trader within any of the Statutes of Bankrupcy,
he is only communis hospitator, a person or Trador who buys and sells for
hospitality; 8 Co. Caly's Case.
by receiving Travelers he becomes chargable to the Public, to protect them
and their Goods.

A Shoemaker, 1 Cro. 31. Hutt. 46, 47.
Tanner and Baker are Trades within the Statutes, but the difference between
those Trades and an Innkeeper is plain, because they use the Manufacture, and
thereby increase the value, as Leather is made more useful and of more value,
by making of it into Shoes.

A Farmer is not within the Statute, and yet they all buy and sell, for it is
necessary to their Occupation.

This Point was settled in Crisp and Prat 's Case; but the occasion of the doubt
afterward, was by the publishing of Justice Jones 's Reports, who doubted upon
the particular finding of the Jury, and so the Court came to be divided.

There is no material difference between an Innkeeper and the Master of a
Boarding-School, who buys and dresses Provisions for young Scholars, and
obtains Credit by his way of Living, but it was never yet thought that he was
within any of those Statutes.

Rowsby versus Manning.
Mich. 4 Jac. Rot. 15.
DEBt upon a Bond for performance of an Award, Conditional submission to an
Award.
so as it be made by such a day, and ready to be delivered to the Parties or to
such of them as desire it.

The Defendant pleaded nullum fecerunt arbitrium, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that after the submission, and before the day appointed
in the Condition, the Arbitrators did make their Award, by which they ordered
the Defendant to pay so much Money to the Plaintiff, and so assigned the breach
for non-payment, etc.

And upon a Demurrer to this Replication, Sergeant Tremaine said it was a
conditional submission, viz. to perform an Award, so as it be made by such a
day, and ready to be delivered to the Parties, and the Plaintiff has not
showed that it was ready to be delivered to the Defendant, which he ought to
have averred.

If the Condition be to perform an Award between the Parties, 5 Co. 103. More
642.
Ita quod arbitrium praed. fiat and deliberetur utrique partium praed. before
such a day, it must be delivered to all the Parties, and not to one, for each
of them are in the danger and penalty of the Bond.

E contra. E contra.
Sergeant Thompson agreed it to be a conditional Submmission, but not such as
goes to the substance of the Award it self; for the conditional Words are not
to the Award, but to the Form of the delivering of it, and therefore it should
come on the Defendants side to show that it was not ready to be delivered.

Curia. If an Award is actually made it is then ready to be delivered, but in
this Case it must be ready to be delivered to the Parties, or to such of them
who desire it, so it must be desired, and if then denied the Party may plead
the matter specially.

The Summission was, viz. 2 Cro. 577. 2 Roll. Rep. 193.
so that the Award be made ad vel antea 5 December. ready to be delivered at a
certain Shop in London.

The Plaintiff showed an Award made at York ready to be delivered at the Shop
in London, this was adjudged to be a void publication and delivery, because a
place was appointed where it should be delivered and published, viz. at the
Shop in London, where the Parties were to expect it, and not elsewhere.

So it would have been if a day had been appointed on which it ought to be
delivered, and the day had been mistaken. 2 Sand. 73.


But here is neither day or place appointed for the delivery, so that the
Defendant ought to have desired the Award; and if it had not been ready to be
delivered, he ought to have pleaded the Matter specially.

DE Term. Sancti Hill. Anno 2 Gulielmi and Mariae Regis and Reginae, in Banco
Regis, 1690.
Mr. Leigh's Case.
HE brought a Mandamus to be restored to the Office of a Proctor of Doctors
Commons. Mandamus will not lie for the Office of a Proctor of Doctors Commons.


The Return was, that the Court was the supreme Court of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who had the Government thereof; that he appointed a Judge of the
said Court, who had power to alter and displace Officers; that the Defendant
was admitted and sworn a Proctor of the Court and took an Oath to obey the
Orders thereof; that part of the said Oath was, That no Proctor should do any
thing in that Court without the Advice of an Advocate; that he had done
Business without such advice in a certain Cause there depending; and that he
refused to pay a Tax of 10 s. imposed upon him by Order of the Court toward
the Charges of the House.

The Questions upon this Return were, viz.

1. Whether a Mandamus will lie to restore a person to the Office of a Proctor?

2. Whether a sufficient cause was returned to displace Mr. Leigh?

As to the first, It was held that a Mandamus does lie, because it is a public
Office, and concerns the Administration of Justice; and the Proctors being
limited to a certain number, viz. 28. if many of them should be displaced it
would be a means to hinder Justice.

This Court does judicially take notice of the Ecclesiastical Courts, by
prohibiting them, by taking notice of their Excommutions or of any proceedings,
when they are against the Law of the Land.

A Proctor does the Business in that Court as as Attorney in B. R. and Notice
is taken of his place as judicially as of any other Officer; Sid. 94, 152.
and as to this purpose those Officers cannot be distinguished; if therefore a
Mandamus has been granted to restore an Attorney, why not a Proctor?

The Plaintiff has no remedy but by a Mandamus, because an Assize will not lie
of this Office; it is admitted that an Action on the Case may be brought, but
then Damages only are to be recovered, and not the Office; and it would be very
inconvenient to leave it to a Jury to give such Damages as the Party may
sustain for the loss of his Livelihood.

It Is no Objection to say, that there is a proper Visitor, in this Case to whom
to appeal, viz. to the Archbishop; for they have not set out any such
visitatorial power in the Return; or if any, that he had power to restore him.

But if such Power had appeared upon the Return, yet a Proctor ought not to
appeal to the Archbishop or to the Guardian of the Spiritualties Sede vacant,
because 'is in effect to appeal to themselves; for the Dean of the Arches
before whom the Appeal must be brought is an Officer appointed by the
Archbishop himself, and has the same Jurisdiction with him.

Besides, the Proctors there are not properly under any Visitatorial Power,
they have a particular Jurisdiction within themselves, and their Courts have
been held in several places, as at Bow, Christchurch, etc.

Then as to the Causes of this removal it is returned.

1. For receiving and prosecuting of a Cause without the advice of an Advocate
contrary to a Statute made by the Archbishop Abbot.

2. For refusing to pay 10 s. set upon him as a Tax toward the Charges of the
House.

Now neither of these are sufficient Causes to displace him.

As to the first Cause, if that Statute gives them any such Power it is void,
because it deprives a Man of his Freehold which cannot be done, but by the Law
of the Land.

It Is not said when this Offense was committed, for it may be before a general
Pardon, and then it is discharged.

But if it is an Offense, that will not make a Forfeiture without warning, and
no such thing appears upon the Return; 11 Co. 99. a.
for if he had notice publicly, he might have offered something in excuse of
himself, as Sickness, etc. which might have been allowed by the Court.

It Is as unreasonable a Law to put the Clients to unnecessary Charges to advise
with an Advocate upon an ordinary Libel, as it would be for an Attorney of the
King's Bench to advise with Council to draw a Declaration on a Bond.

2. They do not show by what Authority they may levy a Tax, neither do they set
forth what Tax was made in the whole; so that it might appear that 10 s. was a
proportionable part for him to pay; neither does it appear when this Tax was
made, or that Mr. Leigh was a Proctor when it was made.

E contra. E contra.
This is not an Offense in matter of Judgment, but it is a Misdemeanour and
punishable.

It Is very like the Case of Fellows of Colleges, who have proper Visitors, and
therefore the King's Bench will not grant a Mandamus in such Cases.

A Proctor is an Officer of a Court different from the Courts of Law, and
therefore the King's Bench cannot take notice of his Office judicially; they
have no other way of punishing of a Proctor but by displacing of him; and if
this should be remedied by a Mandamus, then those persons may offend without
punishment.

It Is not like the Case of an Attorney, for he being an Officer of the King's
Bench the Court does judicially take notice of him, but not of a Proctor. It Is
more like the Case of a Steward of a Court Baron, which is of private
Jurisdiction, and for which a Mandamus has been denied.

It Is like Midleton 's Case, who was Treasurer of the New River Water; it is
true, a Mandamus was granted to restore him to that Office, but it was only de
been esse to bring the Matter before the Court, though that was a Corporation
settled by Act of Parliament.

It Is also like the Cases of Abbots, Priors and Monks for whom a Mandamus was
never granted, because they are Ecclesiastical Corporations and have proper
Visitors, which is now by Law devolved upon the Archbishop.

So also Lay Corporations have Visitors which are their Founders and their
Heirs.

It Is an Objection of no force to say that this Appeal must be to the Dean of
the Arches, which is to appeal to the same person, because though it is true
that the Dean is constituted by the Archbishop, yet when once he is invested
with that Office he is in for his Life, and the Archbishop cannot afterward
come into that Court, and execute the Office of Dean himself, so he is not the
same person, neither has he the same Jurisdiction.

Curia. A Proctor is not an Officer properly speaking, it is only an Employment
in that Court, which acts by different Laws and Rules from the King's Bench;
they have an original Jurisdiction over this matter, and a Mandamus is in the
nature of an Appeal, which will not be granted, where they have such a
Jurisdiction, but when they exceed it and encroach upon the Common Law, then
Prohibitions are granted.

It Is for this reason that in cases of Divorce which are of a higher nature
than this case is, no Appeal can be to the King's Bench, for it would be an
endless business for persons to Appeal ab uno ad aliud examen, and therefore
credit must be given to the determinations of those Courts, who have such
Original Jurisdiction.

Officers are incident to all Courts, 1 Roll. Abr. 526.
and must partake of the nature of those several and respective Courts in which
they attend, and the Judges, or those who have the supreme Authority in such
Courts, are the proper persons to censure the Behavior of their own Officers,
and if they should be mistaken the King's Bench cannot relieve; for in all
cases where such Judges keep within their Bounds, no other Court can correct
their Errors in Proceedings.

Now for a Churchwarden of a Parish, Clerk, an Attorney, or the like, all these
are Temporal Officers, and are to be ordered by the Temporal Laws.

But if any wrong be done in this Case the Party must Appeal; so no Writ of
Restitution was granted.

Rex versus Guardianum de le Fleet.
AN Inquisition being found to seize the Office of Warden of the Fleet into the
King's Hands: Inquisition quashed.
the Court of Chancery, assisted with three Judges, was moved that it might be
Quashed. The Exceptions taken were, viz.

1. It Is found that the Defendant was Warden of the Fleet, but does not say
what Estate he had therein, whether for Life, or years, or in Fee, etc.

2. The Offenses which are the causes of the Forfeiture, are laid to be
committed at the Fleet, by suffering Escapes, and by Extortion, and it is not
found where the Fleet is situate, so there being no Visne, those Offenses
cannot be traversed.

3. 39 H. 6.32.
They do not find the Escape to be sine licentia and contra voluntatem of the
Warden, the Debts being unpaid.

4. Admitting it to be a Forfeiture, the Office cannot go to the King, but it
shall go to the next who has the Inheritance.

The Opinion of the Court was, that there are two things which entitle the King
to this Office, neither of which were found by this Inquisition.

1. An Estate in the Party offending.

2. A cause of Forfeiture of that Estate.

Now here was no Estate found in the Warden, but only that the Office was
forfeited by suffering of Escapes, etc.

If this had been an Office of Inheritance, ^ Co. 95.
then it ought to be found that such a person was seized in Fee, etc. and so
what Estate soever he had in it, ought to be expressly found.

But as this is found, it is void, because it does not answer the end for which
the finding of Offices was provided, which is to entitle the King to the
Offenders Estate.

An Indictment is but another sort of Office, and here being no Estate found;
it is much like an Indictment which finds no Offense, therefore it must be
quashed.

It might have been objected that no Man can tell what Estate the Warden had in
this place, and that not being known, no Office could be found for the King.

But this Objection runs to the finding of all manner of Offices in general,
whose very nature is to find an Estate, and to divest the subject thereof and
vest it in the King.

Besides in this Case one of the Indentures by which the Office was granted to
the Warden must be enrolled in the Court of Common Pleas.

This cannot be helped by a Melius Inquirendum, 3 Cro. 895. 9 Co. 95. Keilw.
194.
which never will support a defective Inquisition, and this is such because it
does not appear that the Defendant had any Seisin or Estate in the Wardenship
of the Fleet.

Barker Mil' versus Damer.
Hill. 1 Rot. 635.
AN Action of Covenant was brought by Sir William Barker, (who was Defendant in
a former Action) against Mr. Damer, wherein he declared that William Barker his
Father was seized in Fee of the Land in Question (being in Ireland) and made a
Lease thereof to one Page, for 31 years, under the yearly Rent of 200 l. in
which Lease Page did Covenant for himself, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns to pay the Rent to Mr. Barker, his Heirs and Assigns.

That William Barker the Father by Lease and Release conveyed the Reversion to
Sir William Barker, the now Plaintiff, that the Term was vested in the
Defendant, and assigns the breach for non-payment of the Rent.

The Defendant pleaded to the Jurisdiction of this Court, that the Lands in the
Declaration mentioned lay in Ireland, where they have Courts of Record, etc.
and so properly triable there.

To this Plea the Plaintiff demurred and the Defendant joined in Demurrer.

The single Question was, whether an Assignee of the Reversion can bring an
Action of Covenant against the Assignee of a Lessee in any other place than
where the Land is.

Those who argued that he may, said that this Action being brought upon an
Express Covenant is not local but transitory, 2 Inst. 231. Noy 142. 2 Cro. 142.
ibidem. Sid. 157. 2 Roll. Ab. 571. 1 And. 82.
for debitum and contractus sunt nullius loci, and if it is a duty, it is so
every where; therefore it has been adjudged, that upon a Covenant brought in
one County, the breach may be assigned in another.

Tremain Sergeant Contra. E contra.


He admitted that Debt upon a Lease for years upon the Contract it self, and
Covenant between the same Parties are transitory Actions, and may be brought
any where, but when once that privity of Contract is gone as by assignment of
the Lessee or the death of the Lessor, Latch 197.
and there remains only a Privity in Law, there the Action must be brought in
the County where the Land lies; the reason is, Hob. 37.
because the Party is then chargeable in respect of the possession only.

Therefore it was held that where an Assignee of a Reversion of Lands in
Sommersetshire, brought an Action of Debt in London, Cro. Car. 184. Jones 83.
Dyer 40 b.
upon a Lease for years made there, reserving a Rent payable at London, which
was in arrear after the Assignment, that the Action was not well brought, for
it ought to have been laid in Sommersetshire, where the Lands were, because the
privity of Contract was lost by the assignment of the Reversion, and therefore
the Party to whom that assignment was made, ought to maintain the Action upon
the privity in Law, by reason of the Interest which he had in the Land it self,
and that must be in the County where it lies.

Curia. There is a difference between an Action of Debt for Rent brought by an
Assignee, and an Action of Covenant, for the first is an Action at the Common
Law, which has fixed the Rent to the Reversion, and therefore such an Action
must be maintained upon the Privity of Estate, which is always local.

But an Assignee of a Reversion could not bring an Action of Covenant at the
Common Law, 1 Sid. 402. 3 Cro. 580. 1 Sand. 240. 32 H. 8. c. 34.
for it is given to him by a particular Statute (viz.) of 32 H. 8. but the
Statute did not transfer any Privity of Contract to the Assignee, but the
intent of it was to annex to the Reversion such Covenants only which concerned
the Land it self, as to repair the House or amend the Fences, and not to anner
or transfer any collateral Covenants, as to pay a Sum of Money, for that is
fixed by the Common Law to the Reversion.

It Is true, At the Common Law an Assignee of a Reversion might have maintained
an Action of Covenant for any thing agreed to be done upon the Land it self:
Privity of Contract is not thereby transferred so as to make the Action
transitory, but it must be brought upon the Privity of Estate; for if a Man
does covenant to do any collateral thing not in the Demise, and the Word
Assigns is in the Deed, yet they are not bound if they have no Estate, so that
it is not the naming of them, but by reason of the Estate in the Land, they are
made chargeable.

No Judgment is entered upon the Roll.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
FOlio 88. Line 13. for Defendant read Plaintiff, f. 106. l. 26. for no r. an,
f. 119. l. 7. after (must be) r. Error, f. 147. l. 13, 18, 38. for coram r.
quorum, f. 189. l. 23. for reasonable r. unreasonable, f. 196. l. 28. for
devises r. demises, f. 199. l. 1. for 23. r. 13. f. 201. l. 14. before merged
r. not, f. 218. l. 17. for 1672. r. 1679. f. 203. l. 31. after Berkley r. and
Mr. Killigrew, f. 222. l. 31. leave out and marries, f. 226. l. 21. leave out
she marries, f. 237. l. 29. for devise r. demise, f. 255. l. 31. for Father r.
Nephew, f. 256. l. 12. for joined r. tried, f. 287. l. 6. after delivered r.
tied, f. 303. l. 16. for Grantee r. Guarantee, f. 307. l. 36. for voidable r.
void.

A TABLE to the Third Part of Modern Reports.
A.
Abatement, See Joint Action 8. 1. DEBT was brought by four Plaintiffs, one of
them died before Judgment, the Action is abated as to the rest, 249 2. Waste is
brought against Tenant pur auter vie, and pending the Writ, Cestui que vie
dies, the Writ shall not abate, because no other person can be sued for the
Damages, ibid. 3. Two Jointenants are Defendants, the death of one shall not
abate the Writ, for the Action is joint and several, ibid. 4. Where two or more
are to recover in a personal thing, the death of one shall abate the Action as
to the rest, ibid. 5. But in Audita Querela the death of one shall not abate
the Writ, because it is in discharge, ibid.
Abeiance See Acceptance. 1. Resignation of a Benefice passes nothing to the
Ordinary, but puts the Freehold in Abeiance till his acceptance, 297
See Acceptance, Resignation, Surrender. Acts of Parliament See Justice of
Peace, 2 Pardon, 2 Ought to be construed according to the intention of the
Lawmakers, and ought to be expounded according to the Rules of the Common Law,
63 2. Where a particular punishment is directed by a Statute Law it must be
pursued, and no other can be inflicted upon the Offender, 78, 118 3. When an
Act is penal it ought to be construed according to Equity, 90, 157, 312 4.
Preamble is the best Expositor of the Law, 129, 169
Action upon the Ease. Assumpsit. A Feoffment was made upon Trust, that the
Feoffee should convey the Estate to another, the Cestuy que Trust may have an
Action if the Feoffee refuses to convey, 149 2. In consideration that the
Plaintiff would let the Defendant have Meat, Drink, etc. he promised to pay as
much as it was reasonably worth; the word valerent was in the Declaration, it
should have been quantum valebant at the time of the Promise, but held good
after Verdict, 190 3. Where a personal promise is grounded upon a real
Contract, the Action will lie, 73 4. It will not lie for Rent reserved upon a
Demise, but where a Promise is made to pay Rent in consideration of occupying a
House, it will lie, 240
Action on the Case, See Bankrupts 2 Indictment 2 Slander where it lies. 1. He
is a Papist, spoken of a Deputy Lieutenant, 26 2. Where the words injure a
person in his Profession, or bring him in danger of punishment, 27 3. He stole
the Colonel's Cupboard Cloth, there being no precedent Discourse either of the
Colonel or his Cloth, 280 4. He is broken and run away, and never will return
again, spoken of a Carpenter, 155 5. He is a Rogue, a Papist Dog, and a pitiful
Fellow, and never a Rogue in Town has a Bonfire before his door but he, spoken
of a Merchant, who made a Bonefire at the Coronation of King James. 103 6. He
owes more Money than he is worth, he is run away and is broak, spoken of an
Husbandman, 112 7. The Wife was called Whore, and that she was the Defendant's
Whore; the Husband and she brought the Action and concluded ad dampnum ipsorum,
it lies without allegding special Damages, 120 8. Sir J. K. is a buffle headed
Fellow and does not understand Law, he is not fit to talk Law with me, I have
baffled him, and he has not done my Client Justice, spoken of a Justice of
Peace, 139 9. J. P. is a Knave, and a busy Knave for searching after me and
other honest men of my sort, and I will make him give satisfaction for
plundering me, spoken of a Justice of Peace, no Colloquium was laid, the Court
was divided, 163
Where it does not lie. Words were laid to be spoken ad tenorem and effectum
sequen' which is not an express allegation, that they were spoken, 71, 72

Action on the Case against a Common Carrier. Where it was brought against him
upon an Assumpsit in Law, and likewise upon a Tort, the Declaration is not
good, 322
Action on the Case for a wrong, See Pleading. For diverting of a Watercourse
the Antiquity of the Mill must be set forth, 49 2. It lies against a wrong doer
upon the bare possession only, and the Plaintiff need not set forth whether he
has a Title by Grant or Prescription, for that goes to the right, 51, 52, 132
3. If the Declaratien is for the diverting of the Water ab antiquo and solito
cursu, this amounts to a Prescription, which must be proved at the Trial, or
the Plaintiff will be nonsuited, 52 4. Whether it lies for the making of a
scandalous Affidavit in Chancery, 108 5. For selling of Oxen affirming them to
be his own ubi revera they were not, but does not say sciens the same to be the
Goods of another, or that he sold them fraudulenter or deceptive, it is naught
upon a Demurrer, but good after Verdict, 261 6. Where several are guilty of a
wrong the Action may be brought against either, 321 7. Debt upon the Statute of
Ed. 6. for not setting out Tithes brought against two Tenants in Common, one of
them did set out the Tithes and the other carried them away, it ought to be
brought only against the wrong doer, 322 8. For disturbing of a Man in a Common
Passage or Common Highway no Action on the Case lies without a particular
damage done to himself, for the proper remedy is a Presentment in the Leet, 294
Administrator Vide Infant 18 Ordinary Interest 2 Pleading 2 Administrator
durante minore aetate has no power over the Estate, 24 2. Administration could
not be granted by the Spiritual Court before the Statute of Ed. 3. 24 3. Where
it is once granted, whether it ought to be repealed, 25 4. Administrator had the
whole Estate in him before the Statute of Distributions, 60 5. He then gave
Bond to distribute as the Ordinary should direct, ibid. 6. The Father died
intestate leaving one Son, an Infant, Administration was granted durante minore
aetate, he died before 17. whether Administration de bonis non of the Father
shall be granted to the next of Kin of him or his Son, 61, 62 7. Whether an
Interest is vested in an Infant where Administration is granted durante minore
aetate, so that if he die before 17. it goes to his Executor, 61 8. Before the
Statute of Distribution, if there was but one Child he had a right of
Administration, but it was only personal; and if he died before it was granted
to him by the Court, it would not go to his Executor, 62 9. Husband has a
right of Administration to the Goods of the Wife, because the Marriage is quasi
a Gift in Law, 64 10. If Administration had been granted to a Stranger before
the Statute of Distributions, and no Appeal within fourteen days, he who had
right though beyond Sea was barred, 64 11. Husband and Wife Administratrix to
her first Husband, recover in Debt, the Wife died, and the Husband brought a
Scire Facias to have Execution, it will not lie by him alone, because it was a
Demand by the Wife as Administratrix in auter droit, ibid. 12. Judgment was had
in Somersetshire the Plaintiff died intestate, Administration is committed by
an inferior Diocese, it is void, because the Entry of the Judgment in Middlesex
where the Records are kept made him have bona notabilia in several Diocesses,
and so Administration ought to be granted in the Prerogative, 324 13. If the
Intestate has two Sons and no Wife, each have a Moiety of the personal Estate,
if but one, an interest is vested in him, 59 14. At Common Law none had a Right
to an Intestate's Estate, but the Ordinary was to distribute it to Pious Uses,
ibid.
Admiral and Admiralty. There was a Sentence in the Admiralty, for taking of a
Ship, and afterward Trover was brought, for taking of the same Ship, whether
it lies or not? 194 2. Pawning of a Ship for Necessaries at Land, and a Libel
was exhibited in the Admiralty, whether good or not? 244 3. Where things
arising upon Lands may be sued for in the Admiralty, 245
Addition, See Indictment. Where it makes a thing certain, as an Ejectment de
Tenemento is uncertain, but with the addition vocat' the Black Swan, it is made
certain, 238
Admittance, See Baron and Feme, 9. A Custom cannot warrant an uncertain Fine,
upon an Admittance to a Copyhold, 133 2. The Lord may refuse to admit without a
tender of the Fine where it is certain, ibid. 3. Where it is uncertain the Lord
is to admit first, and then to set the Fine, ibid. 4. Custom that upon every
Admission the Tenant should pay a years value of the Land, as it was worth
tempore admissionis, it is good, 132 5. For a Fine upon an Admission, an Action
of Debt will lie, for though it favors of the realty, yet it is a certain duty,
230 6. Before Admittance, the Estate is in the Surrenderor, and he shall have
an Action of Trespass against any person who enters before another is admitted,
226 7. Before an Admittance the Surrendree cannot enter but by special Custom
to warrant it, 225
Affidavit, See Action on the Case for a Wrong, 4. See Baron and Feme, 11.
Infant, 21. Agreement and Disagreement. Whether assent is necessary to a
Surrender, it being a Conveyance at the Common Law; it is not necessary in
Devises, or in any Conveyances directed by particular Statutes, or by Custom,
298 2. Whether the Estate shall be in the Surrendree immediately upon the
execution of the Deed, if he does not show some disassent to it, 300 3.
Agreement is not so much necessary to perfect a Conveyance, as a Disagreement
is to make it void, ibid. 4. A Feoffment to three and Livery is made to one,
the Estate is in all till disagreement, 301
Alien. Leases made to Alien Artificers are void by the Statute of 32 H. 8.
This Statute was pleaded by an Alien, who was a Vintner, and held to be no
Artificer, 94
Amendment See Mistrial, Costs 2. 1. Of the Distringas by the Roll after a
Verdict, the Day and Place of Assizes being left out, 78 2. In matters of Form,
the Court have sent for a Coroner to amend his Inquisition, 101 3. Of a
Mis-entry of a Writ of Enquiry, without paying of Costs, 113 4. Return to an
Homine Replegiando, amended by Rule of Court, 120 5. A Riot was laid to be
committed after the Indictment, it was amended, being only a Misprision of the
Clerk, 167 6. Where matter of Form is cured by a Verdict, but it is not
amendable upon a Demurrer, 235 7. Scire Facias upon a Recognizance to have
Execution for 1000 l. juxta formam Recuperationis, it should have been
recognitionis, amended after a Demurrer, 251
Amerciament, See Court 3. 1. Differs from a Fine, for that is the act of the
Court, but an Amerciament is the act of the Jury, 138 2. It need not be to a
Sum certain, for that may be affered, 138 3. A Bailiff of a Liberty cannot
distrein for an Amerciament Virtute officii, but he ought to set forth the
taking Virtute Warranti, ibid.
Appeal. Against three for a Murder, the Count was, that O. gave the wound of
which the person died; the Jury found that L. gave the wound, and that O. and
M. were assisting: this varies from the Count, and yet held good, 121 2. The
Wound was given in one County, and the Death ensued in another, and the Party
was Tried where the Wound was given, and held good, ibid. 3. At Common Law it
was at the Election of the Appellant to bring the Appeal in either County, and
the Trial to be by a Jury of both; but now it may be brought in the County
where the Party died, 122 4. Whether Auter foitz Convict of Manslaughter is a
good Plea to an Appeal of Murder, 156, 157 5. If a Woman be slain, her next of
Kin shall maintain an Appeal, 157 6. How many things are required by the
Statute of Gloucester to be alleged in an Appeal of Murder, 158 7. The
Appellee pleaded in Abatement, but did not plead over to the Felony, whether
good or not, 267 8. Where the Appellee must plead in propria persona, and where
per Attornatum, 268
Apportionment. Where a Contract under Hand and Seal for a Sum certain shall
not be apportioned in an Action pro Rata, as if it be for a Years Service, the
Plaintiff must serve a Year, and aver it, though the Contract is executory, 153
2. But if a Promise is for a Years Board, an Action may be brought for three
Quarters of a Year, for if there is a Variance between the Agreement and the
Declaration, it is for the benefit of the Defendant, 154
Apprentice. Whether Justices of Peace have any power to compel men to take
poor Children Apprentices, since the Statute gives power to Churchwardens to
raise Money for putting them out, which must be to such who are willing to to
take them for Money, 270
Arbitrament. To pay 5 l. presently, and give Bond to pay 10 l. more on a day
following, and now to sign general Releases, it shall only discharge such
matters which were then depending at the time of the submission, and not the
Bond, 264 2. A person who was a Stranger to the Submission was awarded to be a
Surety, it is void, 272 3. Submission was so as the Award be made, etc. ready to
be delivered to the Parties, or to such of them, who shall desire it; the
Defendant must desire the Award, and plead the matter specially, and the
Plaintiff need not aver that it was ready to be delivered, 330
Assent, See Agreement. Assets. Reversion in Fee Expectant upon an Estate Tail,
is not Assets, but when it comes into possession, then and not before it is
Assets, 257
Assignment, See Privity of Contract, 2. Executor of a Lessee for years shall
be liable to an Action of Debt for Rent incurred after an assignment of the
Term, for the privity of Contract of the Testator is not determined by his
Death, but his Executor shall be charged with his Contracts, so long as he has
Assets, 326
Assizes. The Method of arraigning an Assize, the Title must be set forth in
it, 273
Attornment, See Bargain and Sale. Ejectment of a Manor, parcel in Rents and
parcel in Services, the Attornment of the Tenants must be proved, 36
Averment, See Devise, 4 The consideration of a Duty ought to be precisely
alleged, as in an Action on the Case for a Duty to be paid for weighing Goods,
it must be averred that the Goods were such which are usually sold by weight.
162 2. The nature of an Averment is to reduce a thing to a certainty which was
uncertain before, 216 3. Where it may be made against the express words of a
Condition, 217 4. Not allowed to be made against a Record, 305

B.
Bail. IT was demised in a Scandalum Magnatum, 4 2. Writ of Error pending in
the Exchequer-Chamber, the principal in the Action rendered himself, the Bail
are discharged, 87 3. Scire Facias against Bail, upon a Writ of Error, who
plead, that the Principal rendered himself before Judgment, it is not good, for
the Bail, are liable not only to render the Body, but to pay the Debt, ibid. 4.
Proceedings were stayed by Injunction above two Terms after the Bail was put
in, and before the Declaration delivered, which was pleaded to a Scire Facias,
brought against them, but held not good, 274
Bankrupts. An Innkeeper is not within the Statutes of Bankrupcy, 327 2. It Is
not actionable to call a Man Bankrupt unless it be laid, that he was a Trader
at the time of the words spoken, 329 3. Innkeeper buys and sells under a
Restraint of Justices and Stewards of Leets, which though for a Livelihood, yet
cannot be a Bankrupt, 329 4. Whether a Farmer or Master of a Boarding-School be
within the Statutes, 330
Baretry. Difference between Baretry and Maintenance, 97 (2.) It Is not Baretry
to arrest a Man without a cause, ibid. 4. If one design to oppress and to
recover his own right it is Baretry, 98 5. Money may be laid out to recover the
just right of a poor man and no Baretry, ibid. 6. But money may not be expended
to promote and stir up Suits, ibid.
Barbados. It was gotten by Conquest, and therefore to be governed by what Law
the King wills, 161
Bargain and Sale. What words by construction of Law shall amount to a Bargain
and Sale to make the Reversion pass with the Rent without Attornment, 237
Baron and Feme. See Slander 7 Administrator 9, 11 Sci. Fa. 7 (1.) Whether Sci.
Fa. will lie against the Husband alone after the death of the Wife upon a
Judgment had against her Dum sola, 186 (2.) If a Judgment is recovered against
her while sole, then she marries, and dies, the Husband is not chargeable,
unless had likewise against him during the Coverture, ibid. (3.) A Debt is due
to her whilst sole, she marries and dies before it is recovered, it shall not go
to the Husband by virtue of the marriage, but he may have it as Administrator
to his Wife, ibid. 4. Judgment is obtained against her whilst sole, she marries
and a Sci. Fa. is brought against Husband and Wife, and Judgment quod habeat
executionem, the Wife dies, a Scire Fa. may be brought against the Husband
alone, 189 5. The Recovery upon a Sci. fa. is against both, and is therefore
joint against both, 188 6. Husband may have Execution of a Judgment recovered
by him and his Wife, after the Death of his Wife, without a Sci. fa. 189 7.
Devastavit against both, the Wife being an Executrix, and Judgment that the
Plaintiff have Execution de bonis propriis, the Wife dies, the Goods of the
Husband are liable, ibid. 8. A Woman who had a Term for years, married, the
Rent is arrear; she died: the Husband shall be liable, because by the Marriage
he is entitled to the Profits of the Land, ibid. 9. Feme Covert Copyholder,
her Husband made a Lease for years, without License of the Lord, it is a
Forfeiture during the Coverture, 222 9. Feme Covert Heir to a Copyhold Estate,
her Husband after three Proclamations will not be admitted, it is a Forfeiture
during Coverture, 226 10. The Husband has a Lease in Right of his Wife, who
was an Executrix; and he grnats all his Right and title therein, the Right
which he had by his Wife passes, 278 12. A. Feme Sole had a Lease and Married;
then Husband and Wife Surrender in consideration of a new Lease to be granted
to the Wife, and to her Sons, the Estate vests immediately in her, without the
assent of her Husband, for the Law intends it her Estate till he dissassent,
300 13. Feme Covert, and another joint-Tenant for Life, she and the Husband
Lease their Moiety, reserving a Rent, during Life, and the Life of her Partner,
the Wife died, it is a good Lease against the Surviving joint-Tenant, till
disagreement, 300 14. The Husband made a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself
and Wife, and to the Heirs of the Survivor; he afterward made another
Feoffment of the same Lands, and died; the Wife entered, but the Fee was not
vested in her by the first Conveyance, because the contingent right was
destroyed by the last, 310
Bar. Recovery in a personal Action is a Bar to an Action of the like nature
where the same Evidence supporteth both Actions, 2 Judgment in Trespass is no
Bar to an Action of Detinue, 2
Bill of Exchange. The Drawer and Endorsers are all liable to payment, but if
Recovery be against one, it is a good Bar to an Action which may be brought
against the rest, 86
By-Law, See Corporation 12. Trade 8. Where it is too general and where not, 193

C.
Carrier, See Pleading 11. Certainty, See Custom. Grants. Certiorari. IT lies
to remove Causes and Orders from an inferior Jurisdiction, where it is not
prohibited in express words by any Statute, 95 2. Will not lie to the Grand
Sessions, nor to a County Palatine to remove Civil Causes, quaere whether it
lies to the Royal Franchise of Ely, 230
Charter. Usage shall expound ancient Charters, 9 (2) The Common Law does
operate with it, ibid. 3. One Clause of a Charter may expound another, 10 4. A
Charter which establishes a Corporation must provide for a new Election in
order to a Succession, otherwise the Common Law will not help, 13
Church, See Prohibition. Commitment. By the Lord Chancellor and several
others, Dominos Concilii, (for a Misdemeanour) whether it should not be Dominos
in Concilio, 213 2. Of a Peer for a Misdemeanour which amounts to a Breach of
the Peace, for which Sureties are to be given, 214 3. When a person is brought
in by a Capias for any offense he ought to plead instanter, 215
Common and Commoner See Ioytenancy 4 Joint Action 7 Prescription 7 A Common
cannot pass without Deed, and if the Plaintiff shows a Que Estate he must
produce the Deed, 52 2. If a Prescription is made for a Common, and does not
say for Cattle Levant and Couchant, it is not good, 162, 246 3. But this fault
is cured by a Verdict, 162
Confederacy, See Indictment. Condition See Infant 2. Notice 2, 4. A bare
denial without doing any more is no Breach of the Condition, 31 2. How it
differs from a Limitation, 32 (3.) To restrain Marriage to the consent of
particular persons is void, ibid. 4. Where it is of two parts in the
disjunctive, and both possible at the time of the Bond given, and one becomes
impossible afterward by the Act of God, the Obligor is not bound to perform
the other part; for the Condition being made for his benefit shall be taken
very beneficially for him, who had election to perform either part, 233 (5.)
When the Condition is but of one part it is otherwise, as if A. promise B. that
if C. do not appear such a day at Westminster, he will pay 20 s. C. died before
the day the Money must be paid, 234 6. Condition was to pay Rent at Michaelmas
or Lady Day during the Life of a Woman, or within thirty days after, she died
after the Feast, but within the thirty days, the payment which was due at the
Feast was discharged thereby, ibid. 7. To save harmless Non damnificatus
generally is a good Plea, but if it be to save harmless, acquit and discharge,
then it is not good without showing how acquitted and discharged, 252
Confederacy, See Agreement. Consideration, See Action on the Case.
Construction. Where it shall be made of an Act of Parliament according to the
intent of the Lawmakers, 33 2. Where it shall be made of an entire Sentence so
as the intent of the Law may appear, 220 3. Where particular words are in the
first part of a Sentence, and general words follow, both shall stand, 278, 279
Contract. Where an Agreement is entire to do or perform a thing for a certain
Sum, it shall not be apportioned pro rata for the performance of part, 153 (2.)
There must be a recompense of each side to make the Contract good, 237
Copyhold and Copyholders, See Baron and Feme, 8, 9. Lord may seize the Land of
a Copyholder till a Fine is paid, 222 2. A Man by Custom may assign a person to
take the Profits of a Copyhold Estate during the Minority of an Infant without
rendering an account when he comes of Age, ibid.
Corporation, See Charter 4. In all proceedings which concern a Corporation, it
must be alleged that there is one, and how erected, whether by Grant or
Prescription, 6 2. Mayor has no more Power than an Alderman in the Coporation
where he is Mayor, 9 (3.) Is not of the Quorum for electing of an Alderman, 10
4. The Mayor is named in the Grant as part of the Name of the Corporation, and
is not of the Quorum without naming him to be so, 9, 10 5. He is a Mayor in
respect of Reverence, but not of Power, 11 6. At the Common Law neither his
Name or Office require his presence at the choosing of an Alderman, 11, 14 7.
He cannot act eo nomine, but by the express Power given in the Charter, 12 8.
Elections of Officers of a Corporation must be free, 21 (9.) Mayor of a
Corporation is no Officer at the Common Law, 12 (10.) Original of Corporation
was preservation of Trade, ibid. (11.) Corporation by Charter without setting
forth their Duty or Office has no Power, ibid. 12. A Company in London made a
By-Law, that none of them should buy such a Commodity within 24 Miles of London
but two Men, it is too large to bind at such a distance out of their
Jurisdiction, 159
Costs, See Amendment 3. Trespass for breaking of a Close, and impounding of
Cattle, and Damages given under 40 s. the Plaintiff shall have his Costs, 39 2.
Amendment after a Writ of Error brought, Costs must be paid, 113
Covenant, See Local Action. Where a thing is lawful at the time of the
Covenant made, and afterterwards prohibited by Law, yet the Covenant is
binding, 39 2. To find Meat, Drink, and other Necessaries, the Breach was
assigned in not finding Meat, Drink, and alia necessaria, and entire Damages;
though this Breach was too general, yet it is good; for it may be as general as
the Covenant, 69 3. There must be such certainty in it that if the Defendant
should be sued again he may plead the former Recovery in Bar, ibid. 4. Need not
so much certainty in assigning a Breach upon a Covenant, as upon a Bond for
performance of Covenants, ibid. 5. For quiet enjoyment the Breach was that a
Stranger habens jus and titulum, and does not say what Title; for it may be
under the Plaintiff himself, therefore not well assigned, 135 6. To make an
Assignment according to an Agreement between the Partis, as Council should
direct, whether the Council of the Plaintiff or Defendant should advise, 192 7.
Give, grant and confirm are words at the Common Law, where they shall be taken
to amount to a Covenant to stand seized, 237
Court. Cause not to be removed out of an inferior Court, unless the Habeas
Corpus is delivered to the Steward before Issue or Demurrer joined, so as it is
joined within six Weeks after Arrest or Appearance, 85 (2.) If the Cause is
tried in an inferior Court, the Steward not being an Utter Barister, an
Attachment shall go, ibid. 3. Amerciament in a Court Leet is a Duty vested in
the Lord, for which he may distrain, 138 4. Presentment in a Court Leet is the
proper remedy when a Man is disturbed in a common Passage or Way, 294
Custom See Admittance. Infant 10. Prescription 8. Pleading 12. Must have
nothing to support it but Usuage, 133 (2.) It Is made of repeated Acts, ibid.
(3.) Must be very certain or it is not good, 134 (4.) Must be taken strictly
when it goes to the destruction of an Estate, 224 (5.) A Custom that every
Copyholder, who leases his Land shall forfeit, it does not bind an Infant, 229
6. Amongst Merchants where it must be particularly set forth, 226 7. It must be
certain and therefore where it was laid for an Infant to sell his Land when he
can measure an Ell of Cloth, it is void for the incertainty, 290 8. To have
solam and separalem pasturam has been held good, 291 (9.) Prescription must
have a lawful commencement, but it is sufficient for a Custom to be certain and
reasonable, 292 10. Whether a Custom likewise ought to have a lawful
commencement, 293

D.
Damages See Ejectment 3. Joint Action 2. Trespass 2. Baron and Feme brought an
Action for words spoken of the Wife, and concluded ad damnum ipsorum, it is
good, for if she survive the Damages will go to her, 120
Det See Admittance 5. Assignment 1. Judgment 1. Quantum meruit. Where it is
brought upon a Specialty for less than the whole Sum it must be showed how the
other was discharged, 41 2. Whether it lies for a Fine upon an admission to a
Copyhold Estate, for it does not arise upon any Contract, 240 3. There must be
a personal Contract or a Contract employed by Law to maintain an Action of Debt,
ibid.
Deceit, See Action on the Case. Deputy, See Office 6, 7, 9. Devise, See Tail.
Where it shall not be extended by implication, 82 2. Where the word Estate
passes a Fee, where not, 45, 105. 3. I give All to my Mother, passes only an
Estate for Life; for the Particle All is a Relative without a Substantive, 32
4. To A. and the Testator's Name is omitted in the Will, yet it is good by
averring his Name, and proving his Intention to devise it, 217 5. The Testator
after several Specific Legacies and Devises of Lands, gave all the rest and
remaining part of his Estate, etc. by those Words the Reversion in Fee passed,
228 6. By the Devise of an Hereditament the Reversion in Fee passes, 229
Disseisin, See Election, 1. Interest, 2. The Son Purchased in Fee, and was
disseised by his Father, who made a Feoffment with Warranty, the Son is bound
for ever, 91 2. Lessor made a Lease for Life and died, his Son suffered a
Common Recovery, this is a Disseisin, ibid. 3. Where an Estate for Life or
years cannot be gained by a Disseisin, ibid. 4. A wrongful Entry is never
satisfied with any particular Estate, nor can gain any thing but a Fee-simple,
92
Distribution. Before the Statute, if there was but one Child, he had a right
of Administration, but it was only personal, so that if he died before
Administration, his Executor could not have it, 62

E.
Ejectment. THE Demise was laid to be the 12th of Junii habendum a praed.
duodecimo die Junii, which must be the 13th day, by virtue whereof he entered,
and that the Defendant Postea eod 12 die Junii did Eject him, which must be
before the Plaintiff had any Title, for his Lease commenced on the 13th day,
not good, 199 2. De uno Messuagio sive Tenemento, not good, because the word
Tenementum is of an uncertain signification, but with this addition vocat', the
Black Swan, it is good, 238 3. If the Term should expire, pending the Suit, the
Plaintiff may proceed for his Damages; for though the Action is expired, quoad
the possession, yet it continues for the Damages, 249
Election. Where the Cause of Action arises in two places, the Plaintiff may
choose to try it where he pleases, 165 2. Tenant at Will made a Lease for
years, the Lessee enters, this is no disseisin, but at the Election of him who
had the Interest in it, 197
Entry. In Feoffments, Partitions and Exchanges, which are Conveyances at the
Common Law, no Estate is changed until actual Entry, 297 2. Lease for years not
good without Entry, 297 3. Tenant for Life, Remainder in Tail Male levied a
Fine, and made a Feoffment having but one Son then born, and afterward had
another Son, the eldest died without Issue, the Contingent Remainder to the
second was not destroyed by this Feoffment, for it was preserved by the right
of Entry which his elder Brother had at the time of the Feoffment made, 305
Escape. Debt upon an Escape would not lie at the Common Law against the
Jailer, it was given by the Statute of W. 2. 145 2. The superior Officer is
liable to the voluntary Escapes suffered by his Deputy, unless the Deputation
is for life, 146 3. If an Escape is by negligence it must be particularly
found, 151 4. A person was in Execution upon an erroneous Judgment, and
escaped, and Judgment and Execution was had against the Jailer, and then the
first Judgment was reversed, yet that against the Jailer shall stand, 325
Evidence, See Witness. An Affidavit made in Chancery shall not be read as
Evidence, but only as a Letter, unless Oath is made by a Witness that he was
present when it was taken before the Master, 36 2. What shall be Evidence of a
fraudulent Settlement, ibid. 3. An Answer of a Guardian in Chancery shall not
be read as Evidence to conclude an Infant, 259 (4.) Whether the return of the
Commissioners in a Chancery Cause that the person made Oath before them is
sufficient Evidence to convict of Perjury, 116 5. Whether a true Copy of an
Affidavit made before the Chief Justice is sufficient to convict the person for
the like Offense, 117 6. A Verdict may be given in Evidence between the same
Parties, but not where there are different persons unless they are all united
in the same interest, 142 7. Conviction for having two Wives shall not be given
in Evidence to prove the unlawfulness of a Marriage, but the Writ must go to
the Bishop because at Law one Jury may find it no Marriage, and another
otherwise, 164
Exchange. Ought to be executed by each Party in their Life time, otherwise
it is void, 135
Excommunication, Stat. 5 Eliz. For not coming to the Parish Church the
Penalties shall not incurr if the person hears Divine Service in any other
Church, 42 2. The Causes are enumerated in the Statute which must be contained
in the Significavit, otherwise the Penalties are not to incurr, 89
Executor, See Grants. Notice 5. Whether an Executor de son tort can have any
interest in a Term for years, 91, 93 2. An Executor may sell the Goods before
Probate, 92 3. May pay Debt upon a simple Contract, before a Bond, of which he
had no notice, 115 4. Whether an Action of Debt will lie against an Executor
upon a Mutuatus, 5. By what words he has an Authority only, without an
Interest in the thing devised, 209, 210 6. He had both Goods of his Testator,
and of his own, and granted omnia bona sua, that which he has as Executor will
not pass, for they are not properly sua, 278
Exposition of Words and Sentences, See Number. Subsequent words may explain a
former Sentence in a Deed, but in Wills the first words guide all which follow,
82 2. Action was brought by Original, for that the Defendant prosecut' fuit and
adhuc prosequitur in the Admiralty; those words adhuc prosequitur shall not be
construed to make it subsequent to the Original, but must refer to the time of
suing it forth, 103, 157 3. Doubtful Words must be Expounded always against the
Lessor, 230 4. To make an Assurance to the Obligee and his Heirs, the
Conjuction and shall be taken in the disjunctive, 235

F.
Fair, See Trade. IF the place where it should be kept is not limited by the
Grant, it may be kept where the Grantee will, 108
False Imprisonment. It will not lie against a Sheriff for taking the Body by
virtue of a Casa, upon an Erroneous Judgment, for the Execution is good till
avoided by Writ of Error, 325
Fees. Of the Clerks of the Crown-Office, the Court will not regulate upon a
Motion, but if oppressive they must be indicted for Extortion, 297
Fines levied, See Tenant at Will, 6. One of the Cognisors died before the
return of the Writ of Covenant, it is Error; but not in the case of a Purchaser
for a valuable consideratino, for the Court will interpose, 99 2. If the
Cognisor does dye after the Entry of the Kings-Silver, the Fine is good, 140 3.
Writ of Covenant, Test 15th of January, returnable in Crastino Purificationis
taken by Dedimus 18th of Januarii; The Cognizor died in Easter-Week following,
but four days before her Death, the Kings-Silver was entered as of Hillary-Term
precedent; this was held a good Fine, 141 4. Where a person is in possession by
virtue of a particular Estate for Life, and accepts a greater Estate, it
shall not divest the Estate of those in Remainder for Life, so as the same may
be barred by Fine and Non-claim, 195 5. Lease for one hundred years in Trust to
attend the Inheritance, cestuy que Trust being in possession, Demises to
another for fifty years, and levied a Fine, and the five years passed, the Term
for a hundred years is divested by this Fine, and turned to a right, and so
barred, 196 6. In what Cases a Fine is a Bar, and what not, 198
Fines upon Admittance, See Admittance, Copihold, Debt, 2. Infant, 9. The
Judges are to determine whether it be reasonable or not, 134 2. Lord cannot
enter for non-payment of an unreasonable Fine, 134
Forfeiture. If Tenant for years make a Feoffment, it is a Forfeiture, but if he
make a Lease and Release, 'tho it is of the same Operation, yet it is no
forfeiture, 151
Fraud, See Evidence.
G.
Grants, Grantor and Grantee. WHere an Interest is coupled with a Trust in a
Grant, it shall go to the Executor of the Grantee, 43 2. Grants must be
certain, otherwise they are void, 134
Grants of the King. Not good for the sole Printing of Blank Bonds, exclusive
of all other Printers, 75 2. A Grant to restrain trading to particular places,
is good, 77 3. But of sole making Cards not good, because it restrains a whole
Trade, ibid. 4. A Grant cannot divest the Subject of a Right enjoyed long
before it was made, ibid. 5. Cannot discharge a person of a Duty to which he is
made liable by a subsequent Act of Parliament, 96 6. Difference between his
Grants and Prohibitions, 7. Where his Grants ought to be taken very strictly,
168 8. In a Quo Warranto, the Defendant pleaded that the King was seized in Fee
of a Franchise, who granted it to another Habendum the Hundred, whether good or
not, 199
Gun, See Justice of Peace, 3. Conviction before a Justice of Peace, upon the
Statute of H. 8. for keeping a Gun, not having 100 l. per Annum, quashed,
because it was said non habuisset, instead of nunquam Habuit, 100 l. per Annum,
280

H.
Habendum. WHere it shall be said to explain the general Words preceding, 81 2.
Nothing passes in the Habendum, but what was mentioned in the Premises, 199
Heir. Error by the Plaintiff, ut Consanguineus and Haeres, viz. Filius, etc.
it is sufficient without showing the descent from more Ancestors, 152 2. Where
he shall take by Descent, and where by Purchase, 205 3. In a Bond where the
word Heir is a word of Limitation, and not a designation of the person, 233 4.
Reversion in Fee descended to an Heir after the Estate Tail spent, and an
Action was brought against him upon a Bond of his Ancestor, it is not necessary
that the Plaintiff name all the intermediate Remainders, but him who was last
actually seized of the Fee, 255
Heriot. Lease for 99 years if A. B. C. so long live, paying an Heriot upon the
death of either, A. assigns the term, no Heriot shall be taken of the Assignee,
231 (2) May seize or distrain for Heriot Service; if distrain it may be the
Beast of any man upon the Land; but if he seize it must be the very Beast of
the Tenant, ibid. 3. Where an Heriot is reserved upon a Demise it differs from
those which are due by Tenure, 231 4. Lease for 99 years if M. and D. so long
live, reserving an Heriot after death of either, provided if D. survive no
Heriot to be paid, but M. survived, the Court was divided whether a Heriot
should be paid, 230
Highways. A Man cannot be exempted from repairing by the Grant of the King if
made before the Statute of Ph. and Mar. which charges him to repair, 96
Homine Replegiando. Brought for a Monster, and upon the Return of the Sheriff,
that he had replevyed the Body, he was bailed, 121 2. Brought for a young Woman
taken out of her Parents Custody, and married against her Consent, 169
Hue and Cry, See Robbery. Hundred Court. This Court was first derived from the
County Court, 200 (2) Hundreds were usually granted to Abbots, and their
Possessions coming to the Crown by dissolution of their Abbeys are merged, and
cannot be regranted, 200

I.
Idiot. HOW it differs from a Lunatic, 43 2. The King has power to grant his
Estate to any person without Account to be given, ibid. 3. Grant of an Idiot by
the King, the Grantee dies, his Executor has an Interest in him, ibid.
Ieoffails See Indictment 8. Travers 4. Variance 2. None of the Statutes help
an insufficient Indictment, 79 2. Variance between original and declaration not
aided by the Statute of Ieofails, 136 3. Want of concluding without a Travers
is but matter of form, and aided, 319
Indictment. For using of Alias Preces than enjoined by the Book of Common
Prayer it may be upon an extraordinary occasion, and so no Offense, 79 2. For
scandalous words whether it lies as it does for Libels, the one being a
private, the other a public Offense, 139 3. For Baretry in soliciting of a
Suit against another, who was not indebted to the person, 97 4. It will lie for
such words for which an Action will not, 139 5. For a Riot in unduly electing
of an Alderman of Bristol, not being summoned by the Mayor, 5 6. Exception to
it, viz. does not say that it is antiqua Villa, or whether it was a Corporation
by Charter or Prescription, of which the Court cannot judicially take notice if
not shown, 5 7. Does not say that any Charter was granted to the City of
Bristol, where the Riot was supposed to be committed, 7 (8.) Must be very exact
and certain, for it is not aided by any Statute of Ieofails, ibid. 9. For
treasonable words preached in a Sermon, viz. We have had two wicked Kings
together, etc. whether good without some preceding discourse of the King, 53,
54, 69 10. For Subornation of Perjury in persuading another to swear, and does
not set forth that the Oath was made, that it might appear, that the thing
sworn was false, 122 11. Quashed, because the words per Sacramentum duodecim
proborum and legalium hominum were left out, ibid. (12.) For using a Trade not
being an Apprentice upon 5 Eliz. and does not averr that it was a Trade used
before the making of the Act, 152 13. For not serving upon a Wardmote Enquest,
quashed for incertainty, 168 14. For Perjury by the Name of A. B. de Parochia
de Algate, and did not show in what County it was, for which reason it was held
not good, 139 15. In Indictments there must be an addition to the person and
place, viz. To the person, of what Estate and Degree he is. To the place, viz,
in what Hamlet, Town, Place and County he lives, 139 (16.) Caption was coram
Justiciariis ad pacem dicti Domini Regis conservand', and did not say (nunc)
whether good, ibid. 17. For Burglary the very day need not be set down, for if
it be either before or after the Offense the Jury ought to find according to
the truth, 141 18. It Is sufficient to lay the Fact to be committed in Parochia,
etc. without laying a Vill, though Parish is an Ecclesiastical division; 158
19. Per Sacramentum 12 praesentat' existit modo and forma sequen' Midd. viz.
Juratores pro Domino Rege praesentant, it should have been praesentat' existit
quod, etc. and not modo and forma, quashed, 201 20. The certainty of the Fact
ought to be particularly alleged, if for Murder it must be alleged that a
Stroke was given, 202 21. Pardon was pleaded, and Judgment quod Defendens eat
sine die, but being convicted of Manslaughter, his Goods were forfeited, and
though he was out of the Court by this Pardon and Judgment, yet the Indictment
was quashed upon a Motion for a fault in it, and this was to prevent the
Seizure, 202 22. Two were indicted for a Confederacy, one of them was
acquitted, and the other found guilty, the acquittal of one is the discharge of
the other, 220
Inducement. In Trover the Contract is but Inducement, the Cause of Action is
upon the Conversion, 322
Inferior Court, See Court. Infant See Copyhold 2. Custom 5, 7. Evidence 3.
After three Proclamations in a Court Baron of a Manor, he did not come to be
admitted to a Copyhold Estate, and held no Forfeiture, 223 2. Had an Estate
upon Condition to be performed by him and it is broken during his Minority, the
Estate is gone for ever, 222, 224, 226 3. The Law will not allow the Privilege
of Infancy to work a wrong to any body, 222, 226 4. Shall not be prejudiced by
the Latches of another, but shall be answerable for himself, 222, 223 5. Custom
to be admitted after three Proclamations will not bar him if beyond Sea, 222
6. He is not obliged to be admitted during his Infancy, 223 7. His Feoffment is
no Forfeiture at the Common Law, ibid. 8. If he does not present to a Church
within six Months it shall lapse, ibid. (9) He may be admitted to a Copyhold,
but not obliged to pay the Fine during his Nonage, 224 (10) May be bound by
acts of Necessity, and by some Customs, ibid. (11) Where he has a right it
shall be preserved after a Fine, and Nonclaim, but he has no right before
admittance to a Copyhold, 226 12. Cases of Coverture and Infancy are guided by
the same reason of Law, so are Cases of Infants and Lunaticks, ibid. 13. Where
he brought an Audita Querela to avoid a Statute entered into by him in his
minority, 229 14. A Surrender made by an Infant is void, 303 15. Where Acts
done by him are void in themselves where voidable, 307 16. When he is made
Defendant he must appear by Guardian, and not by Attorney, for he has not
capacity to choose one; the appearance by Guardian is the Act of the Court,
when he is Plaintiff he may sue per Prochein Amy, 236 17. Whether in Replevin
one of them who made Cognizance, being an Infant, may do it per Attornatum? it
may be pleaded in Abatement, 248 18. If he is Administrator he may bring an
Action of Debt per Attornatum, because he sueth in the right of another, 248
(19.) Where he recovers as Plaintiff, the Defendant shall not assign infancy
for Error, ibid. 20. Answer of his Guardian in Chancery, shall not be read as
Evidence at Law to conclude him, 259 21. He is not capable to take a Surrender,
because he cannot give his assent, which is an essential requisite to a
Surrender, 298 22. Release by an Infant Executor is no bar, for it works the
destruction of his Estate, 303 23. Cannot surrender a future Interest by his
acceptance of a new Lease, or make an absolute Surrender of a Term by Deed, 304
Information. For a Forgery brought against a Coroner, who inserted the Names
of two persons in an Indictment upon his Enquest for a Murder whom the Jury had
not found Guilty, 66 2. For a Riot in breaking a Bank and diverting a
Watercourse, the Jury found quoad fractionem Ripae guilty, and quoad Riotam not
guilty, for which reason the Judgment was arrested, 73 3. For going Armed to
terrify the People, it is an Offense at Common Law, 118 4. For forging quoddam
scriptum per quod, A. was bound, which cannot be if the Bond was forged, 104 5.
For Perjury in a Deposition taken before Commissioners in Chancery, whether
they ought to be present to testify that the Defendant is the same person, 116
6. An Information of Perjury will not lie against a Person for Swearing to the
value of Lands, if not true, 134 7. Upon the 5th of Eliz. against a
Turkey-Merchant for employing Men in his House to dress Cloth, it was held to
be exercising the Trade of a Cloath-Worker, 315
Innkeeper, See Pleading, 11. Inquisition, See Melius Inquirendum. Found to be
an Idiot, per spatium octo Annorum those words are surplusage, for he must be
so, a nativitate, 44 2. Quashed, because the year of the King was omitted, 80
3. Taken before a Coroner, the person having drowned himself, it was suffocat'
and emergit fuit, if it had stood singly upon the word emergit it had been
insensible, but the word suffocat' expressing the sense, it was held good, 100
4. Where nothing is vested in the King before Office found, ibid. 5. It must
always be found that there is an Estate in the person offending, and a cause of
Forfeiture of that Estate to vest it in the King, 336
Interest in a thing, See Pardon, 4. Where a Man may have an interest in a
Chattel without a Property, 61 2. Devise to a Wife and Children after Debts and
Legacies paid, an interest vests in the Devisees; but it is otherwise in case of
Administration, for there no Interest vests till actual distribution, 65 3. A
Man may have a Property, though not in himself, as in the Case of Joyntenancy, 97
Intestate, See Administration. Innuendo. The proper office of it is to make
the subject matter certain, 53 2. It will not help insensible words, 54
Joyntenancy, and Tenancy in Common, See Abatement, 3. Baron and Feme 12.
Interest 3. If one Joyntenant bring an Action against the other, unless he
pleads the Jointenancy in abatement, the Plaintiff will recover, 97 2. If two
Coparceners lease a House and the Rent is arrear, and one brings an Action and
recovers, Judgment shall be arrested, because both ought to join, 109 3.
Tenants in Common must join in the personalty, but it is otherwise in real
Actions; for though their Estates are several, yet the Damages to be recovered
survive to all, 109, 251 4. Where one Commoner may bring an Action against his
Fellow, 251
Joint Action, See Action for a wrong, 6. Ioyntenancy, 2, 3. Where an Action
may be joint or several at the Election of the Plaintiff, 86 2. Where it is
brought against three Defendants, who plead jointly, the Jury may sever the
Damages, and the Plaintiff may take Execution de melioribus damnis, as well as
where their Pleas are several and Trials at several times, 101, 102 3. Judgment
against two, and one brought a Writ of Error, and assigned the Infancy of the
other for Error, the Writ was abated because both did not join, 134 4. The
Defendants in the original Action must join in a Writ of Error; but it seems
otherwise where the Plaintiffs bring Error, 135 5. Two covenant to sell Lands,
and the Purchasor agreed to pay the Money to one of them, he alone ought to
bring the Action, 263 (6) Where there are several Proprietors of a Vessel for
carriage of Goods, which are damaged by carrying, the Action must be brought
against all or against the Master alone, 321, 322 (7) Where two Tenants in
Common were sued for not setting out of Tithes, the Action ought to be brought
not against him, who set them out, but against the other who carried them away,
322 8. Two are bound jointly, one is sued, he may plead in Abatement, that he
was bound with another, but cannot plead Non est factum, 323 (9) In all Cases
which are grounded upon Contracts, the Parties who are Privies, must be joined
in the Action, ibid. (10) Action must be brought against all where a promise is
created by Law, 324
Issue. Must be joined upon an affirmative, and a negative by concluding to the
Country, 80
Judges. The making, altering and displacing of several Judges, Sergeants at
Law and King's Council, 71, 99, 100, 104, 125, 143, 191, 239
Justices of Peace. Offenses against the Statute of 23 Eliz. c. 1. for not
coming to Church may be enquired of by them in their Sessions, 79 2. Where a
Statute appoints a thing finally to be done by them, yet the Court of King's
Bench may take Cognizance of it, 95 3. Conviction for keeping of a Gun before a
Justice of Peace, the time when he had not 100 l. per Annum must be precisely
alleged, 280
Justification, See Pleading 4, 5. Where it is pleaded by way of Excuse to an
Action of Trespass, for the taking of any thing, the Defendant must averr the
Fact to be done, and set forth the Warrant to him directed, and the taking
virtute Warranti, and not generally, that he took it by a Mandate, etc. 138 2.
In Replevin, where the Defendant made Conusance in right of the Lord, he may
Justify the taking generally, ibid.
Judgment. (1.) At the Common Law, no Execution could be of a Judgment after a
year and a day, but the remedy was to bring an Action of Debt upon Judgment,
187, 189 2. Now a Scire Fac. is given upon a Judgment after the year by the
Statue of W. 2. 189 (3.) When a Judgment is once execucuted, the Goods are in
custodia legis, and shall not be taken away by an Exchequer Process, or by the
Commissioners of Bankrupts, 236

L.
Lapse, See Notice. Lease. A Covenant in a Lease for years, that the Lessee
should pay the Rent without obliging his Executors or Administrators, it is
determined by his Death, 231 (2.) For 99 yeas, if three persons or any of them,
so long live, reserving a Rent, and an Herriot upon the death of either, the
Beast of the Assignee shall not be taken for a Herriot, for the Lessee is to
pay his best Beast, and that shall not be carried further than to the person
named, 231
Libel. Where a Fine and Corporal punishment was imposed upon the Offender
after Conviction, 68
Limitation. An Estate was settled upon Trustees, to the use of A. and her
Heirs, provided she marry with the consent of Trustees, remainder over to B.
This is a Limitation, and not a Condition, 32
Limitation of Action, See 21 Jac. 16. Where a Trespass is laid with a
continuando, for more than six years, and the Statute pleaded, and entire
Damages, it must be intended only for that which falls within the six years,
and that the Jury rejected the beginning of the Trespass, 111 2. This Statute
relates to a distinct, and not to a continued Account, 112 3. It provides a
Remedy when the Plaintiff is beyond Sea, at the time when his Right accrews,
and saves it, till he returns; whether it may be extended in a Case where the
Defendant is beyond Sea longer than six years, from the time the Plaintiff was
entitled to the Action, 311, 312
Local Actions. Whether Covenant will lie by an Assignee of a Reversion,
against an Assignee of a Lessee in any other place than where the Land lies,
337 (2.) Debitum and contractus sunt nullius loci, ibid. 3. Debt for Rent upon
a Lease for years brought upon the Contract and Covenant between the same
Parties, are transitory, ibid. 4. If Privity of Contract is gone by making an
Assignment and only a privity in Law remains, the Action must be brought in the
County where the Land lies, ibid.

M.
Mayor, See Corporation. Marriage, See Condition, 3. Evidence, 7. Limitation.
Notice A Maid above 12 and under 16 taken from Parents, or Guardian, and
Married, forfeits her Estate to the next in Remainder, during her Life, 84 2.
There must be proof of the Stealing an Heiress, either by slight or force, to
bring the person within the Statute of Phil. and Mar. 169 3. There must be a
continued disassent of the Parent or Guardian, for if she once agree, it is an
assent within the Statute, though she or they disagree afterward, 169 4.
Marriage de facto is triable in the Temporal Courts, but de Jure, in the
Spiritual Court only, 165
Mandamus. Denied to restore a person to a Fellowship of a College, 265 2.
Denied to restore a Proctor to his Office in Doctors Commons, 332 3. It has
been granted to restore an Attorney, 333 4. It will not lie to restore a Steward
of a Court Baron, 334
Master and Servant, See Robbery, 2. Where the Act of the Servant shall charge
the Master, 323 2. Where the Master may have an Action for a Robbery done upon
the Servant, 287
Melius Inquirendum. Not granted but for a Misdemeanour in the Jury, 80 2. It
never helps a defective Inquisition, 336 3. Whether it may be granted to a
Coroner in the Case of a Felo de se, who makes his Enquiry super visum
corporis, 238
Merchants, See Custom, Pleas and Pleading. Misfeazance. Not Guilty, is a good
Plea to any Misfeazance whatsoever, 324
Misprision of Clerk, See Amendment. Mistrial. It Is not a Mistrial where the
day and place of the Assizes is left out of the Distringas, for the Jurata is
the Warrant to try the Cause, 78
Mortuary. It Is not due, but by particular Custom of the Place, 268
Monopoly. The Definition of it, 131

N.
Ne exeat Regum. IS a Writ grounded upon the Common Law, and not given by any
particular Statute, 127 (2.) It was brought to prevent a person who had married
an Heiress without her Parents consent to go beyond Sea, 169
Nolle prosequi. Whether it may be entered after the Jury is sworn, 117
Non compos Mentis. If he releaseth his Right, that shall not bar the King, but
he shall seize his Lands during Life, 303 2. Surrender made by him is void, 305
3. He may purchase Lands, and may grant a Rentcharge out of his Estate, and
shall not plead Insanity to avoid his own Acts, 309
Notice, See Executor, 115. A Settlement was made in Trust for A. provided she
married with the consent of Trustees, Remainder to B. she married without
consent. Whether the Trustees ought not to give notice of this Settlement
before the Marriage? or whether the Estate is forfeited without notice? 29, 30
2. Where Conditions are annexed to Estates, to pay Money, notice is necessary,
but where Estates are limited upon performance of collateral acts, it is not
necessary, 30 3. Lapse shall not incur upon a Deprivation, but after notice
given to the Patron by the Ordinary himself, 31 4. The Heir himself ought to
have notice of such Conditions, which his Ancestor has put upon his Estate,
because he has a good title by descent, 34 5. Where it ought to be given of
Debts to an Executor, 115
Number. Where the singular number shall be intended by the plural; as by
Children is meant Child, 63

O.
Obligation, Obligor and Obligee. DEbt upon Bond will not lie before the day of
payment is past but it may be released before, 61 2. Where the Debt is
confessed under and Hand Seal, whether that will amount to an Obligation, 154
Office and Officer. Whether the Office of Marshal of B.R. can be granted in
Trust, 145 2. It cannot be granted for years, ibid. (3.) Non-Attendance,
whether a Forfeiture or not? 146 4. Non-Feazance is a Forfeiture, ibid. 5. It
lies in Grant, and cannot be transferred without Deed, 147 6. Neither a
Judicial or a Ministerial Officer may make a Deputy, unless there is an express
Clause in the Grant that it may be executed per se vel Deputatum, 147, 150 (7.)
Marshal of B. R. may grant that Office for Life, but cannot give the Grantee
power to make a Deputy, 147 8. That Office may be granted at will, 149 9.
Deputy may be made without Deed, 150
Ordinary. Probate of Wills did not originally belong to him, 24 (2.) He had no
power at Common Law over the Intestate's Estate, 25 (3.) An Action lay against
him at Common Law, if he got the Goods and refused to pay the Intestate's
Debts, 25 (4.) Was alone entrusted by the Common Law, as to the distribution of
the Intestates Estate, 59 (5.) Afterward by the Statute of W. 2. was bound to
pay Debts so far as he had Assets, 60 (6.) Then, and not before an Action of
Debt might be brought against him, if he did dispose the Goods without paying
Debts, ibid. (7.) By the Statute of the 31st of Ed. I. he was bound to grant
Administration to the next of Kin, ibid. 8. Afterward by the Statute of 21 H.
8. was compelled to grant it to the Widow or next of Kin or both, ibid. 9.
Before the Statute of Distributions he always took Bond of the Administrator to
distribute as the Ordinary should direct, ibid.
Outlary, See 5 Ed. 6. For Treason cannot be reversed without the Consent of
the Attorney General, 42 (2.) For Treason the Party was taken within the year,
but because he was apprehended, and did not render himself, he had not the
benefit of the Statute, 47 (3.) For Treason, and a Rule of Court for the
Execution of the person, 72 (4.) For Murder against three persons, it was
reversed, because it did not appear that the Court was held pro Comitatu; 2dly,
it is said Non comperuit, but does not say nee eorum aliquis comperuit, 90

P.
Pardon. THE King has power to pardon by general words, as felonica
interfectio for Murder, 37 (2.) Where his Power is restrained by Act of
Parliament, yet a Non obstante is a Dispensation to it, 38 3. A Suit was
commenced for Dilapidations, which is to have satisfaction for Damages
sustained, it is not pardoned by these general words, viz. Offenses, Contempts
and Penalties, 56 (4) If an Interest is vested in the King, a Pardon of all
Forfeitures will not divest it without particular words of Restitution, 101,
241, 242 5. An Exception in a Pardon ought to be taken as largely as the Pardon
it self, 242 6. A Pardon of all Offenses, except Offenses in collecting of the
King's Revenue, that must be of the stated Revenue, and not what arises by any
Forfeiture, ibid.
Parish, See Indictment. Parliament. Writ of Error upon a Judgment in B. R.
returnable in Parliament, Prorogued from the 28th of April to the 29th of
November, whether this was a Supersedeas to the Execution, because a whole Term
intervened between the Test and Return of the Writ of Error, 125
Pedigree. Where persons are named by way of Title, and where by way of
Pedigree, 255
Perjury, See Information. Pleading. In pleading of the Statute of Usury, you
must set forth, what Agreement was made, and what Sum was taken more than six
pound in the Hundred, 35 (2.) An Administrator pleaded a Judgment in Bar to an
Action of Debt for 100 l. brought against him, and that he had not Assets
praeterquam bona non attingen to 5 l. but did not show the certain value of the
Goods, and yet held good, ibid. 3. A Judgment upon a simple Contract may be
pleaded in Bar to an Action of Debt upon a Bond, 115 4. A Possession where
it is only an Inducement to a Plea and not Substance, the Defendant may justify
upon such a possession against a Wrong-doer, 132 5. Where a special
Justification is to an Action of Assault and false Imprisonment, the cause of
Commitment must be set forth in the Plea, 160 6. Where the defense consists in
matter of Law, the Defendant may plead specially, but when it is Fact he must
plead the geneal Issue, 166 7. Where special matter which might be given in
Evidence at the Trial, and which amounts to no more than the general Issue may
be pleaded, ibid. (8.) When a Man is brought into Court by Capias he ought to
plead instanter, because he has given delay to the Court, 215 9. So where he
appears upon Recognizance, or in propria persona, or is in Custody for any
Misdemeanour, he ought to plead instanter, ibid. 10. In Covenant to pay so much
Money to the Plaintiff or his Assigns as should be drawn upon the Defendant by
Bill of Exchange, he pleaded that the Plaintiff secundum legem mercatoriam did
assign the Money to be paid, etc. it ought to have been secundum consuetudinem
mercatoriam, 226, 227 11. If an Action is brought against an Innkeeper or
Common Carrier the Declaration must be secundum legem and consuetudinem
Angliae, 227 12. In Trespass the Plaintiff prescribed as to the Freehold, and
alleged a Custom in the Copyholders to have solam and separalem pasturam, etc.
whether he could make a joint Title in the same Declaration, by virtue of a
prescription and Custom, 250 13. If the Plea is double the Plaintiff ought to
demurr, 251 14. The Condition of a Bond was to acquit, discharge and save
harmless, Non damnificatus generally is not a good Plea without showing how
acquitted and discharged, 252 (15.) Mutuatus for 400 l. the Defendant pleaded
an Attainder of Treason in Abatement, the Plaintiff replied, that after the
Attainder and before the Action he was pardoned, etc. and concludes unde petit
Judicium and dampna sua; for this cause Replication was held ill, 281
Pledges, See Replevin. Replevin in an inferior Court by Pleint removed in B.
R. the Plaintiff was nonsuited, and a Sci. Fac. brought against his Pledges,
and held good, 58 2. There are no Pledges of Returno Habend' at the Common Law,
the Sheriff was not obliged to take Pledges in a Replevin by Plaint, 75
Poor. A Man had 5 l. to remove out of one Parish into another, who gave Bond
to repay it, if he returned within forty days, he stayed there so long, and it
was held a good Settlement, 67 2. A Note in writing must now be left pursuant
to the Statute to make a Settlement, 247
Possession. It Is sufficient to maintain an Action against a Wrong-doer, 48
Prerogative. Whether a Lease was made pursuant to a Power in a Proviso to make
Leases for three Lives or 21 years, or for any Term upon three Lives, the Lease
made was for 99 years determinable upon three Lives, 268, 269
Power. In granting of Letters Patents of the sole printing exclusive of all
others, 76, 129 (2.) Where no individual person can claim a Right or Property
it must be vested in the King by Law, 76 3. Whether the King has a Prerogative
to restrain Trade to a particular number of Men in particular places, 127 4. He
may command his Subjects to return out of a Foreign Nation, ibid. 5. He may
regulate Trade by Letters Patents,
Prescription, See Common 2. Pleading 12. For a way he may set forth his Estate
without showing how he came by it, 52 2. Where it cannot be by a Que Estate to
have Retorna Brevium, 200 3. Where it may be to hold Pleas, Leets and Hundreds
without matter of Record, 201 4. For all the Tenants of a Manor to fowl in a
Free Warren, this Prescription is not too large, it might not be good upon a
Demurrer, but it is otherwise after a Verdict, 246 5. For a Profit apprender in
alieno solo, the Tenants of a Manor may prescribe by a Que estate exclusive of
the Lord, ibid. (6.) There must be a certain and permanent Interest abiding in
some person to maintain a Prescription, and therefore it will not lie ratione
commorantiae, 290 7. To have Common sans number is good, but ad libitum suum
which is almost the same thing, is void, ibid. (8.) It may be joined with a
Custom in the same Declaration, 251 9. Where it is laid in a discharge, as to be
exempted from Toll, or for an easment, as for a Way to a Church, not only a
particular person, but the Inhabitants of a whole Vill may prescribe; but where
it relates to the Profit or Interest in the Land it self, it is not so, 292
Presentment. In a Court Leet which concerns the person and not the Freehold,
whether traversable, 137, 138
Privity of Contract, See Local Action 4. Action against an Administratrix of a
Term for Rent incurred after the Assignment of the Lease, the Privity of
Contract of the Intestate was not determined by his death, but Administratrix
shall be charged with his Contracts as long as she has Assets, 326 It Is not
gone either by an Assignment of the Term or death of the Lessor, neither is it
transferred to the Assignee by the Statute of H. 8. for that Statute only
annexeth such Covenants which concern the Land with the Reversion, 337, 338
Proof, See Prohibition. Prohibition. Not to be granted because a Temporal Loss
may ensue, 67 (2.) Where some words are actionable at Law, and some punishable
in the Spiritual Court, a Prohibition shall be granted, for otherwise it would
be a double vexation, 74 (3.) Libel causa jactationis maritagii the Suggestion
for a Prohibition was, that he was indicted at the Old Bailey for marrying two
Wives, that he was convicted in a Court of that Offense which had a proper
Jurisdiction, etc. and a Prohibition was granted, 164 4. A person lived in one
Diocese, and occupied Lands in another, where he was taxed toward the finding
of Bells for that Church, for which a Suit was commenced in the Bishop's Court
where the Lands were, and he suggested the Statute of H. 8. that no Man shall
be cited out of his Diocese, except for some Spiritual Cause neglected to be
done there, and a Prohibition was granted, for this was not a Spiritual Cause
neglected to be done, because Church Ornaments are a personal Charge upon the
Inhabitants, and not upon the Land Owners who dwell else where, but the
repairing of the Church is a real Charge upon the Land. 211 5. Not granted for
Mariners Wages, 244 6. Libel for a Tax upon the Parishioners for not repairing
of their Church, who suggest that they had a Chapel of Ease in the same
Parish; the Prohibition was denied, for of common right they ought to repair
the Mother Church, 264 7. Proof of Matter of Fact by one Witness denied to be
allowed in the Spiritual Court is a good cause for a Prohibition, 284 8. Where
the Release of a Legacy offered to be proved by one Witness was denied in the
Spiritual Court, ibid. (9.) Proof of Payment or Subtraction of Tithes denied,
and a Prohibition granted, ibid. 10. Whether a Prohibition ought to be allowed
after Sentence, an Appeal being then the more proper remedy, 284
Property, See Interest.
Q.
Quorum. MUst be one Justice of the Peace of the Quorum otherwise cannot be a
Sessions, 14, 152
Quantum meruit. Will lie for Rent reserved upon a real Contract where the Sum
is not certain, but if a Sum in gross is reserved then Debt must be brought, 73

R.
Record. ERror shall not be assigned against the Essence of a Record, 141
Recovery Common. Reversed without a Scire Facias to the Tertenants, but it
seems not to be good, 119 2. For there must be a Scire Facias against the Heir
and Tertenants when a Writ of Error is brought to reverse it, 274
Relation. Where an Estate shall pass by Relation, where not, 299, 300
Release. Of a Legacy by one Executor, and also of all Actions, Suits and
Demands whatsoever, those general words which follow are tied up to the Legacy,
and release nothing else, 277 2. Of a Demand will not discharge a growing Rent,
278 3. A Receipt was given for 10 l. in which there was a Release of all
Actions, Debts, Duties and Demands, nothing is released but the 10 l. 277 4.
Judgment against four Defendants, who all joined in a Writ of Error, and the
Plaintiff pleaded a Release of Errors by one, it shall not discharge the rest
of a personal thing, but if there had been four Plaintiffs to recover, the
Release or death of one is a Bar to all, 109, 135, 249 5. A Release of all
Actions will discharge an Award of Execution upon a Scieri Facias, 185, 187 6.
Of all Actions and Demands does not discharge a Legacy, it must be by
particular words, 279 7. One of the Defendants, who made Conusance, released
the Plaintiff after the taking of the Cattle, this was held void upon a
Demurrer, for he had no Demand or Suit against the Plaintiff, having distrained
in the right of another, ibid.
Remainder, See Entry 3. Fines levied 4. Must take place eo instanti the
particular Estate is determined, or else it can never arise, 309 2. By the
Conveyance of the Reversion in Fee to him, who had the Estate for Life before
the Birth of a Son, the particular Estate is merged, and all contingent
Remainders are thereby destroyed, 311
Replevin. Where it is brought by Writ the Sheriff cannot make deliverance
without the taking of Pledges de prosequendo and retorn' Habend', 35
Replication. Where the Plaintiff confesses and avoideth he ought not to
traverse, for that would make his Replication double, 318
Request. When a thing is to be done upon Request, the time when the person
requires it to be done is the time of the performance, 295
Reservation. Of a Rent upon a Lease for three years payable at Michaelmas and
Lady Day, Debt was brought for 2 years without showing at which of the Feasts
it was due, it is good after, Verdict but ill upon a Demurrer, 70
Resignation, See Abeiance. To the Ordinary, and Patron presented, 'ts void if
the Ordinary did not accept the Resignation. 297
Reversion, See Bargain and Sale. Surrender 2. Tenant in Tail, who had likewise
the Reversion in Fee, if he acknowledge a Judgment the Reversion may be
extended, 256 2. But a Reversion in Fee, expectant upon an Estate Tail, is not
Assets; until it comes into possession, 257 3. By what words a Reversion in Fee
passes in a Will, 228
Revocation. A Will shall not be revoked by doubtful words, 206 (2.) It might
be revoked by Word without Writing before the Statute of Frauds, 207 3. Before
that Statute a Will might be revoked by a subsequent Will, which was void in it
self, yet good to revoke the former, 207, 218 (4.) A subsequent Will which does
not appear shall not be any Revocation of a written Will which does appear,
204, 205, 206 5. Whether a subsequent Will which is void in it self may revoke
another since the Statute of Frauds, 218 6. Such a Will must be good in all
circumstances to revoke a former, 260, 261
Riot, See Information. Robbery. The Hundred was sued, and it did not appear
that the Parish where the Fact was laid to be done was in the Hundred, or that
it was done upon the High way, or in the day time, this was helped after
Verdict, 258 (2.) A Servant delivered Money to a Quaker to carry home for his
Master, they were both robbed, viz. the Servant of 26 s. and the Quaker of 106
l. the Servant made Oath of the Robbery, and the Quaker refused, the Master
brought the Action, it does not lie for him, 287, 288

S.
Scire Facias See Bail 3, 4. Baron and Feme 1, 4, 5. Judgment 2. Pledges 1.
Recovery. MUst be to the Tertenants before the Common Recovery shall be
reversed by Writ of Error, 119 (2.) Scieri Facias quare Executionem non habet
recites the first Judgment, but prays no new thing, only to have Execution upon
that Judgment, 187 3. It Is not an original but a judicial Writ and depends upon
the first Judgment, 187 4. It Is suspended by Writ of Error and if the original
Judgment is reversed that is so also, ibid. 5. Debt will lie upon a Judgment
had on a Scire Facias, 188, 189 6. A Judgment upon a Scire Facias is a distinct
Action from the original cause, 189 7. Judgment in Dower and a Writ of Enquiry
of Damages, the Woman marries and dies before the Writ of Enquiry executed, the
Husband administered and brought a Scire Facias upon the Judgment, whether it
lies or not, 281
Sergeants at Law, See Judges. Surplusage, See Inquisition. Steward, See Court.
Supersedeas, See Parliament. Surrender, See Assent 1, 2. Where it may be
pleaded without an acceptance, 297 2. No man can take it but he who has the
immediate Reversion, 299 3. If pleaded without an Acceptance it is aided after
Verdict, which shows it is no Substance, 301 4. By one Non compos mentis it is
void ab initio, 303

T.
Tail. DEvise to D. for Life, the Remainder to her first Son and the Heirs of
the Body of such first Son (endorsed thus) viz. Memorandum, that D. shall not
alien from the Heirs Males of her Body, she had a Son who had Issue a Daughter,
it is not an Estate Tail Male, for the Memorandum shall not alter the Limitation
in the Will it self, 81, 83 (2.) The Testator had two Sons and four Daughters,
he devised a House to his eldest Son; and if he die then he devised his Estate
to his four Daughters; and if all his Sons and Daughters died without Issue
then to A. and her Heirs, this is not an Estate Tail in the Daughters by
Implication, 105 3. Where a Devise is to several persons by express Limitation,
and a Proviso if all die without Issue of their Bodies, the Remainder over,
this is no cross Remainder, or an Estate by Implication, because it is a Devise
to them severally by express Limitations, 106 (4.) Devise to his eldest Son,
and if he die without Heirs Males (but does not say of his Body) then to his
other Son, etc. it is an Estate Tail in the eldest, 123
Tenant in Common. A Devise to hold by equal parts makes a Tenancy in Common,
so that there can be no Survivorship in such case, 210
Tenant at Will. Cestuy que Trust by Deed is Tenant at Will to the Trustees,
149 (2.) Where a Grant by Tenant at Will though void amounts to a determination
of his Will, 150 3. Whether Tenant at Will can grant over his Estate, ibid. 4.
What Act shall amount to the determination of his Will, ibid. 5. Any thing is
sufficient to make an Estate at Will, 196 6. Tenant in Fee made a Lease for 100
years in Trust to attend the Inheritance, and continued still in Possession, he
is Tenant at Will to the Lessee for 100 years, and if he make any Lease, and
levy a Fine Sur Cognizance, etc. the first Lease is displaced, and turned to a
Right, and the Fine bars it, 196
Trade See Grants 2. Prerogative 3, 5. Indictment 12. Information 7.
Confinement of Staple to certain places was the first regulation of Trade, and
from thence came Markets, 127 (2.) The King is sole Judge where Fairs or
Markets ought to be kept, ibid. (3.) Custom to restrain a Man from using of a
Trade in a particular place is good, 128 (4.) A Man may restrain himself by
Promise or Obligation not to use a Trade in a particular place, ibid. (5.)
Regulation of Trade is the chief end of Incorporations, ibid. (6.) Such
incorporate Bodies have an inherent power to judge what persons are fit to use
Trades within their Jurisdictions, ibid. (7.) Whether Grants of the King
prohibiting Trade are void, 131 (8.) Cannot be restrained by any By-Law, 159 9.
At the Common Law any Man might exercise any Trade he please, 312 10.
Petty-Chapmen are not within the Statute of 5 Eliz. 315 (11.) Journymen who
work for hire are not within the Statute, but the Master who sets them to work
and pays their Wages is punishable, 316, 317 (12.) Subject has not power
absolutely to trade without the King's License. 127
Travers, See Ieofails 3. Presentment. Replication. Cannot be to a Return of a
Writ of Restitution, 6 2. He who traverseth the King's Title must show a Title
in himself, 146 (3.) After a Travers it is not good pleading to conclude to the
Country, 203 4. Not concluding with a Travers is but matter of form, it is aided
by the Statute of Ieofails upon a Demurrer, 319 5. Want of a Travers seldom
makes a Plea ill in substance, but an ill Travers often makes it so, 320 (6.)
It must be taken where the thing traversed is issuable, 320
Treason, See Outlawry. Attainder of Treason reversed because on arraignment or
demanding Judgment, and because there was Process of Ve. fa. instead of a
Capias, and likewise for that it did not appear that the Party was asked what
he had to say why Sentence, etc. 265
Trespass. For breaking and entering a Free Fishery, and taking the Fish, ipsius
querentis not good, for he had not such a Property as to call the Fish his own,
97 (2.) In Trespass Quare vi and armis clausum fregit, to his Damage of 20 s.
an Action lies, let the Damage be never so little, 275
Trial, See Appeal, 2, 3. Election, 1. Where the Trial and conviction of a
Criminal is had he must be executed in that County, and not elsewhere, unless
in Middlesex by prerogative of B. R. which sits in that County, 124 2. Where
the Court refused to grant a new Trial in a Case where excessive Damages are
given, 101
Trover and Conversion. Judgment in Trespass is no Bar to an Action of Trover
for the same Goods, 1 (2.) They are different Actions in their very nature, 2
(3.) It lies upon a demand and denial, but Trespass does not, ibid. 4. Trover
pro diversis aliis bonis has been held good, 70 5. It Is a good Plea in Trover
to say that Damages were recovered against another Person for the same Goods,
and the Defendant in execution, though the money is not paid, 86 6. Whether it
lies for taking a Ship after a Sentence in the Admiraly for taking the said
Ship, 194 7. Brought by two, and after Verdict one died, whether Judgment shall
be arrested, 249

V.
Variance, See Appeal, 1. Apportionment, 2. BEtween the Original in Trespass
and the Declaration, that being certified three Terms past, and no
Continuances, for that reason not good, 136 2. Between Original and the
Declaration, not aided by the Statutes of Jeofailes, ibid. 3. Sci. fa. to have
execution of a Judgment obtained in the Court of Oliver late Protector of
England, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and in reciting
the Judgment, it was said to be obtained before Oliver, late Protector of
England, and the Dominions, etc. but left out Territories, this was held to be
good in substance, for the Judicature is still the same, 227
Venire Facias. The Court would not order the Plaintiff to file a Ve. fa. 246
Verdict, See Assumpsit, 2. Action for a Tort, 5. Amendment, 1.6. Common, 3.
Evidence, 6. Prescription, 4. Reservation, 1. Robbery, 1. Surrender, 3. The
true reason why it helps a defective Declaration, 162 (2.) A Promise to pay
quantum rationabiliter valerent instead of valebant, at the time of the
promise, good after Verdict, 190 3. It cannot be diminished, neither can any
thing be added to it, 205 4. An Hundred was sued for a Robbery, and though it did
not appear that the Fact in the Declaration mentioned was done in the Hundred,
or that the Robbery was in the Highway, or done in the daytime, yet good after
a Verdict, 258 5. The Defendant sold Cattle, affirming 'em to be his own, ubi
revera they were not; but it is not said that he affirmed them to be his own
sciens the same to be the Goods of another, or that he sold them fraudulenter
vel deceptive, yet good after Verdict, 261
Vicaridge. It Is not sufficient to allege Seisin in Fee of a Rectory, and that
he ought to present to the Vicaridge, but he must say that he is Impropriator,
or that he was seized in Fee of a Rectory impropriate, 295
Visitor. No Appeal lies from his Sentence, for he is Fidei Comissarius,
especially in the Case of a Fellow of a College which is a thing of private
design, and does not concern the Public, 265
Use. If a Letter of Attorney is in a Deed, or a Covenant to make Livery,
nothing passes by way of Use, 237

W.
Ways, See Action for wrong, 9. Prescription, 1. IN Actions for not repairing
them, it must be alleged that the Defendant reparare debet, 291 (2.) Action on
the Case does not lie by any particular person for not repairing, unless he
has a particular damage, but an Indictment is te proper remedy, ibid. 3.
Custom for all occupyers of a Close in such a Parish to have a Foot-way, not
good, for the Plaintiff ought to prescribe in him, who has the Inheritance, 294
Waste, See Baron and Feme, 7. It lay at Common Law only against Tenant by the
Courtesy, or in Dower, 90 2. It was given by the Statute of Gloucester against
Tenant for life, or years, and treble Damages, ibid. 3. It lies against an
Executor de son tort of a Term for years, 93 (4.) It lies against an
Administrator of a rightful Executor, though the Statute does charge only
Executors de son tort, and Administrators, that they shall be liable as the
Executor or intestate, 113
Wills, See Exposition, Devise. A subsequent Will may be made so as to consist
and stand with a former, 204 (2.) It may also revoke part, and confirm part of
aformer Will, ibid. 3. If two Wills are made without Dates, they are both void,
otherwise of Codicils, 208 4. Two Witnesses to a Will and two to a Codicil
annexed to the same Will, one of the Witnesses to the Codicil was a Witness to
the Will, the third person is not a good Witness to the Will, for he never did
see it, 262
Witnesses. A Witness at a Trial had made a Bargain with the Plaintiff who
promised her 1000 l. if she recovered; she was not allowed to be sworn, 85 2.
Informer shall be a good Witness to convict a Man for Deer-stealing, though he
has a Moiety of the Forfeiture, 114, 115 3. The Patry to an Usurious Contract,
shall not be a Witness to prove the Usury, for he is testis in propria causa,
114

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-Luce over
against St. Dunstan 's Church in Fleet Street.
Law Books.
THE Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight, late one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in two Parts. The first containing select Cases adjudged in the
King's Bench, in the Reign of King Charles II. The Second Part, containing
choice Cases, adjudged in the Common Pleas, in the Reign of King Charles II.
and King James II. and in the three first years of his now Majesty King William
and the late Queen Mary, while he was a Judge in the said Court, with the
Pleadings to the same; with the allowance and Approbation of the Lord Keeper
and all the Judges. Tho Volumes. Folio. Price 1 l. 10 s.

The Second Part of Modern Reports, being a Collection of several special
Cases, most of them adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas in the 26, 27, 28,
29, and 30 Years of the Reign of King Charles II. when Sir Francis North was
Chief Justice of the said Court: To which are added several select Cases in the
Courts of Chancery, King's Bench and Exchequer; Carefully collected by a Learned
Hand. Printed School. Price 12 s.

The Lord Coke's Reports in English. Folio. Judge Crook's Reports in three
Volumes, the third Edition, with Reference to all the Late Reports.

The Lord Coke's Commentary on Littleton Folio.

-- His Commentary on Magna Charta. Folio.

-- His Pleas of the Crown, or the third part of the Institutes. Folio.

-- His Jurisdiction of Courts, or fourth part of the Institutes.

-- His Eleven Reports in French. Folio. Bulstrode's Reports with new
References. Folio.

Leonard's Reports in Four Parts, with New References. Folio.

The Year-Books in ten Volumes, the last Edition, with new Notes and Tables to
them all. Folio.

The Reports of the Lord Keeper Littleton, in the time of King Charles the
First, Folio.

The Reports of the Learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobert, the Fourth Edition
corrected and amended. Folio.

Reports in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, from the 12th to the 30th
Year of King Charles the Second: By Joseph Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire; In three
Volumes. Folio.

Kelway's Reports, with new References to all the late Reports; By Joseph
Washington, Esquire;

Reports of several especial Case in the Court of Common Pleas, in the Reign of
King Charles the II. By S. Carter of the Inner Temple, Esquire; Folio.

An Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier performance of their
Duty: the first part containing the particular Clauses of all such Statutes,
from Magna Charta, until the first of King James II. that do any ways concern a
Justice of Peace; in the other Part, the whole Office of a Justice of Peace is
methodically digested, with the most approved Presidents under proper Heads; to
which is now added a Table for the ready finding out the Presidents, with a
large Table of the Matters never before Printed: By Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn,
Esquire.

An exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, being of great Use
for all that are concerned in Parliamentary Affairs, and Professors of the Laws
of this Realm: Collected by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet. Folio.

The Commentary of Edward Plowden, Esquire; with References: whereunto is added his
Quaeries. Fol.

The Laws of Jamaica in II. Parts, in Fol. with a large Map of the Island.

An exact Abridgment of the Statutes of King William and Queen Mary, and of
King William III. in Force and use. Begun by Joseph Washington of the
Middle Temple Esp; and since his Death revised and continued to the End of the
last Sessions of Parliament, April 27. 1696. And thence continued to the 5th of
July, School. 8vo. Price 6 s. 6 d.

The Scrivener's Guide; being choice and approved Forms of Precedents of all
sorts of Business now in Use and Practice, in a much better Method than any yet
Printed: being useful for all Gentlemen, but chiefly those who Practice the
Law. 8vo. Price 5 s. Styles's Practical Register; begun in the Reign of King
Charles the First, Consisting of Rules, Orders, and principal Observations
concerning the Practice of the Common Law in the Courts of Westminster,
particularly the King's Bench, as well in Matters Criminal as Civil: Carefully
continued down to this time. The third Edition. 8vo. Price 6 s.

An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Form and Use, from the beginning of
Magna Charta; begun by Edmund Wingate, and since continued by J. Washington, to
the Year 1689. In this Impression many hundred of false References are
corrected, Price, 7 s.

Two Dialogues in English between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student of the
Laws of England, of the Grounds of the said Laws, etc. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The New Natura Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitzherbert,
Corrected and revised.

The Laws against Bankrupts, or a Treatise wherein the Statutes against
Bankrupts are explained: By T. Gooding, Sergeant at Law, 8vo.

The Entering Clerk's Vade Mecum; being an Exact Collection of Presidents, in
8vo. By W. Brown.

Divinity and Miscellanies.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem:
dedicated to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more
difficult Matters in the whole History. Also a Prefatory Discourse concerning
Heroic Poetry. The second Edition revised by the Author, and improved with the
Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters;
with sixty Copper Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorn. Fol.

The Pious Communicant rightly prepared; Or, a Discourse concerning the Blessed
Sacrament; where the Nature of it is described; our Obligation to frequent
Communion enforced, and Directions given for due Preparation for it, Behavior
at, and after it, and profiting by it. With Prayers and Hymns, suited to the
several parts of that Holy Office. To which is added a short Discourse of
Baptism. With a Letter concerning Religious Societies. In Twelves. By Samuel
Wesley, A. M. Chaplain to the most Honorable John Lord Marquess of Normanby,
and Rector of Epworth in the Diocese of Lincoln: Author of the Life of our
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In Folio.

The Second and third part of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The second
containing what was written and published by himself in his younger Years,
Reprinted together: The sixth Edition. The third Part containing his six Books
of Plants, viz. The first and second of Herbs, the third and fourth of Flowers,
the fifth and sixth of Trees: Now made English by several Hands, with necessary
Tables to both Parts, and diverse Poems in praise of the Author. Folio.

The Lives of the Roman Emperors from Domitian, where Suetonius ends, to
Constantine the Great. Containing those of Nerva and Trajan, from Dion Cassius:
A Translation of the Six Writers of the Augustean History. And those of
Dioclesian and his Associates, from Eusebius and others: with the Heads of the
Emperors in Copper Plates: Dedicated to His most Sacred Majesty in two Volumes.
By J Bernard, A.M.

Resolves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions, in Prose and
Verse. In this Eleventh Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations
heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham, Esquire. Folio Price 12 s.

The Works of the Famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Newly and faithfully Translated into English. Folio. Price 15 s.

The Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous
Civilian, Sam. Puffendorf; now made English. 8vo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic, being the whole Works of that Eamous
Physician, rendren into English: second Edition, with forty Copper Plates. Fol.

The Historical and Miscellanious Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Peter
Heylin, D. D. now collected into one Volume. And an Account of the Life of the
Author, never before published. Folio.

The Religion of Protestants, a Safe way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the
Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which in
this Edition is added his Letter, showing the Reason why he left Popery. Folio.

The History of Queen Elizabeth, by W. Cambden, King at Arms. Fourth Edition.
Folio.

An Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of
the Scotch Rebellon in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First.
Fol. In two Volumes. By Dr. Nalson.

Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Folio. In three Volumes.

The History of King Edward II. King of England, and Lord of Ireland, Folio.

Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic. 8vo. With his Treatise of the Plague. Price
7 s.

Arithmetic; Or, the Ground of Arts: Teaching that Science, both in whole
Numbers and Fractions, Theorically and Practically. Originally Composed by Dr.
Record, and others: And now Perused, Corrected, new Methodized, much Improved:
And thereunto added a New Treatise of Decimals, with the Demonstration of each
Rule, and the relation it has to Vulgar Fractions; Also why Decimals are
wrought as whole Numbers, etc. By Edw. Hatton, Philomercat. Price 5 s.

Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience required of the Subject,
with a large Preface by Bishop Sanderson. 8vo.

Animadversions on a Book, Entitled The Theory of the Earth. By Herbert Lord
Bishop of Hereford.

School-Books.
LInguae Romanae Dictionarium Luculentum Novum: A New Dictionary in five
Alphabets: representing, 1st The English Words and Phrases before the Latin. 2.
The Latin Classic before the English. 3. The Latin Proper Names of Persons,
Counties, etc. 4. The Latin barbarous. 5. The Law Latin. The whole completed
and improved from the several Works of Stevens, Cooper, Gouldman, Holyoke, Dr.
Littlenon; a Large Manuscript in three Volumes of Mr. John Milton, etc. In the
use of all which, for greater Exactness, recourse has always been had to the
Authors themselves, in 4to.

Cole's Dictionary in 8vo, English and Latin, and Latin and English.

The Pantheon. Representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes, in a short, plain, and familiar Method; by way of
Dialogue: Written by F. Pomey, for the use of Schools. The second Edition.
Wherein the whole Translation is Revised and much amended, and the Work is
Illustrated and Adorned with Elegant Copper-Cuts of the several Deities. 8vo.
Price 3 s.

English Examples to Lily's Grammar Rules for Childrens Latin Exercises, with
an Explanation to each Rule. For the Use of Eaton-School.

Gratii Falisci Cynegeticon, cum Poematio Cognomine M. A. Olympii Nemesiani
Carthaginensis: Notis perpetuis, variisque Lectionibus adornavit Thomas Johnson
M. A. Accedunt Hier. Fracastorii Alcon, Carmen Pastoritium: Jo. Caii, Angli, de
Canibus Libellus: Ut and Opusculum vetus (...) dict. seu, de Cura canum,
Incerto Auctore. In Usum Illiustrissimi Ducis Glocestriae.


