Otto Tachenius his Hippocrates Chymicus Discovering The Ancient foundation of
the late Viperine Salt with his Clavis thereunto annexed Translated by J.J.V.

London Printed and are to be sold by W: Marshall at the Bible in Newgate
street. 1690



TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THe Author of these Ensuing Discourfes, who is, as it is hoped, yet Living at
Venice, has his Name in an high degree of Merit amongst the Prime Physicians
and Chemists of this Age; His knowledge in the Spagyrical Art (in the judgment
of those Emunct and Sagacious persons, who have Studied the Controversy
betwixt Them) far exceeding That of Zwelfer, his Antagonist; who during this
whole Treatife, goes under the name of the Reformer, for the reason mentioned
p. 2. The Translation it Self was not performed without Labor and Sweat,
partly because the Editions which were made use of, one from Brunswick, the
other from Leyden, were very unperfect and incorrect; partly also, because, The
Author being more intent on Matter than Words, on Things than Expressions ('it is
his own Apology, p. 4.) does sometimes leave his Sense to be picked out by the
Analogy of his Doctrine. If morose and supercilious Censurers shall object
Impoliteness, Solaecisme, Inept Cadencys and Cohaesions of Words and Sentences;
Obscurities, length of Parentheses's, and other flawes usually incident, or at
least imputed to Translations: In bar to such Hypercriticks, I offer the
particulars following, viz. That every Language has its Idiom, which is not
properly transferrable to another; That a Translator is no Paraphrast, but
being limited to the Sense, and in great part confined to the Words of his
Author, has no allowable Liberty to make Excursions, or to add any explanatory
Embellishments to another Man's Work: It is his Province to write by the Copy
before him (i. e.) to Vestigate and Overtake the Author's Sense, and faithfully
to render it; which I hope is here, not unhappily performed; As for the
Obscurity objected, The Doctrine it self must bear part of the Guilt (if any
he) For That being Novel, or at least retrived from Antiquity, may not perhaps
be so clearly and Apodictically explained in a Compendium (which the Author
intimates more than once) as to stop the Mouths of all Gainsayers, though
plainly enough (especially with the addition of the Clavis) to satisfy the
Reasons, and convince the Judgments of Candid and Ingenious Readers. Lastly,
Since it is an easy thing to be Witty in another Man's Labor, I shall conclude
with the Poet,

Carpere vel noli nostra, velede Tua.
J. W.

PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THis Book, as to the Translation of it, has been sufficiently perused,
justified, and approved by some of the most learned and experienced Chemists in
and about this City: As to the Matter of it, it needs no other Commendation
than the long since allowed and printed Observation and Approbation of the
Royal Society of England, in these words;

Philosophical Transactions, Aug. 16. 1669. Number. 50. page 1019.

OTTO NISTACHENII Hippocrates Chymicus Venetiis in 12o.

THis Author, though Printed two or three years ago, came not to our Knowledge,
till now: He in his Tract endeavors to justify the Ancients blamed by Zwelfer
in his Pharmacopaea Augustana, for having committed several Faults in the
preparation of a certain Salt called Theriacal, because extracted out of
Vipers, and diverse other Ingredients composing Theriack; and having done this,
he thence takes occasion to Treat of the Nature of Salts, especially of
Alcalyes and Acids, which he, with some other Chemists, hold to be the first
Principles of all mixed Bodies: And being persuaded that Hippocrates was also of
this opinion, and a great Chemist too, he Entitles His Book Hippocrates
Chymicus.

Though the Salt Alcaly properly signifies that Salt which is drawn out of the
Ashes of an Egyptian Herb, named Kaly; yet Chemists take it in a larger Sense,
and understand by that Word all the Salts, which, like that of the said Herb,
draw and impregnate themselves with, Acid ones. To this Salt our Author refers
almost all the Operations of Nature, and having examined its properties,
relates diverse, not Uncurious Observations concerning it.

For Example, That nothing pierces so much as Alcalyes, and that therefore
Nature has stored the Sweat of Animals so plentifully with it, for that the
Ordure which continually gathers on the Skin, would soon stop the pores of it,
if the Sweat were not furnished with some efficatious Dissolvent to open and
pierce Them; Whence he observes, that the best liquored Boots, and such as are
Water-proof, will be quickly pierced by the sweat of Horses; adding, that
though Riding-post, he had, to avoid that inconvenience, rubhed his Boots with
a Vernice, which resisted even to Aqua Fortis, yet the Sweat of the Horses he
rode on dissolved that fence after the second day of his Voyage.

Next, He holds it to be an error to use Spirit of Vitriol for whitening the
Teeth, Experience showing that from the mixture of an Alcaly and the Spirit of
Vitriol, there results a yellow; and that there is an Alcaly, continually
transpiring out of the Gums, as out of all the other parts of the Body; whence
it must follow that the Spirit of Vitriol employed to rub the Teeth, when mixed
with that Salt, must tinge them of the same color.

Then he affirms, that Wood rotten has no Alcaly in it, and that it rots not,
but upon the account of the exhaling of that Salt, Whence it is (says he) That
the Venetians to harden the Timber designed for building of Ships, sink it
green in Water, and there leave it many years, which is the cause, That the
Alcaly having been hindered from exhaling, the Timber rots not, but becomes as
hard in a manner as Stone.

We cannot pretermit taking notice, That this Author finds occasion in this
Book to explain the way by which the Famous Turnheiser, a Germane Chemist made
that celebrated Nail, half Gold and half Iron; which is showed at Florence in
the Repository of the Great Duke of Tuscany. It Is said, that That Chemist,
having in the presence of that Prince, immersed in a certain Oil, the one half
of a Nail which appeared to be all Iron, that part which touched the Oil, was
instantly found to be good Gold: Several persons having examined this Nail, and
seeing the Gold and Iron, exceeding well conjoined, were persuaded that it
could not well be effected, but by a true change of one of those two Metals
into the other; believing it impossible they could be Sodered together. But the
Author of this Book makes that a very easy thing, if the Iron be before
prepared after a certain manner, which He teaches; and He pretends, That That
was the whole Secret of Turnheiser, the rest being nothing but Illusion; for
after he had by that means Sodered together a piece of Gold with half a Nail,
He knew so well to give the color of Iron to Gold, that Men believed that the
whole Nail was of Iron; and having afterward put this Nail into the Fire, and
held it in the Oil, to take off that color, he made appear that Gold, which
was hid before.

To the Most Serene and Mighty PRINCES, The LORDS George William, John
Frederick, Ernest Augustus,
Brethren.
By the Grace of GOD, DUKES of Brunswick and Lunenburg, etc. His Most Bonntiful
LORDS.
POndering often in my Mind (High and Mighty Princes, and my Noble Patrons) the
Great and many Favors which Your Grand and Princelike Liberality has most
Graciously heaped upon me, and thereby Eternally obliged me to Your
Excellencies; I became solicitous and concerned in my thoughts, with what
Veneration and Industry of Wit (answerable to the Obsequiousness of my Devoted
mind) I might declare by some Testimony, at least, an endeavor of Gratitude
for Your Benefits bestowed upon me. It Is the guise of Others in Dedicating
their Lucubrations to Princes and Nobles, chiefly to concern themselves in
Blazoning their Genealogies, and in Decyphering their Praises and Heroic Acts,
in an high Method of Elegancy, thereby extolling them (as we say) with an open
mouth to the Skies. But I (well knowing that the full-blown Elogies of
Talkative Fame, do displease Your Excellencies, especially since glorious and
memorable Virtue it self, for so many Ages backward (together with Magnanimous
Bounty) have flourished in the most August House of Brunswick and Lunenburg,
and by God's Blessing will ever flourist in the same) I, I say, waving
therefore all such Proceedure do come only furnished with a gift not large, nor
great (though you are worthy of both) nor glittering with Gold, Silver, or
Precious Stones, Ornaments which (Divine Bounty has abundantly replenished
Your Highnesses withal, but) are denied to me, and persons of my condition:
Mine is only a Paper gift, but extracted from the true Protochymick Art, which
is most Ancient, and has more in the Recess than it promises in the Front: Yea
it is That, by which the uncreated Spirit, the Founder of the World d^d order
and distinguish the (otherwise) confused Natures of things. Hereupon I
persuaded my Self, that I could offer no gift more grateful to Your Highnesses,
than a new work of this most Vetust, yet Wonderful and Necessary Science. A
Work most curious in it self, which hitherto Envy has forborne to restore, and
to gratify the World with: For although the unconquerable Truth comes commended
only by its own strength, and is sufficiently fortified by its proper and
native Vigor (for nothing can subsist, which is not firmed in the very
Foundation of Nature) and so enjoys this invincible Patronage; yet the plain
Purity of my Writings being Dedicated to Your Eminencies, and thereby armed
with so great Splendour, thus doubly strengthened, will appear more boldly in
the sight of the World. Accept therefore (most Noble Princes) this Diminutive
Gift for the bare Title's sake, and go on, if not entirely to love, yet
somewhat to respect and favor,

VENICE the Ides of May, 1666. Your Highnesses most Devoted Servant, OTHO
TACHENIVS.

The PREFACE to the Courteous READER, And Lover of the Ancient Doctrine of
HIPPOCRATES.
HIppocrates, The Writings of the Ancients were like the Oracles of Apollo,
Aenigmatical.
That bright-shining Light of Physic, did wrap up His Divine Oracles in
Aenigma's, and with an Obscure Brevity, related his Precepts in all the parts
of his Works; So that his Instructions and Aphorisms, by reason of their
Obscurity, are wrested by Writers into diverse Senses; some of which Galen,
with wonderful Skill and comely Order, has digested into Chapters; but
othersome, especially the Golden Book De Diaeta, which is full of Mysteries, he
has left untouched. For the Divine Old Man bequeathed Those only to the
followers of Chemistry; which Art was heretofore, and perhaps in Hippocrates
his time, called Natural Philosophy. For who can understand the rare sayings of
that Old Man, or comprehend the Soft Fire mentioned by him, unless he be well
versed in this Occult Natural Philosophy of Hippocrates. Raimund Lully gives
his Attestation hereto; for, says he, Testam. chap. 26
Though a Logician may have as profound Wit, acquired, or natural, able to
argue concerning outward things, yet he can never understand by any Reason
grounded on Sense, how the Seed in the Earth does germinate, increase, and
brings forth Fruit, unless, being assisted by experimental Learning, He first
have made some progress in Our Natural Philosophy, rather than in That
Sophistical Wordy one, which Logicians do attain to, by sundry Fantastical
suppositions and presumptions; who thereby, with the Prognostications of their
sequels against the force of Nature, do cause many Men pertinaciously to err,
through an intoxicated Mind. But by our Mechancial Science, the Understanding
is rectifyed in point of insight, and of true Mental Knowledge, by the force of
Experience: Yea, Our Experiments are superior to all fantastical Probations of
Conclusions, and therefore admit not of Them, but do show the way how all other
Sciences may enter vigorously into the Understanding. Whence we further learn
by Nature, that Inward thing, That it is, and What it is; because by such
Science the Understanding is freed from those superfluities and errors, which
do ordinarily carry it off from the Truth, by reason of those presumptions and
prejudices which are believed in the Conclusions. Hence it is, that Our
Chemists have directed themselves through the path of every Science, to enter
into all Experience by Art, according to the course of Nature in her Uni^^cal
Principles. For it is only Chemistry, which is the ^lass of the true
Understanding, showing it how to feel and see Truths in a clear light, and
therefore Tabula Smaragdina says, By this kind of demonstration all Obscurity
is banished and expelled from Man, etc.

Hippocrates points at the foundations of this most Ancient Art, Lib. 1 de
Diaeta
in the beginning of his aforesaid Book.

All other living Creatures, says he, as well as Man, are constituted of Two
principles, different in faculty, but concording, and jointly fit for Use, Fire
an Water: Both of These together, are sufficient both for all other things, and
also for themselves mutually; but eitheir of them severally and apart, is
sufficient neither for it self, or any other, etc.

It is my purpose in this short Tract, to expose to View those two, hitherto
Obscure Principles, to wit. This soft Fire and Coagulable Water, only out of a
desire to propagate Truth; which in this Age is woefully kept under by the
Haters of Hippocratical Learning; not that I think it possible for any Men
wholly to exinguish it, In regard it is Powerful, Impregnable, and Triumphant
above all things in the whole World, 3 Esdr. c. 3 and 4.
as Holy Writ also testifies; For Zorobabel says, Wine is strong, The King si
stronger, Women strongest, but above all things, Truth bears away the
Victory; all the Earth calls upon Truth; The Heaven praises it, it is always
strong, it conquereth and lives for evermore, etc.

I know many men according to the variety of their Dispositions, Philosophers;
and Those too, ^ugging hard after it; by Labor and Study.

For says Raimund, Thcor. c. 1
Nature, my Lady and Mistress appeared to me, and with Tears in her Eyes,
bespake me thus; Alas! what shall I now do? endeavors are on foot to take away
my Weapons and Instruments from me, and to plunder and discover my Secrets,
etc. Whereupon I obliged my self to hide her Instruments and to preserve them
from the hands of their enemies. These Instauments of Nature the profound
Lullye, being so instructed by Hippocrates, keeps in the dark and points at
them only in two Words, calling them Entia Realia.

So also Basilius Valentinus hides Them under the barbarous terms of Asa, and
Phalaia: Yea, the same Mechanical Instruments of Nature, which Hippocrates
calls Fire and Water, He elsewhere styles, Gladiatores: A Clavi. 1.2.
And as Hippocrates did display them only to a few Disciples, after the manner
of the Pythagoreans, under the operation of various Arts; so Basilius,
following his Master, See Cur. Triumph. Antim.
chooses to represent them under the notion of Brewing of Beer, and other Rural
Labors.

But Paracelsus despising vulgar Allusions, though condemned of Heresy by the
Church, yet agrees with Hippocrates in This most Ancient Learning, and holds
forth the aforesaid Instruments of Nature under the names of diverse One
Spirit draws, another th^^sts out, both does sam^ thing, etc. Hip. l. 1. De
D^ae^.
Spirits.

The rest of the Ancient Philosophers veiled the said Architectonick
Instruments under the fained compellation of Re-bis (as if intimating two
things) Hence the Rythme,

Est Re-bis in dictis rectissima norma figuris,
From Rebis, as two things,
The right Rule springs.
Others have notified and represented Them under other disguises, etc.

I answer, Commonwealth, to which all of us owe the gratest part of our
Fortunes: For in disphaying these Instruments of Nature, I do likewise exhibit
a sure and certain Method, hitherto observed by few, exclusive of all Ambages
and Eallacies; so that for the future, This most Ancient, Noble, and Necessany
Art of Chemistry may for ever be vindicated from the Calumnies and Barkings of
Illiterate and Flagitious Persons, who are its ^ude and ignorant Haters.

For what does more frequently proceed from such Giantlike mouths (not only
against the aforementioned lights of the World, I would impair no good Mar's
Credit hereby.
but also against Those, who out of their zeal for piety and Freedom, have
endeavored by their assiduous labor and meditation to conquer those
difficulties and dispel those Obscurities, which the Ancients (worthy to be had
in perpetual remembrance) have propounded) than the names of Apostates,
Mountebancks, Empiricks, or Experimentalists (though this last Epithet they
sparingly give; as not willing to mention any thing of experience) Yea, they
likewise threaten and crack amongst unlearned ones (a just Wonderment that so
great Arrogance can be spent on so small a Subject) that they will shortly
manifest to the World by their Pens, the Vanities of Chemistry, though they
never yet knew what this Ancient Dame was, In lib. Hip. de Aliment. Comment, 3.
Te^t. Pharmacia.
nor had ever the honor to salute her, so much as at the Threshold. O how
sorely do they mistake our Friend Galen, whose Followers, yet they profess
themselves to be. For he teaches. That in every thing a Man must first be his
Crafts-master, before he begins his Work. Assuredly there is a great difference
between the Skill of making Experiments, and an habit of uttering vain and
empty words. Of such Heraclitus said of old, It is not best to hide their
ignorance; but it is fit (as Plutarch speaks) to discover it, and to endeavor
to heal it.

Such Learned Men, who have not had their minds darkened by vain and prejudicate
Opinions, have had far other thoughts of Chemistry: Lib. 4. Epid.
For Mathiolus writes to Andrew de Blau, That no man can be an ordinary, much
less a complete Physician, who is not well exercised and versed in Chemistry.
But what need is there to allege the Testimonies of Learned Men in the case?
Nature it self fights for Her, which, without this Art, cannot produce so much
as one grain of Seed; as shall be demonstrated: Hippocrates was very well
skilled in this Ancient Doctrine, as will easily appear; Yea, He commends it to
all the true lovers of Physic: Nay, without this Art the enemies and opposers
of It would live like Bruit-beasts, not having an House to defend themselves
against the injuries of the Weather; for they would want Lime and Brick for
building: neither would there be Glass for Windows, nor Looking-glasses, or
Spectacles, necessary helps for Old-Mens eyes. Yea from whence could the least
gain be expected? unless the melting of Minerals, and the separating of Metals
had been found out by Chemistry? Were it not for This Art, Printing would fail,
Nature of her self would never bring forth Linen, nor Paper, nor Ink to Write,
or Print with; neither should we have any Colors, of which this necessary and
noble Art has produced an infinite number; for Cinnabar, Ultramarine, Blew,
Minium, Cerusse, Purple, An Artificial Gold used much in Italy by Painters.
Aurum Musicum, and the temperature of other Colors, are the products of It:
Yea, who can enumerate all the Benefits arising from this Art, for the use of
Mankind? The whole Northern Region, as well as my own Country, owe much to this
Art; for hereby is made a Drink out of Barley, which is called Ale, or Beer.
Now Barley, as Galen teaches, if it be a little boiled, causes Windiness; if
boiled to an higher degree, it occasions Obstructions. But our Ancestors being
instructed by Hippocrates, through the help of this Art have excited the
instruments of Nature in Barley it self, and have changed it into a new Seed,
no longer called Barley but Malt. They boil this Malt after it is grinded,
and again excite the inward Organs to Alteration, which action is called
Fermentation, a Fervendo. After this manner, as Hippocrates instructs us, is
this most wholesome Drink made of It.

But what do I speak of Beer? The Juice of Grapes, of it self, Wine.
would never be made Wine, unless Art did concur to stir up the Organs in it to
Operation. The like may be said of Bread, Br^ad.
which in the absence of this Art could never be completed, unless the
instruments of Nature in the Meal, by a proportionate degree of Fire and Water
be excited from without? For when These begin to act upon one another, for want
of new matter, the Lump or Dough first sours, then by degrees it putrefies, and
at last breeds Worms: But Art retards, or hinders the Operation of those
Instruments by vehement Heat or Cold; and so the Work is perfected, and Bread
made, which is so necessary for the Sustentation of Man's life.

Neither do Aliments alone stand in need of this Art, but also the most
Wholesome and Effectual Medicines cannot be made without it, as amongst others,
We may see in Treacle; for unless the infinite Instruments of Nature in the
Simples, which make up that Compositum, be united by Fermentation, and so
suffered to rest, it would be altogether useless.

For Lib. De Viribus Cordis. Tract. 2. c. 4.
Avicen says, That, That Medicine is of double Virtue which has suffered
Fermentation. For which cause the Inventor thereof, being well skilled in
Chemical Operations, adds Wine, that the Work may be more readily done. For all
Natural things are transformed by Fermentation, as is plainly seen in the Juice
of Grapes, in Brewing of Beer, and in Making of Bread.

But it is alleged, Philosophy and Physic, and the Mineral and Metalline
Remedies prescribed by you, which are very contrary to Man's nature, and were
unknown to Antiquity: These are the things which we implead and oppose.

I answer. Novelties into the World; but to perfect, alter, thoroughly to mix
and compound things introduced already by the Creator, is very possible. This
Hippocrates teaches, and it is allowed to Art. So Flax or Hemp, by various
alterations is made Paper: Grass by the like Alterations is changed into a
Glove, There is nothing made which was not before, but things thoroughly mixed
and severed, are al^ered. L. 1. De Diaet.
and also into Glue. The Juice of Flowers by a various Alteration is made
Honey; and Honey in like sort is changed into Hydromel, (i. e.) Mead or
Methegline (a most pleasant Drink in Lituania, nothing inferior to Spanish
Wine) and at length it turns to Vinegar, which is afterward casily reduced to
Elementary Water, Bread-corn by Alteration is made Hot-water, Sundry Simples
gathered together and mixed in one, by Fermentation become Treacle. So, since
Hippocrates his time, Cassia, Sena, Mechoacan, Cremor Tartari, and infinite
other things are found out, which he made no mention of; which yet are not new,
but only retrieved and brought forth into use again by long Study and
Experience. So that we may boldly say with the Wise Man, E^. l. c. 1. v. 10.
There is no new thing under the Sun. Whatsoever therefore the Followers of
Hippocrates have handed out, and as it were Mid-wifed into the World, the same
was from the beginning, though our eyes were not so clear-sighted, as to
discover it. But Stephen Pasquier answers this Objection very Elegantly,

Dicitur esse novus, nobis Paracelsus, ob idque;
Crimen, in obseurum pellitur exilium.
At novus Hippocrates, novus est Chrysippus, etc ipsi
Romae Asclepiades, tempore quisque suo.
Qui nova damnatis, veteres damnetis oportet,
Aut ista nihil est in novitate novi.
Englished thus,

Some Paracelse of Novelty implead,
For which Judged Crime he erst was banished.
So Hippocrates, Chrysippus, and at Rome
Asclepiade too, were New, They Would all one Doom.
They who condemn new things, condemn the old,
Or else do both mis-judge, and are o'r bold.
As for Mineral and Metalline Remedies, neither these were not newly introduced
into Physic, but were in use among the Ancients. For Treacle that most ancient
Compound, is altogether Ineffectual without Chalcitis; Alkermes takes into its
composition Lapis Lazuli, and Gold, Gold.
the perfectest and noblest of Metals. The same Mesue made Pills of the same
stone of good use, in Melancholy and Madness; which latter Practitioners guild
over with Gold or Silver.

At Vilna, the Metropolis of Lituania; I knew a Silver-Smith, a lusty Fellow, a
Batchellor, unlearned, Silver.
yet of so happy a memory, that in his own Mother Tongue, he could repeat
almost word for word whatsoever he had once heard. This man from his youth to
that very time, which was the 47th. year of his age, had accustomed himself
daily to eat a little of the filings of Silver, as he was at work, and he
firmly believed that the use thereof increased his memory.

Emeraulds, Rubies, Jacinths, Gems.
do they not enter into various compositions, which we call Cordial ones?

Sulphur is daily prescribed in the Diseases of the Lungs, Sulphur.
and is praised by Dioscorides a very Ancient Writer.

Iron is commended by the Ancients in the Diseases of the Spleen, and we use it
at this day with good success; Iron.
Mineral Waters were in great veneration among the Ancients, and we also have
recourse to them every year in desperate cases.

But what will they say of Salt, Salt.
without which Man's Life cannot be sustained, and which we use every day in
seasoning our Meat? Is that a new Invention? or had the Ancients no knowledge
of it? yet it is excocted not only from the Sea, and from Fountains, but there
are besides Mountains and Mines of native solid Salt, like Marble; out of which
it is hewn, and grows again, like Stones in Quarries.

I my self have seen such in Valachia, and near Cracovia, a greater Revenue
arising thence to the King, than from any other thing; which yet cannot be
called a Vegetable, nor an Animal; it must therefore needs be a Mineral.

So for external Remedies, The Ancients never composed their Ointments,
Plasters, Collyries, and such like, without Minerals and Metals.

Of Lead, Lead.
mixed by Chemical Art, with Vinegar they made Cerusse for the Unguent and
Plaster, which is called White; of Lead is made Litarge, of which is made the
Emplastrum Triapharmacum: All these were found out by the Ancients.

Of Copper and Vinegar by the same Art is made Verdigrease, Copper.
which enters into the composition of the Egyptian Ointment, so called from its
Swarthy color, the invention also of the Ancients.

But why do I spend time in mentioning these things, there is not an Old Woman
in Italy, but will inveigh against the opposers of this Art? for without It, it
is impossible for them to find out any thing to Color and Dye their Hair.

In a word, whatsoever Famous and Excellent thing is performed by Art, it
proceeds from the foundation of This Ancient Philosophy; though men know this
well enough, yet they are ashamed to speak it out. L. 1. De Diaet.
The Old Man, Hippocrates, admiring at this stupidity and turning to his
Followers, says (smilingly and with a low voice) The Divine Mind has
instructed men to imitate her Works; they know what they do, but are ignorant
of what they imitate. They are Hippocrates his words. So that, Hippocratical
Chemists do not endeavor to produce new things, but to recall from Oblivion,
Things approved by the Ancients.

It is further objected, That the strong Remedies of Quicksilver, and Antimony
do evince the ignorance of Chemists; The use of them being abominable, As if
Lapis Armen, L. zuli, and Unguents of Quick siver, were pleasant.
and taken at Mouth, they oftenendanger Life.

As for the ignorane objected, I wonder not at it, for it is an Epidemical
Disease in all Professions, and especially in Physic, which of necessity takes
it original from this Ancient Art. This made De Lege.
Hippocrates to say, That Physic was indeed the noblest of all Arts, but it
was depretiated by reason of the ignorance of those who practiced it. It Is
ignorance therefore which occasions all the Mischiefs in Physic; neither does
it raise greater envy any where, than amongst those who follow not the Chemical
way of Practice, whose envy sometimes appears in their looks: So that now
adays a Physician is ordinarily despised, and exposed to the Scoffs and Taunts
of Facetious Wits: Oh, where is the Majesty wherewith Physicians did once shine
amongst themselves? What Is become of the esteem and brotherly respect one
toward another, which De Decent^ Ornatu.
Hippocrates so much commends? In our age one Physician undervalues another,
carping at what he says or does; yea, he quarrels at, and opposes (behind his
back) That which he understands not; extolling himself amongst the ignorant
Vulgar, for the sordid hope of a little Guin. If such persons by the help of
our Furnaces, had learned that the Principles of Chemistry (i. e.) The
Instruments of Nature, according to Hippocrates, were the Foundations of
Medicine, Physic had never been divided into so many Sects, as it is at this
day. For now there is a Sect risen which divides Physic into two parts,
Chemical and Galenical, against the mind of Old Hippocrates, who never
mentioned but One, neither did Galen take notice of any such division. The
opinions of Hippocrates and Galen seem too prolix to these men; for they are
contented with a few Rules, and though ignorant of the instruments of Medicine,
yet do pride themselves in being accounted and called the only Canonical
Physicians by Old-Wives and Pl^beians. Galen, who was addicted to no Sect, yet
most accomplished for Learning and Prudence, calls such men Servi, for He was
willing to consult with all sorts of persons; Fishermen, and men of the lowest
rank, with rude and unskilful Plebeians (why then does Sennertus in his Book De
Consensu, chap. 4. impute This as a fault to Paracelsus) not only that he might
escape the censure of Hippocrates (who also was not ashamed to ask questions of
plain Contrymen in the beginning of his Book of Precepts) viz. Ignorance,
but also that he might be able to discern Truth from Falsehood: For that
quick-sighted person knew very well that nothing could happen more Calamitous
to the Sick, than to lay credulity, presumptions, opinion, and uncertainties,
as so many Syrtes and Quicksands for the foundations of Physic. And though in
Galen's time Natural Philosophy, which now we call Chemistry, was confined
within a few men's breasts under an Oath of Scoresie, yet for the sake thereof
He traveled over all Egypt, where that Art most flourished at that time; which
shows the wonderful Curiosity and Diligence of the Man: for returning into his
one Country, he distributed diverse rare Medicines, which he there learned,
among several Physicians, his Friends; That so they might be approved by their
Experience. Thus he wrote of the wonderful efficacy of Fire and of Treacle to
Piso, a Piece mst worthy to be read: And he highly extols Aeschiros, De Simp.
Med. f. 18.
the Empirick, his Master, from whom he learned how to burn Crabbs.

Wherefore Galen's Praise remains entire, and He will always be accounted a
most sagacious Person; To whom, as well as to Hippocrates, a Reverence is due,
as to the beginners and producers of many, if not all Good Things.

So that Natural Philosophy (not styled Chemistry) according to Hippocrates, is
a most Ancient Science, being derived from the Greek words 'Als, signifying
Salt, and Cheo, to Melt: Hence came the word Alchymy, as much as to say, The
Art of melting Salts. And it is rightly called so. For Nature herself can
produce no fruit at all, unless the Internal Salts of the Seeds be dissolved in
the Earth (as I shall Ocularly demonstrate:) And these once dissolved, do again
act upon one another, and so arise into a Plant for its peculiar uses, and then
they cease from their labor; for as Hippocrates affirms, One Spirit draws too,
another thrusts from, both doing the same thing, and it inclines to either part
(the Increasing and Vegetating) and so they imitate the nature of Man.

The Chemical Philosopher, instructed by Hippocrates, takes these Seeds thus
brought by nature to Maturity, and in them considers those Two (Salts) the
Organs of Nature, viz. Fire and Water; and by Art, he urges them to action, by
melting the Salts according to Natures Law, as Alchymy teaches, and then a new
thing is produced, which was not before; for Example Bread, In This the
Hyppocratist or Chemist again takes into consideration, the Instruments of
Nature; which he further assists by his helping-hand, melting the Salts; and
imitating Nature, he again brings forth a new Production, which we call
Vinegar: Now the Chemist observing that in this Vinegar the Fire does exceed
the Water (our Master teaching, That no Sapor should overcome by its proper
faculty:) He therefore consumes the Acid part by its contrary, and again
divides the Fire from the Water, and so a new Production called Hot-water is
generated, which afterward by the occult help of Art, is fixed into an Alcaly;
and so the Curious Hippocratilt goes on mixing and ulcering, till he obtains
his intent: And at last he destroys both the Instruments or Faculties by
repeated meltings of the Salts. And though hereby he may seem to ignorant
Persons to have produced some New things, yet there is no such matter, for the
things are most Ancient, only he melts and re-melts the Salts as often as the
Laws of Nature will permit; which is not beyond the fourth Repetition, as Dee,
Holland, etc.
Learned Men with reason say. But of this enough at present. Hippocrates shows
that this repeated Fusion-melting, and Exaltation of Salts, honored by the
Ancients with the Title of Alchymy, has place, not only in the Vegetable, L.
1. De Diaet.
but also in the Mineral Kingdom; for, says he, Gold workers do beat Gold,
wash it, and melt it with a soft Fire, for it will not be made up with a
strong. Galen had no knowledge of Metals, or of Quick silver.
By which saying he discovers the ignorance and unskilfulness of Those, who
write that Chemistry is exercised about the ignoble fusion of Metals and
Minerals, as if these would be melted with a soft Fire; but the contrary is
well known to such who have overseen either of them to be melted; for Gold
requires not a gentle, but a very strong Fire; Wherefore the Philosopher does
not here understand this rude war of Operation, though he takes his beginning
from it; which he presently clears by a plain familiar example: Man, says he,
does thresh, wash, and grind Bread corn, and baking it, he uses not a strong
Fire to make it up in a body, but a soft and gentle one.

Wherefore the Fire of the Chemical Philosopher in the extraction of Animals,
Minerals, or Vegetables (called Small Elixirs by the Modernes) must be
moderate. Hippocrates teaches, All things to be like which were unlike. But as
soon as Fire exceeds the degree of being moderate, it is no longer the
Philosophers fire, but the Artists; for then things are not advanced by the
intervention thereof, but are altered thereby, as our Master teaches in the
forecited Book.

Whosoever therefore do apply themselves to the Fusion or Liquation of Salts,
either with a gentle or a vehement heat, They all have their dependence on this
Ancient Chemical Philosophy; So that such persons are in a gross and ignorant
Mistake in the judgment of Hippocrates, who exclude Apothecaries from this
Art. For when Pharmacopaeans do pound Vegetables, and wring out their Juice,
then it is that they make a fusion of Salts, expelling and thrusting out the
Exotic and Foreign, not being of one and the same temper (they are Hippocrates
his words) but when they condense the melted Salts with Sugar into a Syrup,
then they thoroughly mix and alter them; So it is, says Hippocrates, with the
nature of Man, all Arts communicating with humane Nature.

Wherefore if Nature do precede Art, and Art does but imitate Nature, there is
no man under the Sun, who has not within himself, as it were a Chemical and
Salt-melting shop; only the Canonical Physician, who bears an hatred to the
opinions of Hippocrates, by reason of his ignorance of this Ancient Art,
excepts himself, as being altogether unacquainted with this divinely inspired
Science. And by means of such Ignoramus's, Physic is accounted the meanest of
all Professions, for it has no foundation to build upon: Of such Ignorants,
Seneca speaks. That they are always learning, but never attain to the knowledge
of the Truth.

Hence it is that Galen in his rich Writings approves and commends Hippocrates
to us, Ars Glaucon. initio. and lib. 1. De Venaesect: adversus Erasist.
as the Guide and Author of all Good, which Epithites he frequently bestows
upon him; thereby eternizing and consecrating his Name to Posterity.

This so well grounded opinion of Galen, has moved me, never, as long as I
live, to admit of any other Doctrine in Physic but that of Hippocrates, which
I believe will be Coaevous with Nature it self.

Otto Tachenius, HIS HIPPOCRATES CHYMICVS.
The Occasion of writing the Ensuing Treatise. A man knows only so much as is
certainly discovered to him by either Mental or Manual Operation and Experiment.

CHAP. I.
THe perfect knowledge of all Sciences is so difficult, that the Life of Man
would sooner be at an end, than he can attain unto the complete understanding
of any one of them, (so as to be put beyond all dispute) by the help only of
Whic'^ yet are not wholly to be rejected.
Paperbooks. Socrates having made a through disquisition into almost all
Sciences, was then judged the wisest of men by the Oracle; when he openly
professed, that he knew nothing at all: This the Preacher seems to confirm to
us; I beheld, says he, all the Works of God, Eccl. Chapter 8. v. 17.
that a man cannot find out the reason of the Works which are done under the
Sun, and the more he labors to find it out, the further it is off; though a
wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it out. The Divine
Hippocrates was not ignorant of this difficulty of obtaining knowledge in our
Art of Physic, which made him ingeniously to confess it in his In Epist.
Epistles to Democritus: For, says he, though I am an old man, yet I am not
arrived to the true knowledge of Physic: And the same person avers, 1. Apb. 1.
That our life is too short for the acquist of any one Science, from the very
Foundation thereof. Hereupon he advises us, to honor and esteem those which
have endeavored to search out the hidden works of Wise Nature; L. 1. de Diaet.
adding withal, that no one of them could be justly blamed, though he were not
able fully to find them cut. But it seems the Writer who reformed the Augustane
or (Auspurgh) Dispensatory, was of another mind; his Book was printed at Tergow
by William Vorhoven, A. D. 1657. Upon occasion of that Book, a few days since,
my respected Friend, John de Lanou, a Famous Bookseller of this City, asked my
advice, whether I thought it worth his labor to Print it here, etc. It Is true,
I had heard of the Title before, but I had never seen the Book, for I had not
so much leisure as to spend my time in reading such Pieces: Nevertheless, upon
that occasion, at spare hours I read it all over, and could not but take notice
of, and wonder at that corrupt Custom (so familiar to him and others, against
the direct Precept of Hippocrates) that whatsoever a man had honestly found out
by great Labor and Study, and had commended it to Posterity in writing for the
good of the Public, the same should presently be traduced, defamed, and
spurned at amongst the Ignorant Vulgar, not by force of Reason and Experience,
but by monstrous Calumnies and Reproaches, that so (like Herostratus) they
might procure some fame to themselves, by the ruin of other men's Credit. The
Reformer of the Auspurgh Dispensatory treads in those steps, railing and
declaiming not only against the Ancients, but the Moderns also; Followers of
Hippocrates and Galen, in such sort, that there is hardly an Arrow in the
Quiver of Slander, which he shoots not at them. I had formerly instructed this
Man in the way of making V^perine Salt, but under a Metaphorical disguize (for
I had denied to teach him in plain terms) and now he proclaims me for a Cheat,
Pharmace. f. 487.
and that I hinder by Imposture the making of it public: I ingeniously
confess, that here, at least in part, the Reformer speaks truth; for whatsoever
made Physicians who were lovers of Truth famous heretofore, the same things
Impostors do craftily adulterate. Our Hippocrates was afraid of such Cheats,
which made him conceal his Antipestilential Medicament, by which he had
procured so much Honor to himself, and had happily and securely cured that
Disease; as his Epistles do testify.

Paracelsus did also dread Impostors, who by his wonderful Art cured the
(otherwise incurable) Contagions of the Body, as his Epitaph speaks; which may
be seen graven on a stone at Saltsburge, in the Hospital of S. Sebastians.

In our days Lazarus Riverius feared the like Cheats, and for that cause he
published his Specifique against Feavors under a Metaphor. So Helmont very
prudently veiled the Liquor which (with Paracelsus) he calls by a corrupt Name
Alcahest; which yet is not free from Adulterators; but instead thereof the
Reformer substitutes Vinegar; In Append. f. 71.
hereupon, being instructed by my loss, I became my own Schoolmaster, and have
often thought upon that Saying of Escheurenterus to Gratarolus, Thou know on
easier terms the Sentence passed at Bononia, that he was proclaimed a Traitor
to his Country, and worthy to be hanged, who first made a Filatory at Trent in
Germany; which is an Engine whereby Raw Silk by Spindles is artificially drawn
into Threads.

So that I have hitherto concealed That which might ennoble a Physician, being
jealous, not without cause, lest by my sluggishness and neglect, it might fall
into the hands of Impostors, and thereby the worthy and the unworthy should
undergo the same Fate.

But the earnest importunity of this Pharmac. 487.
Reformer has caused me to select some things out of the heap of my
Observations and Experiments (which I had designed only for my own use) and now
to make them public; yet still I keep to the Precept of Libro Raaic. None are
worthy of the name of Teacher, but such who teach by sure Principles and
causes. Arist in Protm. Me. taph.
Hermes, That the Wisdom of the Author ought to be greater than his Book. But I
must follow the Clew of inevitable Fate; and I undertake this labor the more
willingly, that I may discover the right way to those that wander, and may
bring back Straglers into it: As also, that those who have hitherto opposed
this Art, might at length correct their mistakes, and begin to be wiser: And
further also, that they who practice it, may assuredly understand that it is
founded on the Principles of Nature; and so for the future may be delivered
from the crafts and deceits of Sophisters and Impostors. In this work, I mind
more the Truth of the Cause, than the Ornaments of Elocution; for the speech of
Truth, says Euripides, is plain, neither matters it therein what style we use,
especially since Cicero does not require Eloquence in a Philosopher, much less
does Celsus in a Physician: For as Plato says, Three words are sufficient in a
just cause.
when we dispute of things, the rudeness or the elegancy of words are not to be
heeded, but only that satisfaction may be obtained, as to the Doctrine of the
things themselves; neither have I inserted florid disputings, or odious
altercations, but whatsoever offers it self more occultly to the Senses, that,
Experience being my guide, I have despoiled of its coverings, and have exposed
the truth of things naked to the eyes of all beholders, so that every
individual man may know it; for Truth loves brevity, not disputation. By this
Compass I have Steered: Draw near therefore, all ye Lovers of Truth, and you
shall behold things (both admirable and pleasant) with your eyes, yea and
handle them with your hands, which have hitherto stood remote from our
sensation and knowledge. Now to the work it self.

CHAP. II.
Qui nimium properat, serius absolvit.
Or,

No more haste, than good speed.
THe Pharmac. 5.481.
Reformer begins with a lofty Brow: Now, says he, let us come to the
examination of the Salt of Treacle of the Ancients, whose preparation was so
Childish and absurd, that their simplicity did no where more appear than about
it, etc. And a little after, Animals only have Volatile Salt, and in a violent
Calcination, leave commonly nothing behind them, save only Terra Mortua; yea,
the rest of their absurdities are not to be passed over in silence, Do not
tastly condemn the guiltless, not having thoroughly weighed their cause.
in that they substituted Sal Armoniack in the place of Common Salt, not at
all, as I perceive, understanding the matter, because all the Sal Armoniack is
vanished into Air, and so there remains nothing to them, neither of the Vipers,
nor of their added Salt. Thus. he.

But for my part I cannot see that the Ancients deserve to be accused of
absurdity or simplicity in this thing, so as to incur the undue reprehension of
the Reformer: so thet before we judge, we are to hear, and that both sides; and
we ought to find out what the Sal Armoniack of the Ancients was, and for what
reason they substituted it in the room of Common Salt? and for what end? and
wherein their offense lay? so as to merit the rash anger and bitter despite of
this Reformer.

To make these things more plain, it is necessary that we dive into the secret
nature of certain Salts, No imaginary things here.
in order to the examination and understanding of them, and of the differences
between them, by accidents proper to them, and known to Sense, and that not by
Logical and convertible Syllogismes, or imaginary Non-Entities, but by an
Experimental and Natural History: I say then, and am ready to prove, that not
Animals only have Volatile Salt, but, against the Opinion of this Reformer,
that all Vegetables also have not a grain of fixed Salt by Nature, unless they
acquire it by Ary. But first I will speak of things more known, proceeding
afterward, by degrees, to those which are more occult. Pliny witnesses, that
Natural Sal Armoniack was in great use amonst the Ancients; It is found, says
he, L. 1. Chapter 7.
in Africa, in the Country of Cirenia, till you come to the Oracle of Jupiter
Hammon in lumps, somewhat, long, and under the Sands. Diascorides confirms the
same, that Sal Armoniack is praised from the Country where it is found. This
Salt endures constant in the fire, being, after its manner, of a more Salt-acid
relish, than our common Trencher-salt, as I shall show, and therefore the
Ancients found it more advantageous for Medicines, and for that cause have more
commended it to us: But that which is brought to us is not in longish lumps,
neither is it Natural, but is made by Art, viz. of the Natural, and of the
Volatile Alcaly of Ammals, as the resolution of it shows, according to the
Axiom of All things necess^^ily consists of that into which they can be
resolved.
Aristorle, for it is divided into an Acid Spirit of Salt, and also into a
volatile Alcaly (all salt things are divided into two substances, viz. Alcaly,
and Acid, as I shall show by degrees) both which being separated, and again
reunited, become the Sal Armoniack which it was before. The Acid part or
Spirit, has all the properties of that which is distilled from Common Salt;
but the Alcaly is of the same nature with that which is sublimated from Man's
Urine, only it is not so stinking: Whence I conjecture, that they chose Camels
Urine, not Man's, for the composition: L. 28. c. 8.
For the Urine of Camels, as Pliny observes, is more profitable for Fullers,
than the Urine of other Animals, from whence there must needs be a richer
Alcaly; perhaps because they eat no Salt, as other Animals do, for common Salt
does not wash out, or cleanse; Odys. l. 6. from verse. 85. to 96.
therefore Nansicca, the Daughter of Alcinous, washed her Linen in a Fountain
on the Seashore, as Homer records.

But Artificial Sal Armoniack is made after the same manner as Soap; for Nature
works alike in every thing, as L. 1. de Diaet.
Hippocrates says, to wit, of the Acid part of Sal Armoniack, and the Alcaly of
the Urine of Camels (or of other Animals, it is all one) I have made the like
Salt from the Alcaly of Soot, and the Acid Spirit of Salt, (for want of other)
for the Urine does dissolve the Salt by Maceration; and the Alcaly of the
Urine, which otherwise in a few days would vanish, Sal. Armoniack.
here being delayed and stopped, finds the Acid which it imbibes; and so of the
Acid part of the Salt, and the Alcaly of the Urine, a new Artificial Creature
is produced of a salt relish: But that which is not of the same nature, nor
H^p. l. 1. de Diaet.
accords with this new Salt, of its own accord is severed, and sinks to the
bottom. The clear Salt liquor swimming at top they boil and scum, and again
suffer the Faeces to settle, and at last coagulate it into a Cake. This is the
Sal Armoniack which is brought to us, but it is not that which the Ancients
chose for Salt of Treacle, as the Reformer guesses; but that is the Natural
which is found under the Sands ((...)) as Pliny shows in the forecited place,
of which I shall speak more clearly in the Progress of this Work; but before I
proceed, I must explain more fully what Alcaly is.

CHAP. III. Sal Alcaly, what it is.
IT is not my purpose here to deduce the matter, I call the Senses the Guides
of Life, and of all its Operations
ab ovp, as they say, or from the very Elements, but to manage a Demonstration
concerning things Physical, Natural, Material, and known by our Senses. Know
then, that Salt-Kaly is made of the Herb Kaly, coming in great quantity out of
Egypt, which is there burnt whiles it is green, and so brought over to us, and
is called by some Soda, and Alumen Catinum, but the right name is Sal-kaly.
This Salt is not found in Natures three Kingdoms, unless it be produced by Art,
through the help of Fire; whence it is that this Virgin is said by the Ancients
to have three Fathers, viz. Nature, Fire, and the Philosopher.

This Sal-kaly, as other Salts, is part of the Compositum, Alcaly is inane and
empty.
yet deprived of its seminal virtues, only it has an abstersive, Sope-like,
and resolving property; and by reason of this inanition, being as it were
without form, it sucks up and imbibes all sorts of Acids, (the Ancients call it
impregnation.) Hence it is that all Salts which do mortify Acids are called by
one general name, Alcalies, which are found not only in the vegetable, but also
in the Animal and Mineral Kingdoms: And in these three, there are several sorts
of them, viz. six'd, volatile, manifest, occult, and of a middle nature, taken
from parts of Animals which are to be demonstrated to the eye. But first I
shall begin with that which is more known, which is found in a Flint, which
considered, quatenus, a Flint, is thought by the unskilful to be under the
Regiment only of one Rector; but the skilful Glass-men of Murano have observed,
that though taken from its Native place, it weighs 100 l. yet it yearly
acquires 10 l. or Cosmopolita says, that the occult Food of Life is in the Air.
thereabouts, to its weight. Hence the Hippocratist learns, that Jovis omnia
plena, yea that it receives nourishment from the ambient Air, but as soon as
the External and Artificial Fire supervenes, then the skilful Operator
sometimes converts it to Glass, and sometimes to Calx or Lime: So that the
Hippocratical and Chemical Philosopher comprehends two different Faculties in a
Flint (being so instructed by his L. 1. de Diaet.
Master Fire and Water so called, for the two reasons which constituted a
Flint:) These Faculties the Chemists alter by the help of a due Fire, which
alteration is called Incineration, for of its own accord it turns to a Powder,
whence it is called by a common name, Calx or Lime.

In this Calx or Calcinated Ashes, the Chemist again comprehends the
abovenamed Faculties, which for our better understanding, we will now once for
all, Acid and Alcaly the instraments of Nature.
and at all times hereafter, call the Acid and the Alcaly from their effects.

Calx then, or Lime, has two Salts, or (as Hippocrates) two Faculties in it
self, That the Fire is Acid, the Water Alcaly, I will show in its place.
the Acid, and the Alcaly, both most constant in the fire, and one contrary to
the other; and when the Calx is sprinkled with water, then the Salts are
dissolved, and act upon one another. The Alcaly sucks in, and acts upon the
Acid, and this again assumes the Alcaly, not for the destruction of either, but
for the Production and Generation of a new thing, and whatsoever they lay hold
on in that Generation, not being too heterogeneous from their natures, is
concreted with them into the hardness of stone; so one contrary is coagulated
by another.

This knowledge of Calx, if the Reformer had learned out of Hippocrates, the
Poor Man had never gone about the fixation of viperine Alcaly with Calx, as
with a lamentable voice he declares in his Discourse concerning Salt of
Treacle. Pharmac. f. 485. Contraries are coagulated by contraries.
After the Hippocratist has learned, that according to the Laws of Nature,
Calx is petrified by contrary Faculties, then he reminds the Lesson of his
Master and Instructor, viz. that like is to be dissolved by like, and that not
only in Artificials, but in Naturals, especially in Physic, and Humane Bodies,
as will anon appear; for Arts do imitate Humane Nature: Hip. l. 1. de. Diaet.
they are Hippocrates his words, who also teaches, That agreeable things
adhere to one another.

CHAP. IV. Alcaly and Oil are made Soap.
CAlx or Lime, as I have said, has two different Faculties, Acid and Alcaly: I
have showed before, that Alcaly has at least a Soap-like and abstersive
virtue, Likethings are dissolved by like. Hip. de locis in bemire.
which Hippocratists have taught to extract and separate by its like: Therefore
Soap-men add to the Calx a factitious Alcaly, burnt out of Vegetables in a
triple proportion, because it mortifies the Acid part in the Calx, and melts
the other part by its like; wherefore they moisten a little the Alcalized
Ashes, with which they cover over the unslacked Calx, and so leave them, until
the Lime or Calx falls asunder, as a sign of mutual action; then they mix them
together, and pour on water, that the Mass may become moister (according to the
Rule, Salts act not unless they be dissolved) then with a sufficient quantity
of water they extract the Lixivious Fiery Alcaly; (I call it Fiery, Of Lime and
Honey is made a mixture good for the brawniness of the Feet.
because this boiling Lixivium, or Ley, consumed in a moment a Drunken Man with
his Woollen Clothes, so that nothing of him was found but his Linen Shirt, and
the hardest Bones, as I had the Relation from a Credible Person, Professor of
that Trade) which Fiery Lixivium they call Magistra, which is glutted with so
much Alcaly, that an Egg will not sink in it. Of the same mixture is made also
another Lixivium, less saturated, which will not bear up an Egg; with this last
Lie (for certain reasons) in boiling of Soap, they first mingle Oil or Tallow,
(which is contrary to Alcaly, as containing an occult Acid, as will appear by
degrees) but they boil it with a soft fire till they wax white, then they add
the Magistra in a triple proportion to the Oil or Fat; The greater is
en-creased by the less. Hip. l. 1. de Diaet. Hip l 1. de Diaet.
and in biling, the Oil and Alcaly are coagulated, till they are compacted into
one Body, as contraries, and thoroughly mixed; For they never consist together
in the same, but are always altered; so that of necessity the things severed
and produced from them, must be dissimilary in their nature. For out of the
manifest Alcaly, and the occult Acid in the Oil, is produced a thing of a
Neutral Nature of a salt relish; sometimes they make trial of it by the tongue,
if the taste be sweet, they add the Magistra, if it be biting, it must be
boiled till it has absorbed the Oil; but if it be more than ordinarily
pungent, then they pour in Oil leisurely at discretion, as Hippocrates
teaches, L. 1. de Diaet.
Spiritus unus trahit, alter protrudit, etc One Spirit draws to, another
thrusts from, but both do the same thing, and tend to either part, and so they
imitate the nature of man. Sea Salt, because it is no vacuous and empty Body,
as Alcalyes are, is not coagulated with fat, or Tallow into Soap, for it has
both its Faculties, not to be separated without difficulty, as I shall show
hereafter: For which cause, Nausicca the Daughter of Alcinous washed her Linen
out of a Fountain on the Seashore, as Homer relates, 6. Odyss.

CHAP. V. The Composition, and Dissolution, or Destruction of Glass.
GLass is made of the same Flint, and the same Sal Alcaly, by the Rule of
Contraries, but not the moist way, (as Soap) but by a dry and fiery Fusion and
Liquation: For sometimes three, sometimes two parts at least of the Powder of
Flints are mixed with one part of Sal. Alcaly (not of Acid, Trencher-salt)
which by corrosion slacks the Flint, and absorbs it in the fire of Fusion. I
say, part of the Alcaly sucks up the Acid which the Flint contains for Lime or
Calx, and it swims a top of the slaked Flint, A^^run Croll. in Lep. Medi^um.
and is called Axungia Vitri. The Fell Vitri, being another part of the Alcaly,
makes a coalition with the Flint, and is saturated by it; and because they
consist not in the same, as Hippocrates teaches, they both become a Pellucide
Mass; then Artificers say, the Glass is baked: But the Alcaly swimming a top,
and saturated with the Acid, that they scum off with an iron Ladle, and call it
Fell Vitri, and cast it away as unfit for Glass, for by the mixture it is
changed into Salt; therefore Shepherds give it to their Cattle to lick,
especially in places where Salt is dear; this, in moist weather, easily turns
to a liquor, and then the Powder of Flints subsides of its own accord: The
liquor by heat is coagulated into true common salt, as its Granulation, and
also its Distillation shows; but the Bottom, or Eoex, is a Medicine not to be
despised in difficulty of Urine, as also is Flint fired and slaked in water.

But this Water is sometimes prescribed without success, especially when the
Flint is less heated by its proper heat, and that Diuretic vertuo cease,
which then perishes and cease, when the haat of the fire does Alcalize the
Flint (i. e.) when both Faculties go together into one, for then it does not
reach to the Urinary places, by reason of its fixedness; yea, at that time it
hinders and retards other things which provoke Urine, in as much as it troubles
the digestion of the Stomach, (which is made by Acids) and appropriates it to
it self. Burning of Glass.
Then the Ancients began to reduce Glass into Powder of Flints, by Extinction,
into an Acid Salt, with good success.

This Reduction and Preparation which is purely Hippocratical and very
Ingenious, Pharmac. f. 732.
the Reformer (like himself) calls slight, unprofitable, inept, and by all
means to be exploded, See, says he, A monstrous Speech is the sign of a
monstrous Wit, says out Galen.
how basely such Putative and Wordy Philosophers do discover themselves, who
are destitute of that Philosophy which is true, and into what crrours they
fall, discoverable and derideable not only by those who thoroughly search the
secrets of Nature, but even by Clowns and Rusticks, old Wives and Gossips:
Glass this way prepared (as our Reformer pungently goes on) cannot be given
without danger and hazard to a sick man, though he be not presently sensible of
it.

But I will prove against the frivolous Objections and Grounds of this
Reformer, that he who taught this Burning of Glass was in the right, and I will
vindicate him from those Calumnies wherewith he is aspersed, especially from
this, That Glass this way prepared, cannot be given to the Sick without danger
and detriment. Gl^ss, whereof it is compounded, into the same and by the same
it is resolved.


Take then clear and transparent Glass, melt it with more Alcaly, like Glass,
afterward expose it to the moist Air, and you shall soon find the whole Glass
to be resolved into water; your upon this a sufficient Acid, contrary to
Alcaly, and the Powder of Flints will subside.

This Powder is no longer Glass, but the Powder of Flints, which the Reformer
abhors, and says, it cannot be given to the Sick without detriment, In Append.
Pharmacop Reg. f. 136.
forgetting that he himself commends the Powder of Flints to Queens for
producing of Milk. The Ancients were not acquainted with this separating Art,
(which was bestowed on Mortals from above) yet they had some hints of it by
discourse; and therefore they began to extinguish or slake the Powder, or
Flower of Glass, in Ashes of Beanstalks, whose Salt is of an Acid salt nature,
as I shall show by and by; they repeated the Extinction always with new Ashes,
The overbusie Reformer having his eye on the Ancients, in the interim sees not
his own errors.
and washed away the Powder of the Glass with water, so that every Extinction
was the destruction of the Glass, or Aloaly; this they washed, and again
extinguished, until the Bean-ashes had destroyed all the Alcaly, and had left
an impalpable Powder. This is the Powder of Flints, as That before melted with
Alcaly, and precipitated with Acid, which the Reformer thinks cannot be safely
given at Mouth, so much as to Country people, though he commends it to Queens
(as I have said) to procure Milk.

In this Preparation (which the Reformer out of his sloth and ignorance) calls
slight, The true preparation and knowledge of Simples, requires almost a man's
whole life.
lies hid the profound knowledge of Natural things, as will appear by degrees,
and the taking of it is not at all to be feared, as the Reformer falsely
teaches; But ignorant persons are of necessity subject to great fears.

CHAP. VI.
Rumor sine Capite.
A Report without ground.
THere is a way reported and practiced of drawing out the Diuretic Virtue from
Calcined Flint, by the destruction of the Alcaly, (that is, by a rule contrary
to the Alcaly) with Acid Spirits, after this manner; into Spirit of Salt, they
put by piecemeal unslaked Lime, the Spirit is presently absorbed by the Alcaly
of the Lime with great force and vehement ebullition, they draw forth the
insipid Phlegm, and dissolve the Lime saturated with the Acid Salt, they melt
it with a gentle fire in a Crucible, straining it into a cold Mortar; when it
is cold they beat it to Powder, (it then emitting fiery sparks) from which,
with hot water, they elicite the saltness; this they purify and coagulate, and
again suffer it of its own accord to run into a salt liquor, not unprofitable.
But there are some Sophisters and Impostors who give forth, that this Liquor is
distilled in a Lembick, for they mix the foresaid Liquor with Calcined and
Powdered Flints in a fourfold proportion, and distill it with an open fire into
an Acid Spirit, which by a wrong name they call Spiritus Calcis Basilii. Now
let us see to what Original or Parent, we may ascribe the foresaid distilled
Spirit.

First of all, the Spirit of Salt was absorbed and swallowed up by the
vitrifying Alcaly, and most constant in the fire.

Further, the Acid part of the Flint was separated by the water, and cast off
under the covert of the Faces.

Thirdly, the fixed Alcaly of the Flint or Lime drinks up the Acid Spirit of
the Salt, and a Salt is made of the volatile Acid and most fixed Alcaly.

Fourthly, they mix this Salt with the Calcined Flints (i. e.) with the
unslaked Lime, which abounds more with Alcaly than Acid, as I have showed in
Glass and Soap.

And though this Mixture be urged with the strongest fire, what else can it
distill forth than a volatile Acid? that is, the same Spirit of Salt which the
Alcaly had absorbed and drunk up: Famous and Learned men have commended this
Spirit in the Gout and Stone, as a singular Remedy, but the success has not
answered: But Basilius, ill interpreted and understood, wrote not to Impostors,
and therefore he is wrongfully accused by them for a Cheat: Rightly therefore
does the Comoedian commend us, If thou be wise, make thy self ignorant of what
thou know.

An Addition to this Examen.

By this Method (after you are once instructed in this Hippocratical Learning
which I hold forth in this short Tract) you may in every Process, Nature, as to
Physic, has nothing occult in this sublunary Globe; but by this method an
Hippocratist may discover it.
as well Chemical as Medicinal, by ingenuity and discourse, discern, prove, and
separate Truth from Falsehood, without any expense or loss of time, so as no
longer to be gulled by Deceivers and Cheats; yea, by the same method you may in
your Operations, and in writing of Books, travel on perpetually the right way
(without wandering) in this Natural, Chemical, True, and Ancient Philosophy,
through all the three Kingdoms, Animal, Mineral, and Vegetable, as you will
confess in the Progress.

CHAP. VII.
Qui been distinguit, beue docet.
To distinguish well, is to teach well.
FOr our clearer light and understanding, it will be worth the while, before I
proceed, to demonstrate to the Eye the difference of Alcalyes, and to show what
the contrariety, or the absorbing and imbibing of Acids is: There are, as I
have said, several degrees and Species of fixed Salt- Alcaly, as of Tartar,
which has a singular privilege, of Lime-trees, of Hazel, of all sorts of
Oaks, and those which in the Forests of Norway, Lituania, and Muscovy, are
burnt out of green wood into to Potashes: Also all hot and Oily Herbs, as
Rosemary, Laevender, Rue, etc. all of them, in a word, are contrary to, and
destroyers of Acids, whose difference the following Experiments show.

Dissolve an ounce and half of sublimate Mercury (which by the Hip. l. 2. de
Dia^t.
mixture is changed from Acid and Alcaly into Salt) into fifty ounces of common
water distilled: into a part of this clear solution, infuse by drops, yet
somewhat quickly, the fixed Alcaly of Tartar (which is the Liquor of Tartar
resolved of its own accord) this in a moment divides the Compositum, absorbing
the Acid, and the Mercury presently goes to the bottom of a color obscurely
red.

From the Calcined Faeces, or Lees of Vinegar, The wonderful difference of
fixed Alcaely.
there is drawn forth with water, Alcaly of Tartar, which though produced out
of the same Vine with Wine, yet it precipitates a^ Mercury sparkling and
splendent.

But when the same Alcaly is Calcined by Art to a redness, then the same
Mercury falls down like pounded Cinnabar.

The Tartar being burnt up, if you add the Calx, and draw forth the Alcaly with
simple water, then the falling Mercury glisters like Gold; but extracted out of
the Herb Kaly, it precipitates a Mercury, much more dark colored than the
former: The Lie, or Lixivium, which Soap-boilers call (Magistra) which consists
of the Calx, and Alcaly of Oaks, yields Mercury darkly yellow.

There is an Alcaly brought out of Spain, it is not certain whether a simple or
compounded one, which yet precipitates Mercury of a Tawney yellow color.

But when the same Mercury is precipitated with Alcalyes of Cephalic Herbs, as
of Rosemary, Lavender, etc. these indeed are Alcalyes, but not of Ashes, as the
former, but much more volatile: These, I say, cast Mercury red and shining.

So Celandine has a wonderful Alcaly (so that its fisth Essence (which yet I
take to be the Gift of Heaven) (i. e.) the Alcalized Liquor of this Spiritual
Salt is praised, He which has not tasted the relish of Sales, shall never
attain to the desired Ferment of Ferments, says the Author of the Rosary.
not without a Mystery, by Paracelsus and Lully.^ and it casts a most red
Mercury. I once carelessly neglected the small Vessel in which 'twas put, and
caused it not to be washed, and about a Month after, at the top of the Liquor
there appeared a Golden Flower, not unlike the Flower of Celandine, (it was
chamfered in its Coalition, like Nitre) to the wonderment of the beholders.

These Examples do show, that by how much Alcaly is fuller of Fire, the Mercury
falls so much the darker, because that in the very instant of absorbing,
Arsenick, called by Para^^sus the Soot of Metals, fired with Nitre and
resolved, is not excepted.
the Fiery Alcaly affects and flashes against its Sulphur like Lightning; but
the further it recedes from Ignipotence, the Mercury falls the brighter: so
that volatile Alcalyes, as of Soot, and of all Animals, from the aforesaid
Solution, do precipitate Mercury of a white and snowy color; all which will
more clearly appear in the Progress. So Mercury precipitated from the Balsam
Samech, casts a snowy color, Balsamus Samech.
somewhat inclining to yellow; but if you pour on more than its Nature can
bear, then it turns to a glittering color.

But salt things, of what kind soever, do not precipitate Mercury out of the
abovenamed solution; yea, by how much the nearer they approach to the nature
of Salts, so much the less they hurt Acids.

Examples follow.

Alcaly of Saltpeter, though its first Original be from Alcaly of Urine, yet
with Sulphur being fixed into Alcaly, (and therefore it tastes somewhat saltish)
it somewhat disturbs the Mercury so dissolved, but does not precipitate it; but
if you add to this Pulverised mixture, before it does deflagrate, and leave
burning, a certain fixed and dried Alcaly (of Tartar) and keep it over a gentle
fire, then first it melts the Sulphur, and the pingueous Acid of the Sulphur
preparing for its flight, is greedily imbibed or drunk in by the Alcaly, which
is also pingueous; as it happens in the preparation of Lac Sulphuris the moist
way: The heat still continuing, the Nitre also is melted, whose sulphurous and
inflamable part is associated to its like, viz. to the Pinguedo of the Sulphur;
yea it is greedily received in by the Alcaly (a middle part of which is
sufficient, in respect of the Powders, as of Sal Fulminant.
Nitre three parts, of Alcaly of Tartar two parts, of Sulphur one part) and so
becomes Salt. In this Salt mass, each of the Sulphurs does boil, or bubble up,
and the fire continuing, and being increased, they take flame, which in the
kindling, not enduring the narrowness of place in the Salt, bursts out into the
Air with a noise like Thunder: That these things are so, the Alealy, which is
sometime left behind, may inform us, especially when it is kindled not in a
Concave, but in a plain place, and very leisurely; for then it is changed by
the Acid Spirits into Salt, and does not any longer precipitate Mercury. Hence
by the way we may learn, that

This is the ground why Ceraunocryson, or Aurum Fulminans gives a crack, or
loud noise.

I have elsewhere showed that the Spirit of Nitre in Alcaly is made Nitre of
Tartar. Aurum Fulminans.
Gold is almost all Sulphur (after its own sort and manner) as I have also
experimentally demonstrated in its place; for which reason it is not corroded
by Acids. Gold therefore being dissolved in salt water of Nitre, Alum, and Sal
Armoniack, or common Salt, if you pour in by little and little (not all at
once) a certain Alcaly, the Acid Spirit of the Nitre (for the Spirit of Allom
or Vitriol in the distillation of Aqua fortis does not ascend) takes to it self
a Body in the vacuous and empty Alcaly, and so becomes natural Nitre; but the
sulphurous Nitre easily adheres (via humida) to the sulphurous This is the
cause that Gold dissolved in Spirit of Salt, and the same forecited Alcaly
precipitat, is not falminans, for it returns to Salt, which resists the flame.
Gold, because of the similitude between them; and they are so thoroughly mixed
together, that by no art of Ablution they can be separated (i. e.) when the
Acid of Nitre is imbibed by the Alcaly, it is coagulated into natural Nitre,
which finds the Sulphur in the dissolved Gold, and with it, as being of the
same nature, to use Hippocrates's words, it receives coagulation, as I have
showed in Calx: But if you pour on more of the Alcaly, so that it exceed the
degree of Nitre, then the Nitre also inclines and deflects to the nature of
Alcaly, and it can no longer be called Aurum Fulminans, of which more anon. But
to return from this digression.

So also Fell Vitri Anat. Croll. in Lupide medicam.
contracts the same relish, becoming Salt from the Acidity of the Flint, for it
does not precipitate Mercury at all.

Liquor of Talck (not Oil, as the ignorant vulgar think, for it conceives not
flame) stirs not Mercury at all; as neither do Salts from all Diuretic Herbs,
as Bean-stalks, Broom, S. John's Wort, Rupture Wort, Nettles, etc. all these, I
say, are Acid-salt, and do not precipitate Mercury from the said Solution; but
when they are Alcalized by a quick flame or Fusion, then the Mercury falls down
reddish.

Hence it appears, that that most Learned Man of the Ancients, who taught us to
extinguish red hot Glass in the Ashes of Bean-stalks, and not in its Salt, did
rightly institute the burning thereof, and not according to the Doctrine of our
unskilful Reformer, lest the Salt should unadvisedly assume the nature of
Alcaly, of which I have spoken before in the fifth Chapter.

The salts of the Ashes of vulnerary Herbs, such as Bettony, Agrimony,
Winter-green, Elatine, Star-wort, Sanicle, etc. all yielding a tart Salt, are
therefore unfit for vitrification, and do not precipitate Mercury, which is of
the same taste, as shall be showed in its place: But all the aforesaid Salts,
by the fire of Fusion, do change their nature, and become Alcalyes, are
vitrified, and do precipitate Mercury of a sparkling color: Hence Zoar upon
Exodus observes, that Glass is made of any Ashes (i.e.) when they are reduced
to Alcaly.

Common Salt does not precipitate Mercury, Conslancy of Salt in the Fire.
from the abovementioned Solution; yea, although it be burnt a long time, and
with a quick flame, it would never become Alcaly, neither does it change its
nature by digestion; wherefore it is the perfectest of all Salts, and by a
singular privilege is called by Helmont, The excellentest of Salts. So Salt of
Vipers does not precipitate Mercury, unless the Acid and the Alcaly be again
separated one from the other, of which hereafter.

Salt of Wormwood, being Acid-salt, does not for that reason precipitate
Mercury, Pharmico. f. 788.
neither does it absorb Spirit of Vitriol, as the Reformer teaches under the
Title of Coagulated Spirit of Vitriol; but when it is Alcalized, it
precipitates Mercury yellow, and then also it absorbs the Acid Spirit of
Vitriol, and vitrifies.

Hence we learn, that in a fire stronger than the nature of the thing will
bear, Salts will be fixed, and converted into a Neutral thing; wherefore many
things are produced by the sole Regiment of Fire, not as if they were entirely
generated anew, and brought forth to light for increase (as the vulgar, being
ignorant of this Hippocratical Learning, do suppose) but only by a simple
alteration of the Subject, as my Hippocrates shows; L. 1. de Diet.
and they also know, who have skill to make an Harmonious Conjunction between
the External and Internal.

So also, without the help of Fire, Salts are changed from their natural
temper; as for example, mingle Liquor of Salt of Wormwood, not Alcalized, with
Rosemary, and the Solution becomes milky, both of them being coagulated into a
Neutral thing.

On this Foundation stands the Process of the Febrifuge Medicine of Lazarus
Riverius, Riverius Febrifuge.
hitherto known to few; but I shall crave leave a little more clearly to
explain it, know then, that it is made of one only Subject representing Alcaly,
and two Acids, all of them not having yet undergone the Fire, but by Exaltation
so often repeated, till you see it again changed from blackness into a most
white, volatile, artificial Salt, not unpleasant to the taste, to which
afterward the fourth Athleta is added (i.e.) Scammony, as appears in the
Process. But who can enumerate all the Metamorphoses which arise from the
mixture of Salts; some of them assuming one form, some another, by their mutual
mixtures, as Hippocrates teaches. L. I. de Diaet.


It is to be observed, that Salt of Soot having its Original from the stock of
vegetables, does precipitate Mercury from the aforesaid Solution white, spongy,
Alcah of Soot is made Salt.
and light, as do the volatile Alcalyes of all Animals, as shall be said anon;
but if they are converted into Salts, then the Mercury falls no more.

Hence we may conclude, that almost all oily Herbs, and such as are counted hot
and pingueous, do yield Sal Alcaly by a light and simple Incineration; to which
if the Hippocratist renders its proper Pinguedo, by an hidden Coction, they are
converted into an admirable Salt, which is then called by our Chemists (Elixir
Parvum) and is of great See Riple, Bacon, etc.
virtue in Physic, of which in its place. The salts of other Herbs do
degenerate and turn into imperfectly Salt, or into Acids, and by a quick flame,
or the fire of Fusion, are reduced into vitrifying Alcaly.

CHAP. VIII. The Founders Art does further show, that Alcalyes and Acids are
absorbed.
ALl. Minerals, of what kind soever, having in them hidden Metalline Bodies,
are joined with Acids, (i.e.) Sulphur of several sorts, which do hinder the
Metal from being purged from the impurity of the Mines. In this straight, it is
needful to have recourse to Alcalyes, which do the work speedily: Reducing
therefore the Mineral to Powder, they mix it with Alcaly, and melt it in a
Crucible; the Fusion is accelerated by Nitre, which is kindled with the
Sulphur, as part burns away, so part with the Tartar is turned into Alcaly;
that Alcaly absorbs all the Acid, with which otherwise all the Metal would fly
away; but this way it easily goes to bottom, and that Artists call Regulus (i.
e.) pure Metal, free from Sulphur, which again under a Probatory cuppell with
Lead they further purify, for which you may consult the Say-masters and
Refiners, it being my intent to speak only of the Foundation of Salts.

I have told you, Silver flies away with Acid Minerals.
that Metals are turned by Acid Minerals into Fume, which is manifest in Silver
melted with Lead in an Earthen Pot made of Potashes; put the Sulphur
piecemeal into it, whose acidity as it flies away, it also expels the Metal,
which you may gather up again with a moist Linen Cloth spread abroad in the
Chimney.

Another Experiment to prove that Metals are carried off by the Acid Mineral,
is, that Cement, Gold slies off with the Acid Mineral.
which is called Regale, which is made of common salt, and Powder of Bricks,
with which they stratifie or spread over Gold Money bound in with Copper: In
this Cement the Gold, without Fusion, dismisses the Copper, and together with
the Acid Spirit of Salt, vanishes to smoke, which yet carries off with it
something of the Gold; but when the Acid Spirit, being loaded with the Gold,
assays to pass through the Earthen Covers, the Gold is precipitated, and sticks
to the Covers, Regulus Antimony.
whiles the Spirit corrodes them, which are afterward pounded together with
Quicksilver and water: This recollects the Gold, and restores it to his
Master, when it is separated from it through Leather.

As Minerals bearing Metals are precipitated into Regulus, the same way is
Regulus of Antimony precipitated (i. e.) with Tartar and Nitre, because the
Alcaly of Tartar imblbes the Acid Sulphur from the Antimony, and segregates the
pure Regulus.

Antimony is also melted with common Salt, but the Acidity of this latter does
corrode the Antimony in the vehemence of the fire, and it is raised into
bubbles, and so less Regulus falls. These examples concerning precipitation the
dry way, may suffice.

So any Alcaly being dissolved in water (which is called the moist way) as it
always drinks up the Acid, it also cleanses Saltpeter from every Acid, which
therefore the ablest Physicians do choose for a great cooler in the Quinzey; for
which reason it is called Sal Prunellae. A certain dull Friar hearing Sal
Prunellae to be commanded by Chemists, came by night to a skilful Apothecary,
and demanded of him whether this Sal Prunellae. were extracted out of Sloes, or
Garden Plums; yet these are the men who would be accounted by vulgar Idiots and
silly women, the only Regular Practicioners: I say, they boil Nitre burnt with
Sulphur, does more hurt than good in a Quinzey, for it becomes salt.
Nitre in Alcalized Lie, till a drop stands on cold Iron like Suet; then they
set it aside in a cool place without pouring it into any other Vessel, and in a
night suffer it to concrete into most clear and pure Flakes, which the next
morning they wash off; for the Alcaly has drunk up all the hurtful and impure
Acid from it, as it happens also in man's body, as Hippocrates shows in his
first Book of Diaet.

CHAP. IX. The Prerogative and Privilege of Alcaly of Tartar.
I Have mentioned already, that amongst the fixeder sort of Alcalyes, Salt of
Tartar is endued with a singular privilege; for though it be an heavy Body,
terrestrial, impure, Gold is almost all Sulphur, and gives the least Mercury of
all.
and mixed with filth, yet being digested with any Metal whatsoever, in a due
space of time, it turns it into running Mercury. Having experimented this, I
affirm it for a truth to convince the incredulous; but if any refuse to believe
it, I am not much solicitous.

A Friend of mine endeavoring to obtain Tartar from generous, mature, and
clear Wine, did elicit and draw forth the Spirit, and suffered the Phlegm to
exhale; the remainder being thick as a Syrup, he permitted to concrete in a
cold place, into Pellucid Tartar, which he burnt; and as the custom is, with
common water extracted the Alcaly, which he suffered to run down into a Liquor
of its own accord. A sudden occasion offering it self, that he was to go to
Rome with a certain great man; to the end that the precious Liquor might not be
lost in the interim, he commanded his Servant to preserve it in a Vessel which
he appointed and showed him for that purpose; his Servant, by a mistake, poured
it into a Neighbour^ Vessel, like the former, in which Silver was which had
been dissolved in Aqua fortis, to which Sal Armoniack sublimated and dissolved
in distilled Vinegar (begun for another work) had been added: My Friend
returning after nine Months, and seeking for the Liquor of Tartar, he found the
Cucurbite into which his Servant was enjoined to put it, quite empty: The
Servant answering, that he had poured it into a Neighbour^ Vessel, looking
there, he found not the Liquor, but dry Earth (nine Months exsiccated) which he
touched with his Rod, Mercury out of Silver.
and a great part of the running Mercury discovered it self; at that time he
could not believe that running Mercury could be made out of perfect Metals,
being so persuaded, according to the Axiom, That it is easier to make, than to
destroy perfect Metals, which made him neglect the Experiment, imagining in
himself, that the Mercury had fallen into the Vessel by some chance. But at
length he learned out of Basilius Valentinus, that Salt of Tartar has this
privilege above all other Salts.

The ingenious Helmont has confirmed this Experiment in these words; I have
found, says he, Tract. potest Medic. S. 4.
that the Crudity of Saturn is dissolveable by the fat of fixed Salts, and that
the parts of the Compositum are so divided, that it suffers Silver to run crude.

There came then to my mind a strong Lixivium, wherewith old women boil Litarge
to black their hair (of which Porta also makes mention in his Magia Naturalis)
into which I dropped Spirit of Vitriol, and presently the Alcaly suffered the
Metal to run into a white Powder, which I reduced into Lead; by which means, I
knew for certain, that Alcalyes do invisibly contain and hide in their Bowels
Calcined Metals.

This Experiment being made, Helmont goes on, saying, That calcined things are
most sharp, but they are dulcerated with dissolved Sal Armoniack and putrified
Tartar; (i.e.) they are turned into running Mercury, which is not any longer
tart or biting, as Calcined things are, but insipid to the taste.

I return now to the Salt of Tartar, which in form of Liquor was poured into
the Cucurbite, in which was Silver corroded by Aqua fortis, with Sal Armoniack:
All these changed their nature into Neutral Salts, different from their former
state; so the Silver made no more any show of Silver, of which Lite. de magno
mundi. Mirac.
Basilius de Tartaro.

Durch, etc. By my Spirit they take revenge, and break (or dissolve) all
Metals. For as all Sublunary Bodies (Experience being witness) do consist of
two things, Acid and Alcaly (as I shall mechanically show in this Tract) the
same may be said of Silver: from this Silver the Alcaly of Tartar, by due
digestion and coction, has absorbed so much of the Acid Sulphur, Diana nada.
as was sufficient for the Mercury in the state of Silver (now it being
segregated and divided from it) for its constancy; into the place of Mercury,
succeeds the Alcaly (Philosophers call it Adulterium) which it embraces from
the Silver; and therefore loses its form and beauty, and changes its nature,
so that it is melted even with the gentlest fire, as Lead or Sal Armoniack
mixed with the Calx of Flints, Lana Cornea.
and it is called by Crollius, Luna Cornea, because it may be cut with a Knife
like Horn. This Luna Cornea, though it be washed an hundred times with hot
water, and As I have elsewhere said of Furum Fulminans.
melted with a swift Flux from Tartar and Nitre, yet it is impossible to
Separate them one from the other, unless in Balneo Saturni, in which that of
the Silver which remains, returns to pure, but the Salts, with the Lead, into
dross and Litarge; which also again, by simple Fusion, is reduced into Lead;
but the dross, which were Salts, are hurried into Element together, with the
Sulphur of Silver, which they had absorbed.

CHAP. X. That the Bodies of Alcalyes are Vacua, proved by examples.
WHerefore Salt of Tartar is a Medium, A Vacuum in Nature demonstrated by Art.
wherein not only Metals, but Minerals also do revive and obtain, as it were, a
Resurrection, though by Art, and a strong fire, they seem quite destroyed. Pour
Spirit of Vitriol, drop by drop, upon dissolved Salt of Tartar, till the
hissing noise cease; reduce the Liquor into Chrystals, or dry it all up, and
you shall find a Salt, having the nature of Vitriol, it provokes vomit, and
being superbibed, purges by Stool, as white Vitriol is wont to do: Regeneration
of Vitriol.
It is mingled with Nitre and Quicksilver, it is sublimated into red, to which
add common Salt, and it becomes a Corrosive Sublimate; it is distilled per se
as Vitriol: The whitish Mucilage subsiding in the bottom, is the same Faex,
which in dissolved crude Vitriol, by the affusion of Salt of Tartar, falls down
black: It endures the fire, and resists fusion, as the Colcothar, or Caput
mortuum of Vitriol, which yet without the affusion of Spirit of Vitriol was
easily melted: That fixed Salt is Vitriol Regenerated, called by the Writers of
the Rudiments of Chemistry, Tartarus Vitriolatus, and Universal digestivum. It
is made much more excellent and perfect from crude Vitriol dissolved in water,
and Liquor of Tartar poured upon it, until it cease to be troubled, which point
of Saturation is not found without difficulty, for if it exceed but one drop,
it turns the mixture either into Vitriol or Alcaly, of which my Hippocrates, L.
I. de Diaet.
Nunquam simul in codem consistunt; coagulate the clear Liquor into shining
Chrystals: This is more Noble than the former, because in distilling the
Vitriol, the violence of the fire elevates the Liquamen of the Copper, and
mixes it with the Spirit, so that it become troublesome to the Stomach. But in
this simple way, the Alcaly consumes only that most simple Natural Acid, which
corroded the embrionated Metal in its Flux. This is that simple Acld, agreeable
to our Nature, in Acid Fountains, refreshing the Drinkers, and acceptable to
the Stomach, though taken in great quantity; of this I determine to speak
briefly; yet De morbis Tartareis.
Paracelsus relates, that in a Village called Veltin in Helvetia, there is a
Fountain, the like whereto is not to be found in the whole World.

So also Spirit of Nitre reassumes a Body in Salt of Tartar, and becomes cold
natural Nitre, Regeneration of Nitre.
conceiving flame, and is a Remedy for the Quinzey, which otherwise being
separated are Caustic, Regeneration of common Salt. Of Acid Spirits, only
Spirit of Salt dissolves Gold, and why?
as I have showed in Aurum Fulminans. If you add Spirit of Salt to the same
Salt of Tartar, then, after Coagulation, it becomes common Salt, as it was
before it was turned by a strong fire into Spirit; and therefore, since the
Acid Spirit of Salt by solution returns to Salt, we may cease our wonderment,
why amongst all Acid Spirits, no other dissolves Gold, but that of Salt?
because that by Corrosion it reassumes the Nature of Salt, even as the water
commonly, called Aqua Regia, which without Salt touches not the Gold at all.
Tartarus Regeneratus by some improperly called Tina folia a Phylosoph^n un
Distilled Vinegar becomes fat Oil, concerning flame.


The same Salt of Tartar, if it has imbibed Vinegar distilled from Wine, is
made common Tartar of Wine, having all the properties thereof, excepting only
that in humjdo it does more easily melt: Cleanse this Regenerated Tartar, by
solution, from all its impurity, and afterward distill it with a strong fire
through a Glass retort placed in Sand, and you shall obtain an Oil, and bitter
Liquor, as that which is elicited from crude Tartar, yet the Oil somewhat
resembles the goodness of the Wine, of which the Vinegar was made. It Is almost
incredible to be spoken, What more pleasant than to know those things, and to
see them with our eyes, and handle them with our hands under a grateful
silence, which common sense does not apprehend, and by nature are put remole
from us. Oil made water. Oil made Aqua Ardens Aqus Atdens made Alcaly, and
Elementary water.
that distilled Vinegar should contain in it an occult fatness, and yet it is
very true; but Salt of Tartar has not this pi^^guedo, for it is fixed and
tried in the fire. At Rome, from one Ounce of this Regenerated Tartar, I drew
forth six Drachmes of Oil, of an Orange color, and grateful smell; but at
Venice, a pound scarce afforded me one Drachme, and that black, colored, and
stinking: I say, it is even incredible, that in Vinegar, not only the qualities
of the Wine, but of the Country where it grows, should manifest themselves.
From what has been said, it appears, that Acids do attract Alcalyes at their
pleasure, and rule over them as they lift.

In like manner it reduces Oils, either distilled or expressed, into their
first Elements; for they being mixed in a just proportion (i.e.) to satiety
with Salt of Tartar, and digested afterward out of a Glass retort placed in
Sand, one Moity returns Oil, the other Moity is water. Again mix this Oil with
new Salt of Tartar, as above, repeat the distillation, and you will see all the
Oil converted into water, a little Earth being left with the Tartar, which you
shall know increased in weight; so that Oil, which otherwise is wholly
inflamable, here you may find turned into odoriferous water; and again
distilling this water out of a Glass, you will extract Aqua Ardens, which
again, with Salt of Tartar, returns to Alcaly, and afterward into Elementary
water, like that which remained in the Glass.

There were two pound of the remaining Salt of Tartar in the Retort, which I
laid upon an Iron Board or Slate, that it might run into a pellucid Liquor: I
distilled all the Humidity out of the Retort placed in Sand, and breaking the
Vessel, Salt of Ta^tar turn I into simple Elements.
I again dissolved in the Air the Salt, which was in the bottom, upon the Iron
Slate (which is not prejudiced at all) which is done in about forty hours
space, and there remained nothing on the Slate besides a little slimy Faex. I
again distilled the Liquor, increasing the fire, as before, till nothing came
forth, either dropping or smoking, and I again dissolved the same Salt, having
broken the Retort, on the Iron Slate; I renewed these Operations twelve times,
and all the Salt of Tartar was turned into the Element of water: I gathered up
the Faeces which were left each time on the Slate, and I extracted all the
saltness from the distilled water, with which I made the same Process, as
before; so that all the Salt of Tartar, as the Vinegar, Oil, and Aqua Ardens,
were turned into insipid water, and Terra Mortua, of no savor or smell; which
Earth and Water, a little before, seemed Caustical. It Is a wonder to consider,
what becomes of this Fiery Vital power and virtue, both of the Oil, Vinegar,
and Aqua Ardens, as also of the Salt of Tartar; yet this virtue or form
persisted constant in the fire, until the reduction into the Elements; I now
call it the Rector, for our clearer understanding of it, of which more
particularly in its place: You may call it as you please, either Fire, Form,
Archeus, it is all one to me; All are like, though they appear unlike, as
Hippocrates affirms. L. 1 de Diaet. In Append. ad animad. f. 84.
If the Reformer had had any knowledge of fixed Alcalyes, he had never
prescribed to Podagrical persons Oil of Venice Soap, for whatsoever of Oil
distills from Soap, is like that from Brick, and contains nothing of Alcaly: so
also, they who dissolve the Body of Soap, and say, that it is good for gouty
diseases, are in a great mistake; the taste may be an Omen of their
disappointment which is found manifestly salt; for it does not precipitate
Mercury from the abovementioned solution.

Wherefore the Alcaly of Tartar seems to bear a representation of the
Philosophers Chaos, wherein they say their Mercury has a Resurrection; of
which Paracelsus. The Regeneration, L. 1. de natura rerum.
says he, and Renovation of Metals is thus made, as man returns to the Earth
whence he was first taken, and so shall be again Regenerated at the last day:
So also Metals may again return to Mercury (of which they were first derived)
and be dissolved with it, and r^-become Mercury; and again by fire (which also
shall judge the World) be re-produced and clarified. This way (as he goes on)
are stones Regenerated, Of which see Roger Bacon, Riply, Isaac Holland, yet
read them with caution.
and also special tinctures of Silver and Gold. Thus far Paracelsus. In the
mean while, I would not advise any man to persuade himself, that Salt of
Tartar, after whatsoever manner prepared, is the Catholic Chaos of the
Philosophers, though Metals in it may return-into running Mercury. It Is enough
in short to have advertised this.

But I am enjoined silence by Harpocrates, concerning fixed Salt of Tartar,
Actaeons example deters me.
lest I should be injurious to the curious disquisitions of Learned men, who
have spent much labor and pains to attain the full knowledge thereof, it being
a Medium giving vivification to many things. The Academical Spi^i: understands
not this Mystery.
Basillus, Paracelsus, and others, have taken great notice of it, who have
stripped it of its clothing, and have chosen it for a Dissolver, seeing it does
illuminate and vivifie its objects, almost after the same manner, as the fixed
Alcaly of Herbs extracts from Calcined Flint another, and like Alcaly, which it
is not possible to elicite by any other sapour, than by its like; and it makes
it much more powerful, and turns it into a nature truly fiery; so that we ought
to make our progress from things known to things unknown, as Aristotle rightly
advises.

This is that which John Baptista van Helmont makes a noise about, De Prb^. c.
17. v. 25
Learn, says he, a dissolvent, which is always the same, and you have attained
the inward Essences of things, Tiact. de verbis herbis, and lapidibus.
which he proves by an example, demanding, why Lapis Ossisragus fixed, not
Calcineable, should cure a broken bone taken by the mouth, and yet not the
Stone, or the Gout? I answer this Worthy Man thus, that the ridiculous Alcakest
of the Reformer, and the secret solvent, are nothing but Vinegar distilled from
Aerugo. Append. ad Animadv. f. 72.
And although it corrodes the Osteocolla Stone, yet the Stone by the corrosion
acquires the properties of Vinegar; whence it comes to pass, that it reaches
not to the Urinary places, but is presently precipitated in the Stomach, as
hereafter shall be demonstrated to the eye.

Wherefore hitherto, Salt of Tartar has played its part in its mean dress, but
when it is dispoiled of its Garments by the hand of a Philosopher, so as to
appear in its naked, lucid, and resplendent form, then it reduces the things
which are committed to it, into the same, or a matter like it self (I remember
having once prescribed Crabs Eyes, so dissolved, He that knows little, fears
much.
to a Woman in a long Quotidian Ague, which could not endure Physical Potions,
a Timid Canonical Physician then present, interrupted me, saying, it was a
Mineral, and full of danger) and because it is without form, as all Alcalyes
are, it assumes the form of that with which it is united (for Sal Tartari is a
middle thing between a Mineral and a Vegetable, and therefore easily
comprehends the nature of them both) and so goes forward. Thus much is
sufficient to have pointed at the differences of fixed Alcalyes.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Volatile Alcaly of Animals.
AS fixed Alcalyes do absorb all Acids, and according to the nature of the Acid
are changed into Salt, as I showed above; so also the Volatile Alcalyes of all
Animals, from whatsoever parts of them extracted, are likewise turned into
Salt, imitating the property of the Acid; What Ferment is, I will show anon.
and as Urino contains a Volatile Alcaly by the ferment of putrefaction, so do
Sweat, Blood, Flesh, and Bones of all living Creatures, by a diverse ferment,
every one according to the virtue, innate to the place. And as I have showed
the intrinsic difference of fixed Alcalyes with Mercury sublimate resolved,
and the singular Prerogative of Salt of Tartar, so touching these Volatile
Alcalyes, I will go on to demonstrate in my progress, their peculiar
privileges and endowments. The Alcaly of all Animals, of Urine, of Blood, of
Sweat, (yea of the Stones of all Animals) of Serpents, The Al^^ly of all
Animals are alike, and empty Bedies.
of Frogs, etc. do praecipitate a white Mercury out of the aforesaid solution,
so that by this Mechanical Method, you can discern no difference, and by
consequence this Alcaly is not of a Salt taste, as the Reformer presuming on
his own opinion, has taught; for Salt things, as I have shown, do not
praecipitate Mercury out of the aforesaid solution, but it receives a form,
according to the property of the Acid, as will more clearly appear in the
progress.

The Ancients took notice of this fundamental and specific difference (which
they call Occult.) The occult quality is the Ferment of the place, of which
hereafter.
I say, they observed, that Volatile Alcaly drinks up as much of Sal Armoniack
as is sufficient for its constancy and saturity, for artificial Sal Armoniack,
so that the Alcaly of Urine and the Acid part of the aforesaid Salt, do so
strictly embrace one another, Artificial Sal Armoniack
that per se, they cannot be separated, for the Salt of Urine, in the torture
of the Fire, seeking to escape, carries away with it the Acid part, which it
had absorbed, and they are both sublimated together into artificial Sal
Armoniack.

Now, that Common Salt, either Ours, or the Armoniack of the Ancients, has an
Acid part, communicable out of the Fire; is proved by this Experiment; viz.
Drop Liquor of Tartar upon Salt, when it is resolved, and in a few moments, you
shall see the earthy part to be separated, Common Salt is Acid Salt.
and the Alcaly of Tartar to embrace the Acid, of which more plainly hereafter:
So, without the Art of Distillation, the Ancients essayed to associate the
Alcaly of Vipers with Natural Sat Armoniack.

Wherefore the Ancients, after they had observed out of Hippocrates the occult
difference of Volatile Alcalies (of Animals) and the Acidity of Common and
Cireniack Salt, L. 1 de Diaet.
under the name of Faculties, they began to stratifie Vipers with Natural
Sal-Cireniack or Armoniack, as Pliny says, in the place before-cited (as they
saw, concerning Urine and Salt) to the end that the Alcaly of Vipers might
imbibe as much of the Acid Salt, L. 1. de Diaet.
as might suffice, for stopping its voluntary flight. This Composition, not
altogether without cause, they then called Sal Theriacals, Salt of Treacle;
because they had learned, the Flesh of Vipers to be good against many poisons
(yea by such an ingenious Viperine Decoction, I have more than once cured the
French Pox in Curious Persons) and consequently by reason of its seminal and
mumial Ferment, that the Alcaly of Vipers, must contain the same Faculty.

This Contemplation of the Ancients is unworthily charged by the Reformer with
childishness and absurdity; He himself, being much more absurd, F. 481.
as not understanding the memorable Inventions of our Ancestors. And whereas he
casts in their Teeth, That they had not the Art of Purifying. That indeed is
true; but they are not therefore to be calumniated, nor detracted from, in
point of Honor, much less to be scoffed at, for so my Master advises. Some
Ages hence, perhaps this Reformer will be laughed at, for writing such absurd
thiugs in his Time; for occasion will not be wanting many thousand years hence,
to find out, and learn nower and better things; Because Nature discovers not
her secrets all at once, Siret l. 7. Not. Q^st. c. 31.
neither are they exposed promiscuously to the view of all, but are, as it were
shut up in her innor Chapel, of which this Age brings forth, one thing; the
Age following^, another. But let Us hear my Hippocrates speaking much more
modestly of this thing; It Is an unworthy thing, L. 1 de Diaet.
to blame any one of them for not finding^, all, are rather to be commended,
for seeking and enquiring after.

These things being praeviously understoods, let us now consider, What
excellence and prerogative, the Viporine Sals of this Reformer has, above the
Inventions of the Ancients, which yet, They prepared by an east Operation; but
He, with great charge, labor, pompous ostentation and triumph.

The Alcaly of Vipers (under that Title, Pharm. f. 486.) distilled out of a
Retort, drinks up the Acid Spirit of Common Salt, which I have showed, with
Alcaly added, to be separable, without the Art of Distillation: The Sal
Viptverium of the Reformer s^ Common Salt.
from that Conjunction (i. e.) of the Acid Salt. and the Alcaly of Vipers, is
made Common Salt. If we urge this Common Salt with Fire of Sand, it will be
elevated into Artificial Sal Armoniack, as having all its properties; which is
proved by this Experiment.

Mingle the Powder of Salt of Tartar (i. e.) the Fixed Alcaly of Tartar, with
an equal part of the Viperine Salt of our Reformer, Pure Alcaly of Vipers.
distill this Mixture in a Retort, placed in Sand, and you shall presently see
the Alcaly of Vipers to ascend by the neck of the Retort; because the Fixed
Alcaly of Tartar apprehends and catches the Acid Salt; then the Alcaly of
Vipers, willingly leaves her Acid Companion, whilst it is forced to fly away
by Heat. Do the same with Common Sal Armoniack, and you shall find no
difference; and therefore what the Ancients did with the Body of Salt, That the
Reformer performs (with greater labor and cost) with the Spirit of Salt; and
if the Ancients Sal Viperirum be of no use, as he says, surely His, has the
same property.

But when, Pure Alcaly of Urine.
That Alcaly is expelled with Salt of Tartar from the Common Sal Armoniack,
then you will have the pure and dry Spirit or Alcaly of Urine, which the
Reformer most foolishly calls Salt Spirit of Sal Armoniack; as he also with the
same sottishness, calls that Vinegar, which he distilled from Meal mixed with
Sal Armoniack, out of a Retort. The Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack, adding withal
this gross mistake, These two Spirits out of Sal Armoniack, Append. ad Amimad.
f. 73, 74.
the Acid and the Salt (though both of them contain not a drop of Sal
Armoniack) though produced out of one Subject, yet are contrary one to another,
and being joined together, destroy one another; wherefore let the Apothecaries
carefully distin uish between the Salts and Acids. But the Reformer informs
them very grossly concerning Tastes, yea he presumes to teach them; that, which
he is ignorant of, himself; witness, amongst many other things, The Water of
Mindererus for the Hearing.
Aqua Mindereri, for the Hearing.

For this Water has Urine and Vinegar for its Foundation, which-mixture the
Reformer does not only disallow, as believing, without further enquiry, That
the Salt and Acid, are destreyed by one another; being ignorant, that the
destruction of one, is the generation of another. Thus he huggs his own
opinions as the Ape does her Apelings, but also he asperses a worthy Man with
reproach and calumnies, who has heartily communicated his experiences for the
Public good; notwithstanding which, the Reformer (after his manner) thus
scribbles in his Appendix: Besides many other Absurdities, Ad A^imadver. Fol.
336.
I see Vinegar and Urine to be poured on, which are pla^nly contrary one to
another; for the Urine of Animals distilled, yields a sharp Saline spirit,
which is a destroyer of all Acetous spirits. Thus he.

Hitherto I have demonstrated, that the Volatile Salt of Urine is by no means
Salt, but Alcalizate, and therefore being mixed with Acid, from them both,
there arises a balt tart Sapor; wherefore from the mixture of the Volatile
Alcaly of Urine, and Distilled Vinegar (which two do never concrete,) there is
made a distillable, salt, and most piercing Liquor, I question whether any
thing be more subtle in nature (of a simple mixture) for an old Obstruction,
For which cause the most Ingenious Mindererus rightly, and with good Judgment,
Without hurt or pain it pervades the Cornea Toniea, and dissidves the
Whitespots in the Pupel, left there by the Smallpox. The ignorant carp at what
they do not understand.
commends and prescribes it for Thickness and Difficulty of Hearing; because it
is salt as Sweat is, as shall be proved, and in regard of its Symbolicalness
and congenious nature thereunto, this Distilled Salt and Volatile Water,
pervades the membrane of the Tympanum; yea it is willingly admitted into it. I
said this Spirit was Salt, which is proved by experience, for it does not
precipitate Mercury, from the often named Solution, as other salt things do
not, which according to Galen's opinion do cut, attenuate, and discuss the
excrements, they dry, they support and strengthen Nature, and that in a rude
lump of Salt, why may not then this most subtle Spirit be also Salt? Wherefore
let the Skilful judge, whether the most Learned Mind rerus be not unworthily
worthily blamed by Impostors. The Reformer understood Hippocrates but ill, who
says, L. 6. Prac.
That a Physician using veason for his guide, will never enviously calumniate
another, for thereby he betrays the weakness of his own mind. Now let (...)
consider Salt of Tartar, which drinking up the Acid, ^ad stparated it from the
Alcaly of Vipers, and remained in the Retort, they call that (but improperly)
Caput mortuum, especially that from common Sal Armoniack, from whence the
Spirit or Urine has been extracted. That Caput Mortuum is a compound of Acid
and Alcaly, and will be doubtless of a salt relish, like the Viperine Salt of
this Reformer, and common Sal Armoniack, as has been said and showed; and for
confirmation thereof I will repeat another Experiment.

Dissolve the said Caput Mortuum in water; cause the foeces to go to the
bottom, and coagulate the clear liquor with a gentle heat to a Siccity, and
with Bole Armoniack in a fourfold proportion, mix it into a very fine powder;
urge this with a naked Fire, from a Glass Retort luted, into a great Receiver,
and the Acidness of the Salt, which found a body in the Alcaly of Tartar, by
the power and heat of the fire is put to flight, but in the greatness of the
heat, it flies not alone, because being absorbed by the fixed Alcaly, it
carries off with it the fixed Salt of Tartar, so that from the Acid and Alcaly
being mixed, and urged with a violent fire, there is extracted a Spirit
Semi-Acid-Salt, which, as it is an artificial product from a various mixture,
does not precipitate Mercury from the aforesaid solution; yet it is not of it
self unfit for Medicine, as neither for destroying certain Minerals; but one
Operation being finished, part of the Tartar returns into the element of Water,
and the Acidity of the Sal Armoniack, from the other part of the Tartar,
clothes it self with a new body, which is again sublimated and separated.

It may be demanded, The Spirit of Sal Armoniack re-assumes a body in Tartar.
why in this place a Spirit is elicited from the fixed Alcaly of Tartar and the
Volatile Acid, whereas above from the Alcaly of Flints, and the Acid spirit of
Salt, it succeeds not? To which I answer, that the Acrimony of the Salt of
Tartar, in a fire, not very vehement, returns quite to nothing, as I have
showed elsewhere; and for this cause, with its associate, it is easily elevated
into Spirit, but the Alcaly of Flints, is more fixed, which before it flies, is
rather, with its adjunct, turned into Glafs.

CHAP. XII. How Volatile Alcaly is generated in an Animal, and the parts of it.
I Have said in the Examination of Mind^rerus his water, that I call Sweat,
either that insersinly transpiring, or that which makes wet; it is all one here.
Sweat (by the Natural Proto-Chymist) is made Salt, as is also every compound
of Acid and Alcaly, Urine not excepted; which this Operation shows.

Take that Lie, wherein foul Linen Shirts have been steeped and washed, not
boiled, put this Lie into a Glass of a long, narrow, and equal neck, set to a
Limbeck at least carelessly, and place it in a digesting Bath or Sand, and in a
few days you shall see the Alcaly of Sweat to ascend, yet not stinking, as That
which is sublimated from Urine. This Alcaly could not be separated from Sweat,
unless its Salt relish were divided, The pure Alcaly of Sacat.
which consists of Acid and Alcaly, both Volatiles, as I have showed in
Mindererus his Water, and elsewhere; so that the Lie is a Fixed Alcaly,
absorbing the Acid part of the Sweat in the Heat of Digestion, and the sugitive
Alcaly being divided from it, goes to top and a cold place.

I once observed, as I was traveling post, Sweat salt and pingueous.
this Salt, Volatile, Fat, and (therefore) penetrating and resolving Sweat;
how, although my Legs were armed with Boots made of the choicest Leather, and
well waxed, so as to admit neither Rain not Water; yet the Sweat of the Horses,
exhaling like a Vapor, had penetrated them, as it also happened to my
Companions of good note: To avoid this inconvenience, I invented an Ointment,
like Vernish, which in other cases could resist Aqua fortis, and then in a
second Journey, for the first days, I found less inconvenience; but the days
following, the Sweat had not only penetrated the Vernish, but had plainly
dissolved it, as far as the Vapor of it reached.

Hence I learned, That Sweat was therefore made Salt by Nature, that it might
resolve the filth in living Bodies, which here and there was coagulated in them.

But how the Sweat of all Animals, and whatsoever does insensily exhale from
them, yea of which the Animal consists, does acquire Saltness. I shall explain
a little more clearly, only for the sake of this Viperine Salt, whose Acidity,
as it is occult, so the Saltness of it is more subtle and grateful. The
Invention of the Salt of Vipers.
I profess my self to be the Inventor thereof, though Momus fret never so much;
which the following Epistle shows: And though for Lucre of a little Gain in
this Age and Theater of the World, some unskilful men, and ignorant of Natures
instruments, and of this Hippocratical Doctrine, have appeared, who obtrude, I
know not what, on the unwary and unexpert, to the Prejudice of my Name, yet I
now give the Read^r to understand, that, which I have not discovered to any man
living hitherto, save by this public Writing.

Mareus Aurelius Severinus wishes prosperity and good success to Otho
Tachenius, a great Studier of Nature and the Hermetical Art.
The Epistle.
THe confidence which I always had in your friendship and good will, I now
really experiment: For my desire to have: some of your Viperine Sult, being
scarce signified to you, you presently satisfied me therein; for which I return
you many thanks. I wish some chance would happen, that you might pass over the
Fordye Adriatique to the flourishing Parthenope, it would be neither unuseful
nor unprofitable to you. Besides, that choice Matron, whom you visited in her
blindness at Naples, from that very day has impatiently longed for you;
wishing that the hinder ances of your intended Voyage were removed; but because
you have sent me a Viperine gift, I will requite you with another of the same
kind, I mean a Volume of the Nature, Poison, and Medicinalness of the Viper,
printed for me at Padua by the Famous Printer Paul Frombottus, who upon the
sight of this Letter, will diliver one to you in my Name; and he will give it
to you the more freely, if you, showing a willingness to communicate the useful
observations, Mary Fremies for Truths sake are a great honor amongst
understanding Men. An Old Proverb.
which you have long made, of this Viperine Salt, do b^take your self to the
Famous John Rhodius, my special Friend, the Corrector of the Press; who, if
need be, can add them, to the end of the Work. I wish also, you would add some
preparation and description of this Viperine Sale of your own. I have her with
inserted the preparation of Volatile Salt, out of Johannes Vepserus. Pray tell
me how far you approve it, and continue to love me, as I do you: For I desire
nothing more at Naples, than to enjoy the hopes of such a felicity as your
Conversation and Company would afford. Here you would find a Liberal Harvest;
Farewell.

From Naples the Ides of May, Anno Dom. 1650. The Illustrious Matron, the Wife
of Capicius Regens, to whom you gave your Viperine Remedy, Salutes you.


BUt to what end should I produce the Testimonies of Learned Men, this present
Writing sufficiently declares, that this Salt, with all its requisites, was not
so much as dreamed of by this Reformer, before I acquainted him with It, as I
could show by his own Letters to me, but that I am willing to consult his
Credit: yet unless he produce other Foundations of Art and Nature, than he has
hitherto done, he will never come to the knowledge of this Salt: No more will
men of a far higher Order and Rank than himself, however they boastingly and
ambitiously word it out, and pretend to be able to attain it.

As Urine and Sweat, so also Blood, The Alealy of Blood Volatile and pure,
precipitates a white Mercu^^.
whilst it is yet hot and reaking may be commixed with Lie, and Alcaly be
sublimated from it; but when the same Blood, without the Lie, is distilled out
of a Retort, with the Fire of Sand, then in the Caput Mortuum it leaves much
Salt, somewhat fixed: More Fixed Salt of Blood, a noble Medicine, does not
precipitate Mercury.
The Alcaly precipitates Mercury from the oftennarned Solution into a white
Powder, but the Salt, does not: Hence it is manifest, that as the Lixivious and
Fixed Alcaly drinks up the Acid from the Blood, so the Velatile Alcaly of the
Blood catches also it is Proper Acidity, which is Volatile too, and in the
Regiment of Fire, they are both fixed into a Salt, as will more clearly appear
in the progress.

But least a New Truth should procure me New Envy, I think it worth my Labor,
before I go on, to demonstrate, that Hippocrates was not ignorant of the
Foundations of this Salt: For he in his Golden Books of Diet has these words,
Lib. 1. Priacip
All living creatures as well as man, are constituted of two things, different
in Virtue, but agreeing in Use, Fire and Water, both of these together are
sufficient, both for all other things, and for themselves, but each of them
apart, is neither sufficient for it self, nor any other thing, etc. Thus he,

My Master and Philosopher, has brought these two Faculties on the Stage, Fire
and Water, in whose Bowels all When I had recourse to natural principles then I
knew Art to be true, says Avicen. I will show those things which no man yet
has assayed to explain, Hippoc. ibid.
things are contained, which are necessary to perfect generation and
transmutation.

A while after he adds, that this is no culinary fire, for he says, men thresh,
wash, and grind Corn, and being baked in a hot Oven, they use it; with a sirong
fire it is not made up in its Body, but with a soft and gentle one; what this
soft fire in all things is, will appear in the progress.

CHAP. XIII. The occult Acid is made Manifest
IN a sound Stomach there is lodged a Volatile and never failing Acid; The Fire
(says Hippocrates) is not sufficient for it self; Honco the appeti^e of
Alimental things, for they are Alcalys, as will appear in the Progress.
by the help of which, Aliments, which are all full of Volatile Alealy, ^none
exocpted (as I shall show hereaster) are transmutedo and runed, into Chyle or
Juice, first Sourish, and afterward by little and little into Salt (i. e.)
mature: whether the Stomach has this Acid of it self, or elsewhere, it is not
my present Enquiry, though a certain Writer intimates the sormer: it is
sufficient for me plainly to demonstrate that there is such an Acidity, first
by Authority, then by experience.

Hippocrates says, In long looseness of the Intestines, L. 6. Apho. 1.
if Acid belching supervene, which was not before, it is good. The meaning is,
that Acidity returning to the Stomach, it changes the food into Chyle, or Vital
Juice, then necessarily Health returns.

Hence all seasonings and sauces for Meat, to sharpen our appetite, are Acid;
as Juice of Lemon, Pomgranate, Orange, Verjuice, Tartar, Unripe Grapes, and the
like, all which notwithstanding differ much among themselves; of which, to
avoid Prolixity, I will not now dispute. See Chap. 10.

To recover this Maidity, when it is lost in Diseases, Acid Juices differ from
one another.
the Ancients appointe^, Api^ Sirrups, of Vinegar and Sugar; of Vinegar mixed
with Water, and the like, that by their means, the Weak Stomach might be
resreshed, and the Aliment, though taken in a small quantity, might not
immediately putrify; which yet is taken notice of by few, especially of those
who persuade themselves, that Putrefaction and Chylification are the same
things.

There was a certain man of the n^^^ Sect, and in his own account, no mean
Person, who forbad Juice of Lemmon upon pain of death, to one (...) of a
Fever, who exceedingly desired sharp things, as i^ it were too crude; but he
prescribed simple Syrrup of Vinegar. I could not but admire that he should
allow Vinegar boiled with Sugar, for an alterative, but not Juice of Lemmous,
in his Meat: He Answered with a loud Voice, that Julip of Vinegar was made of
Water and Sugar. Our Hippocrates speaks of such a Physician, L. 1. de Diat.
If he does not know the constitution from the beginning, and that which
predominates in the Body, be can never prescribe that which is good for a sick
man. Now this Acidty, being oppressed by a long Disease, returns to the
Stomach, either of its own accord, or by the Skill of an ingenlous Physician.

But that we may have some knowledge of this Acidity by Experience, Let an
healthy Man drink a draught of Milk fasting, and let him presently vomit it up
again, and he shall perceive the Acidity with his Tongue, and shall see the
Milk vomited up, half curdled, as if Vinegar had been poured on it; (almost the
like Acidity, is commonly found in Nature, He which is ignorant of the
principles of Nature, has no true root whereon to ground his Curative
intention. Geber.
by an helping hand, which in a Glass turns all the Aliment in four or fire
hours space, by the help of a gentle heat, from (...) Acid Salt into a Lacteous
Chyle: a pleasant spectacle (...) behold, which I can ocularly demonstrate to
any who desire to see it; but in this place for some reasons I forbear.) By the
help of this obscure, though grateful Acidity, the Viperine Alcdly is compacted
and gathered together for its proper uses.

But no Sapor does curdle and coagulate Milk, but that which is Acid: Now it
(...) p^^^ormed three manner of ways,

1. In the Healthy Stomach of all living Animals, Milk is not simply coagulated
by the Acid, but in the very coagulation, it is necessarily impressed with the
the Vital Virtue of the very Animals, which though it consists in the Acid, yet
it differs from every other Acid, and then it is chylified and received for
nourishment: An Admirable thing.
So in a Dog, i^ assumes the Nature of the Dog, etc. the handling (...) which
Hippocratical Doctrine, Acidity is the Vital Organ, and the bond of the Rector
with the body, it may suffice to hint this once for all.
being not proper for this place, I do only point at it.

2. In the Stomach of Sick Animals, the Milk is indeed sowred, but not
impressed with a Vital Character; wherefore the Acidity becomes putrefactive,
which nourishes not, but increases the Disease.

Hence my Hippocrates in some Feavors (not in all, C. 5. Apho. 65.
as some would have it) forbids the use of Milk.

3. Milk is coagulated by manifest Acids, and by all of them, either of the
Mineral sort and Class, as are Acid Fountains, Vitriol in substance, Spirit of
Vitriol, of Sulphur, of Salt, of Nitre; or it is coagulated in one only part of
the Animal (i. e.) the Stomach, Diven Coagulations of Milk.
and in no other; which is a sign that the perceptible Acidity is not admitted
into the other parts: but if it creep into them by chance, it becomes the o^use
of Diseases and Death, wherefore Acidity lodges at least in all Healthy
Stomachs, which, because it generally coagulates Milk, it is called by
Dioscorides, What Coagulum is.
Coagulum, and commonly in Italy Conaglio: yea the Stomach of all Birds, have
the abovesaid Acidity so strong and in so great quantity, that unless they
frequently cat Sand or pieces of Bricks, whereby to restrain the
super-abounding Acidity, the said Acid would slide down from the Stomach and
trouble the other Digestions, whence they would fall into an Atrophy and never
grow fat: or else it is coagulated by the Juices of Vegetables; as of Lemmons,
Oranges, Barberies, Vinegar, and what ever else tastes Acid and Sharp: Milk
also sowres of its own accord (as do other Juices, as well of Vegetables as
Animals, when they incline to putrefaction, yea nothing can putrify or be
generated anew, Acid and Alcaly in Milk.
unless this Acidity do proceed) and then it is also coagulated, and the Whey
separated, which carries off with it the occult Volatile Alcaly, by means of
which it does refrigerate, as shall be showed in its place.

Both these faculties are latent in good and sound Milk, and therefore they
cause an occult Saltness therein; which is the reason, that Salt of what kind
soever, either Natural or Artificial, never hurts Milk; yea sublimate Mercury
it self, being a compound of the abovenamed Acid, Minerals (i e.) Vitriol,
Nitre, and Salt (whose Acidity being sucked up by the Quicksilver, Salt things
do not curdle Milk.
as by Alcaly, is changed into a very excellent Salt) does Milk no hurt at all.
Hence it appears, that Salt things do indeed dissolve mucilaginous compounds,
but destroy not harder and more compact Bodies, as will be more plainly
manifested in the Sequel.

CHAP. XIV. The Precedent (...) Illustrated by the Resolution and Composition
of the Stone.
I said in the foregoing Chapter, that the perceptable, or manifest Acidity,
The Analysis of the Stone.
out of the Stomach, was the cause of Diseases; which assertion, the
Composition of the Stone does confirm, which for greater Illustration, I will
now Mechanically resolve, and again compound. Take a Stone, cut out from the
Bladder, or coming voluntarily from the Reins, (a drachme or two is sufficient)
put it into a Glass Retort new and clean (let not the Stone be beat to Powder,
but of that bigness, that it may not stick to the Neck of the Retort) put the
Retort into Sand, set too a new and clean Receiver, urge it with a moderate
Fire; First of all an Alcaly, like Urine, yet of no smell, will drop into the
Receiver, and a little after, you shall see the more fixed part of the same
Alcaly to be sublimated in the Neck of tho Retort: mix both those Spirits, the
Liquid and the Solid, and keep them diligently in a Glass Vessel, stopped with
Wax, For if it be open, they vanish to Air, of which Hippocrates, taken part it
is not sufficient, either for it self, L. i. de Diat.
or any other.

In the Retort when it is cooled, you shall find the pieces of Stone in the
same form as they were put in, yet so light and friable, that if you touch them
but lightly, with your finger, they fall to powder, (as dead carcasses in Roma
Subterranea) upon which entire pieces, if you again pour the Alcaly reserved
from the stone, or else other Alcaly of Urine, presently it hardens, as it was
before; which is a sign, that the Alcaly, in the aforesaid cadaver, finds an
occult Acid, which may absorbe it; for unless it finds the Acid, it abides not
alone in the open Air, but according to its nature, would vanish away, Because
being severed, they are sufficient neither for themselves, nor any other; as
Hippocrates teaches.

Hence we learn, That the Stone (for Example) is not congealed, neither in the
Bladder nor in the Reins, unless by the Alcaly of Urine, or the Alcaly of the
place, and the Acid unduly, unproperly, and by mistake, falling down from the
Stomach, and there being degenerated, the Acid and the Alcaly, being joined
there, must needs concrete into a Mass, as I shall every where plainly show)
and they lay hold also on that which is not much different from their Nature;
which, together with these two, undergo coagulation, as I have said in Calx or
Lime, and daily experience also witnesses. I know it, says the Author of the
Rosary, because of necessity the work mast come to such a Nature


Hence Red Stones are congealed by a little Blood, which falls down in the same
place from the Acid, out of the eroded vein; wherefore they are more friable
and brittle; but the other Stones, having mucilage joined to them, are whiter
and thporefore harder. This is that, which my Hippocrates most skilful in
Chemistry, does proclaim. These things are thus brought to pass by Divine
necessity, yet they know not what they do, but every thing fulfils his destined
fate: which is, as if he had said, both these Spirits or Faculties, being
joined together, in whatsoever place, L. 1. de Diat.
must of necessity concrete and congeale, but being severed, they effect
nothing in Nature, neither can they subsist, being neither sufficient for
themselves or other things, as my Doctor says. So that, manifest Acidity
without the Stomach, in whatsoever place it be, is Morbous and Inimicous to
Nature.

This Doctrine of the Old man is most true, for it is daily observed in
practice, that Stones do concrete all vacuities of the body, wheresoever the
Acid being out of its place, by mistake meets with the Alcaly, as in the Lungs,
the Liver, the Vena porta, the Ureters, the Intestinum Colon, and the Bladder
of the Gaul: which is against the most Aoute Galen, L. 1^ de ^^ affect.
who teaches, That the Stone is generated in the Bladder and Reins only by
heat: wherefore the Stone of all Animals (of which we now speak) has nothing
in its Composition, but Acid and Alcaly, both Volatile, as also Blood or
Mucilage; but when it is coagulated in the Bladder of the Gaul, then it lays
hold of that bitterness which it meets there; ^^pp. L. 1. de Diaet.
some going hither, some thither, and being thoroughly mixed amongst themselves,
etc.

Hence we may learn, of what Virtue in dangerous Diseases, the Water tempered
with or poured upon the Stone which is found in the Gaul of an Hedghog, may be;
which yet some ignorant Practicioners do mightily extol: it is a wonder they are
not afraid of this Stone, as of an igneous or fiery nature, since it is better
from the Gaul, which hitherto they have not observed. If the ablution of this
Stone were good for any thing, furely one drop of the Gaul of the meanest Fish,
were much better then twenty Ablutions thereof.

Wherefore from the coagulation of the Stone, it now appears, how far
Lithon-Tribon, Cantharides, the Blood of an Hare, of a Fex, and the like, have
hitherto profited in the Stone; so that Paracelsus rightly judges, that the
Stone (and the Knotty Gout) are coagulated like Tartar, by two Faculties,
according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates (i. e.) the Acid and the Alcaly; it
also coagulates with it some foeces, which by chance it finds there; and Galen
witnesses against himself and his followers, Lib. 7 de Meth.
The cause being known, it is easy to find the remedy; and therefore whatsoever
of the Stones of Crabs, of Lapis Judaicus, of Flints, of the Stones of Carpes,
of Perches, and the like, being in Powder, or dissolved in Vinegar, is taken at
the mouth for the Stone, it indeed imbibes the Antecedent cause of the Coagulum
(i. e.) the Acid as I have showed; but it does not abate or diminish the Stone,
when it is once coagulated. So also Salt things, by reason of their Acid part,
do hinder the concreteing of the Stone, in as much as they consume and drink up
the Alcaly of the Urine, so that the Acid roving up and down the Body, can find
no Alcaly wherewith to associate or be coagulated; but Salt things do not
dissolve the Stone, when it is already concreated.

But that common Salt does imbibe and absorbe into it self the Alcaly of Urine,
and other Alcalyes of Animals, as I have shown above in the preparation of
Sal-Armoniack, so I will now further demonstrate by another experiment.

It Is known, That the flesh, of whatsoever Animal, is preserved by common Salt,
which in a few days runs down therefrom into a Salt Sanguineous Liquor: Boil
about a pound of this Liquor, and scum it, and put it into a Glass Retort, and
with a gentle fire, draw forth all the moisture; lastly, cover the Retort with
sand, increasing the fire, then the Alcaly of the flesh will be elevated into
the neck of the Retort (like the Alcaly of Urine;) which the common Salt had
absorbed and drawn out from the flesh; only by a few days maceration and
steeping; after the same manner, the Salt which we eat, must needs consume and
drink up the superfluous Alcaly (gathered together here and there in the
Gavities or Ventricles (as Hippocrates says) which is unfit for Transpiration;
reason it self dictates this, and experience bears witness thereto; for
Alcaly by an easy process is sublimated out of Urine, and the Soa-salt remains,
as it was eaten, in the bottom, The Dignity of Common Salt.
the same way as I just now showed, concerning the Salt Liquor of Flesh.

Hence we may gather, That Salt is bestowed on Mortals, as a necessary support
of Health and Life.

It Is plain from our antecedent Discourse, The Wise say, nothing is more
^^^^ral, than a ^^ing to be dilsolved by that, of which it is compounded.
that by a Mechanical necessity, the Stone is not dissolved, unless by a middle
Sapor between Acid and Alcaly; This Sapor is changed into Urine, of great
Strength, and grateful to the intestines (as has been said) and it ought to be
subtle, that it may pass up and down and pervade all freely. If you will call
this way of dissolving, either by its contrary, or by its like, you do not much
mistake, for the Alcaly if it dissolves, it is done by its like; the Acid, if it
destroys, it is done by its contrary: Who (of what Sect soever) besides
Hippocrates, Hiop. de loc. in Homiae.
could have unfolded this Riddle to us, wherefore Galen commends Him, not
without Cause, as Ad Glauc.
our Director in Physic, and an excellent Master in the whole course of our
Life.

There is also a Specific Remedy, known to few, which in young people fully
and perfectly takes away the Stone of the Blader, A Remedy for the Stone,
Asthma, Epilepsy.
without relapse, and elder persons may also take it at Mouth, without any
inconvenience. I would willingly communicate it, if I were not afraid of
Impostors; but chance here more prevails then reason: The Asthma and Epilepsie,
are also perfectly cured by the same Remedy.

CHAP. XV. A Thing unheard of, and admirable, yet most ancient, discoursed of.
I Have already declared, That the Acidity in the Stomach, I have also showed,
That the Stone, Urine, Sweat, and Blood, are Salt. I have also showed, how the
Salt or Sapor taste is divided with fixed Alcaly, that so the Alcaly may be
freed from the Acid; now it is my part, to show, how, Urine, Sweat, and Blood,
etc. do acquire this Salt Taste? All Aliments, and whatsoever does nourish,
have but a little of the Acid, and much of Volatile Alcaly (as hereafter will
be more clearly showed) (i. e) as much Acid as will bind up and restrain the
Alcaly, that it vanish not away (for alone it is not sufficient for it self) as
I have formerly noted out (of Hippocrates) the Acidity of the Stomach acts upon
that Alcaly; L. 1. de Diat.
of these two Sapors is made a Salt-Juice, which being impressed with that Acid
Vital Character, is called Chyle: This passes not through the Mesaraicks,
neither is it admitted thereunto, unless it put on (after its own manner) a
Salt Taste (i. e.) a mature one; otherwise it will be ungrateful and
troublesome to the inward parts; and so, the Acidity of the stomach, vivifies
the Chyle, that it may be made fit for nourishment.

Hence it is, that my De bu^^^^ibus
Hippocrates says; As the Stomach nourishes, heateth, and cools in Animals;
so does the Earth in Vegetables, which sounds thus; That the Stomach is the
President of all Actions which hap pen in the Body, for the sake or by means of
Vital Acid alone lurking there. I think there is no need, Urine of sound men,
Salt.
that the Urine of great Drinkers and Toss-pots (who by reason of the quantity,
they swallow, do piss every hour, especially, if it be Watery Rhenish Wine,
which they drunk) should pass through all the Channels and Ducts of the Veins,
for then it would come forth tinged; but their Urine, though like in color to
simple Water, is notwithstanding Salt, like That which is produced from
moderate drinking; which the Alcalizate Lie proves, as I have showed
concerning Sweat: On the other side, the Urine of dying men, though they make
it, in a little quantity, and tinged to, yet it altogether wants Saltness, and
also Alcaly, Urine of dying men Saltless.
(besides the common; if they take any in their Meat:) wherefore of necessity
that Saltness must be generated from the Impression of the Vital Acidity,
having it is place in the Stomach; which forsakes dying men by degrees.

By this observation, it is as clear as noonday, that the Vital Instrument, in
sound animals, (wherewith the Aliment is impressed, before it glides from the
Pylorus, lest it should putrify, The Proto-Chymickdweils in the Stomach.
as I have said out of Hippocrates) is Acid, wherewith the Chyle, in the very
Stomach (representing an Egg, or grain of Seed,) must be made Salt. In one
word, Chyle is made Salt, by and with the Acidity of the Stomach, and the
Alcalizated Aliment; So is also the Urine Salt for the same Cause (even of
those who never tasted any Salt) their flesh and bones, This Experiment shows
whither a Glister can nourish.
yea the very excrements of the Belly are Salt, yet the Alcalye hereof, though
it be an hundred times Rect^^ed, in a few hours, is again changed into That,
which it was, by means of the Ferment of the Place, or of this hidden Acidity,
lurking and abiding there; whence We learn, that the Alcaly of every thing, The
difference of the Alcaly of Animals cannot be distinguished by out senses.
does contain and keep and preserve the occult Acid (imperceptible to sense) of
the Animal, or else of that part, whence it was taken. for which: Cause
Paracelsus, being illuminated in the A^ cient Hippocratical Science, and after
him, the Famous H^lmont, have specificated a Liquor for the Stone, L^dus is the
Stone cut out of Man's Bladder.
L^ndus (by reason of the Symbol, or the Ferment of the place, which it may be
lawful for me, to intimate;) (So the Viperine Alcaly, having an Alexipharmacal
property (after its manner) is restrained from flight by the abovenamed and
declared Acid, and it is celebrated in very many Diseases, especially in the
Feet-Gout, Jovnt-Gout, L. 7. c. 2.
and its species, (whose pain, as Paraeus first has observed with unspeakable
benefit and advantage) is not without occult Poison) to which, in an exigent, I
add a little powder of Sena, of Hermodactiles, and of Cremor Tartar, Pain of
the Gout from Ac^di^^.
ana a Scruple;) but it goes through all the passages of Man's body, in an
occult Saline form, like Sweat; but when it finds a more Acid Sapor in the
Cavities, Articles, and Joints, then it relinquisheth its proper Acid, and
imbibes that more potent, dolorous, and burning One: after the same manner, as
it happens in Corals dissolved in Vinegar; on which, if a more Acid liquor be
instilled, as of Vitriol, or Sulphur: This associates it self to the Corals,
and neglects the Vinegar, as is well known to every puny Apothecary (see also
the necessity of Precipitation, Different Cooks seldom prepare wholesome Meats.
Chap. 28.) But when the Acid is not alcalized into Salt before it passes
through the Meseraicks, and by chance is received and entertained within,
creeping even to the Blood, it waxes sour, and presently there follow Feavors
and Pleurisies; for the Blood, sent forth at that time, concretes into clotts,
because the abounding Acid, drives the Alcaly together, as I have showed in
Milk. In this case our Ancestors have found out Specific Remedies for the
Pleurisy, friendly to the Stomach (where they resist not nor hinder Digestion)
which abound with Volatile Alcaly, that they may restrain and consume the Acid,
such as are, Goats-blood, Remedies of the Pleurisy.
Juice of Wild-Succory, the Peezil of a Stagg, or Bull, the Seeds of Carduus,
and the like, which are prescribed at this very day with good success,
especially after Letting-blood, the blood being now soured in the Veins; for
then the aforesaid Remedies do easily absorb That which remains, after the same
manner as I have showed concerning Crude Vitriol precipitated with Liquor of
Tartar, for one only drop of either Sapor exceeding the other, turns the whole
mixture either into Alcaly or Acid; so one drop of the Acid, if it enters into
the blood, causes a Disease. Hence it appears that Health consists in a very
narrow point, which is a temperament, ad justitiam, or ad pondus, as Galen
speaks, L. 11. de Temperam.
Which we rather suppose and imagine, then that ^^ really is. Hence L. 1. Aph.
3.
also that of Hippocrates, Bodies advanced to their full vigor, stay not there,
but as weighed in an equal balance, turn down to the contrary sid^.

By what has been said, the reason is manifest, why Vitriol exsiceated,
performs vital actions, with blood, sweat, urine, or execrements, as it may be
drawn to some certain Object, of which I (...) on purpose to speak in this
place, least I should exceed the bounds of a Compendium.

Wherefore the Vital Instrument, or Seminal Virtue, (call it as you please) in
all ^^ings, is Acidity, either hielden, or manise^^. Th^^ ^^^^tue resides
manifestly in the Stomach, but in the (...) members obscurely, as L d^ Art.
Hippocrates witness^^n. (...), says He, has more than one Ventricle, all the
Mu^cl^s have their Ventricle. Now it is the office of the Stomach to change one
thing into another, by the help of the two faculties (i. e.) the innate Acid,
and the acquired Alcaly, for so we are to understand this, as my Hippocrates
enjoynes, saying, L. 1 de Diaet.
Men cut wood with a Saw, one draws to, another thrusts from, so also is the
nature of Man. So that the aforesaid Acid (which I have showed to be occult in
Milk) assumes the Alcaly in the Aliments, and whatsoever is not repugnant to
its own nature, it coagulates it with it self, and increases into a bulk which
is vulgarly called Nutrition, but by my Master, Natural Labor, saying, In the
beginning of the forecited Book
Man cannot be healthy, unless he Labor, but it is meet and fit that a
Physician thoroughly know the force of Labors, both of the Natural and also of
those which are done by force; and which from them prepare Flesh for
augmentation and growth, as upon the Authority of Hippocrates I have given rude
Examples in Lime and Soap; but these things being obscure, by reason of their
brevity, in the following Chapters, I shall more largly explain, discovering
every thing particularly, which here are but generally propounded, That you may
know Nature to be alike in every thing, as the Venerable In aurco carmine.
Pythagoras, with my Hippocrates, does teach.

Since therefore, whatsoever is put into the Stomach, ought to be changed into
a Salt Volatile, and the Chyle is not proportionated, but by reason of some
Error, from within or without, has more or less of Acidity, as we see in
Drunkards, who sometimes vomit up what they drink in, of an Acid taste; then,
If it be forced violently, and overmuch, it loses its success.
the importune Acidity, creeping through the Meseraicks, becomes unfit
(according to Hippocrates) for Aliment, and for the Subsequent Ventricles, and
then, the whole Body falls into an unequal heat, and because the Aliment is
disproportioned, it must of necessity be unfit for Exhalation, Hi^p. l. 1. de
Di^e.
as Hippocrates again teaches in the forecited Book, Of necessity, says he,
those things which are severed and produced from it, must be unlike, etc.

Whence we say, that the Pores are obstructed, and transpiration hindered; and
then a Feavor, or other Disease, must necessarily follow. Hence every Disease,
according to Hippocrates, does generally consist, either in matter coagulated,
or in matter more or less dissolved; and it differs according to the quality of
the taste or sapor, of which he reckons an infinite number, in his Book of Old
Medicines, L. 6. Apho. 1
and in his Aphorisms, Sour Belchings, which were not before, coming on sour
and estinking ones, is a good sign; he means not in every loose Disease; for
Example, In the Flux of the Belly, Acidity is deficient in the Stomach, and in
those Persons where it is, there happens a Flux, or looseness of the Intestines
from too much Salt Sapor, which Sapor does at least dissolve those things,
which are but lightly and gently concreted; yet it is never pernicious, but is
overcome by Milk alone, because Milk is easily mixed and washed off with Salt
things: But if the Acid and Alcaly are proportioned with a due heat, in every
Ventricle, like adhearing to like, without any strife or variance. This is
called San^ty, Hipp 1. d^ Diaet.
and so Smegma Soap is perfected and coagulated, which also it self, if it be
disproportioned, becomes Morbous, and must be dissolved by its like; and again,
by its contrary (as I have showed above) it must be reduced and recocted for
Sanity, and be coagulated into Salt.

It Is enough to have hinted at these things belonging to this matter,
concerning the rise and generation of Volatile Salts in the Animal Family,
unless any man shall object, that Volatile Salts are therefore made because we
eat Salt things; which I have showed before to be impossible, by reason of the
fixedness of Salt; yea Salt is found in Urine, as it was eaten, being unchanged
in its Form and Nature, and without the least Alteration, as may be easily
experimented (i. e.) viz. by the inspissation of Urine, and afterward by its
Calcination, Solution, and Coagulation, where Salt is found granulated; as
also, Men live on the Alps of simple Milk alone, whose Urine notwithstanding,
is not destitute of Acid and Alcaly, which though concreted in the sorm of
Salt, yet it is not granulated as Sea Salt, but of a Cubical form; nor does it
endure constant in the Fire, but the Alcaly, with a gentle heat, forsakes the
Acid, as Experience does declare.

CHAP. XVI. A return from the former Digression, to the Mechanical
Demonstration of Alcalyes.
I have showed the way of Extracting Alcaly out of Sweat, so also out of Urine,
out of Blood, out of the flesh of all Animals; I have also declared that
Alcaly, with the Acid is changed into Salt, not only in the Stomach, but in all
the Ventricles, of which L. de A^te
Hippocrates reckons an infinite number; and when that Salt has done its work,
then together with its dissident or contrary (i. e.) with the unctuous
excrements, L. 1. de Diaet.
it transpires; and is carried off into Elements, as it happens in all
sublunary things, and I have showed in Fixed Salt of Tartar and Oil (and shall
afterward do it more plainly) and also in Artificial Soap, which after it is
made, and has served for use, will return into Water and Earth; which
transpiration and reduction to Earth, ad orcum, will more manifestly appear by
Examples.

Let any one drink, Vitriol seperates Alcaly from Acid.
or but lightly taste, a little Vitriol of Mars, and presently his Tongue
waxes Black, seeming to swell, as if it were furred with Velvet, whose Pores,
are always turged with the Exhalations Occultly Salt, which either are mingled
with Spittle, or vanish into Air; so that as soon as ever the Acidity of the
Vitriol of Mars perceives the hidden Alcaly in the Spittle, in a trice, it
separates the Colcothar, which sticks to the Tongue and makes it Black. But
least you should think I speak of incredible things, behold an Ocular
Demonstration.

Dissolve Vitriolum Martis in fair Water, into the clear Solution, instill by
drops the fixed Alcaly of Tartar, (i. e.) the Liquor of Tartar, then the^
olcothar falls obscurely greenish.

Alcaly Cel^ndine Lavender Wormwood Rosemary Volatile urine Sweat Blood Vipers.

Praecipitates dissolved Vitriolum Martis of a Yellow Green Orange moredarkthen
Salt of Tartar Darkly green Brighter Obscurer

Color.
Salt of Bean-stalks, troubles it into a Yellowness, and after an ho^rs rest,
elevates O^re from the bottom: Common Salt, as being the perfectest of all
Salts, is mixed with Vitriol; So also Mercury sublimate, being an artificial
Salt, and also all Acid things, do not precipitate Vitriol.

Wherefore only Alcalyes do precipitate Vitriol, enclining to black at bottom,
but they are not found fixed in a living Animal; but are only Volatile, and
being perpetually compact with the Acid, after they have served for use, do
exhale from us, and transpire with the Acid under an Occult-Salt-Sapor, which
will more clearly appear.

The whole body of Man, as long as he lives, is Expirable and Conspirable, as
Hippocrates first observed, and whatsoever expires, is occultly Salt; but this
Salt evaporates not only to the External Surface of the body, but the greatest
part of it falls down to the intestines; which is thus proved.

Drink Vitriol of Mars, dissolved in water, and you shall see the excrements of
the Belly tinged either black or green, after the same manner, being
precipitated by the inward Alcaly; as I have already declared by experiment:
but in the External habit of the body, dissolved Vitriol is not precipitated by
the Effluviums of Salt, therefore it passes in greater quantity, to the
Intestines; So neither is the Urine tinged black, for the Colcothar is
precipitated before the liquor is hurried to the Mesaraicks; so that of
necessity it must remain in the Bowels.

If therefore the greatest part of the Excrements pass to the Bowels, being
designed by Nature for Expulsion, It is sometimes by mistake detained in undue
places by the Bonds of Coagulation, or to speak according to Fernelius Language
in the First Region of the Body, and then of necessity it must be furthered in
order to Expulsion, by some Loosning Medicament; So that it seems not to me,
Pargatives alone are not sufficient to recover health, as Hippocrates teaches.
that all Loosning Medicaments are to be disallowed in Diseases, as some think,
neither are they alone sufficient to procure health and recovery, as the
greatest part of Physicians do believe and practice, against the Tenent of
Hippocrates.

But it may be demanded why Acid Fountains carrying Iron, make not the Tongue
Black, as well as the Excrements of the Belly? That happens, because the
Natural Acid Spirit corroding the Vein of Immature Iron, being mixed with
Water, is not saturated, but prevails in the Compositum; and the Fountain
being drunk off in the very Act of Corrosion, there is not then time given for
Praecipitation in the Tongue; but as soon as the grateful Acidity is carried to
the Stomach, then the Colcotar falls, or is praecipitated from the Alcaly,
which flows to the dissolved Iron, for defect of one faculty and excess of
another, and whatsoever of Mucilage they catch in that Coagulation, they
constrain into their own Nature; as I have above-shewed in the Concretion of
the Stone, by the Authority of Hippocrates, and in a rude Example in slacked
and dissolved Lime. This Coagulum is called by Physicians Obstruction.
Obstruction what.
The Acid or the Alcaly may now and then exceed in it; so the Stomach repugne
not, which is the president of all Actions, as Lib. de Humor.
Hippocratcs teaches; or if the Acid Waters touch the place (which pass not
beyond the Diaphragma, a thing to be noted) they without doubt destroy it: I
said that Acid waters are to be drunk in the very Action of Corrosion; (i. e.)
they are to be taken from the living Fountain, for if they flow down a little
from it, then the Action cease, and the Acid Spirit being spent and consumed
by the unripe Iron, grows faint, and with the Solution is praecipitated into
Ocre, which affords not a Black (for it is not praecipitated with Alcaly) but a
yellowish bottom, as it happens to all Vitriol, passing through and carrying
Iron. A Physician of the Canonical Sect, having learned well to quarrel out of
Aristotle, a few years since, caused Water out of a Fountain, corroding a Vein
of Iron, to be brought from the Country about Trent, to a Noble Senator of this
City, being Hypochondriacal, who fearing lest the Corroding Spirit would
exhale, commanded the Water to be filled in Glass-jars of a long Neck, and Oil
to be poured a-top, and so to stop their Mouths with Wax, and to bind them with
a Bladder, rejoicing by this subtle Device, as it were, to have imprisoned the
Spirit of the Fountain, which he looked upon as Spirit of Wine: yet
notwithstanding to such men as these, though they are ignorant of the
Instruments of Medicine, God so permitting, we entrust and commit our Lives,
Fortunes, Wives, Children and Families.

Hence the bold, though ingenious, Tract. Catar. Deli^^m.
Helmont cries out, That a Physician is now adays a rare thing in Europe. This
man if he had been truly versed in Hippocrates his School, and had read over
the Book of Nature, he had never so shamefully discovered himself, neither
would Physic, the Noblest of all Sciences, Hippo. de Lege.
be accounted the meanest: I say he might have known, that the Acidity does not
exhale, but only by its Action on the Iron, grows weak, and then exhales not,
but both of them go to bottom in the form of Faeces, which is called Ocre:
neither can I sufficiently admire the vanity of some prattling Boasters, who
with the same stupidity, hold forth the distilling of a Fountain, Claud. de
ingressu ad infirm. c. 1.
and divineing by the bottom; so Rich men are sent away empty, and without
advantage or benefit.

The Spaw Water is much more Acid, and though it corrode a Vein of Iron, yet it
retains a certain Acidity, and therefore it permits it self, and is capable to
be carried to another place.

The Renowned Fame of this Fountain, about ten years ago, moved a Noble
Vicentine, curiously to enquire into the Nature of this Fountain, for his own
healths sake; to whom I briefly described its properties, and for what Diseases
it was good, being at that time with the Most Illustrious George William, Duke
of Brunswick and Lunenburge; though afterward I went into Low Germany. The
Noble Man being returned home, by chance related to a Physician of that City,
what I had said concerning the Fountain; whereupon he wrote a long Letter,
under pretense of Advice, to the Famous and Excellent Theodore Konerdaig, the
Dukes Learned and Chief Physician, which he sent unsealed to the Dukes own
Hands, and in the Margent my Name was Inserted, that it might easily be read by
him viewing the Letter; Falsity has little strength.
the Duke reading it, and disdaining so mean a Fellow, asked me, whether I knew
who wrote it? I denying it; It Is well, says he, that thou art Despised and
Reproached by the Vulgar, read it and hand it to Mr. Konerdaige, that he also
may know who Wrote it.

The Incomparable Prince gave no ear to Backbiters, but carried himself, as if
he had never read their Reproaches. The whole Contents was nothing but Calumny
and Railing; It Is the part of a Wise man to undervalue the Calummes of the
Unskilful.
wherein he accused me, for bringing in a new Philosophy; which Reproaches,
savouring of nothing but a malignant mind, and stupid ignorance, let them go as
they came.

But to the Matter, As Vitriol, and all Waters, containing dissolved Iron, are
praecipitated into a black bottom, so also, the Acid Spirit of Vitriol it self,
although it be rectified, retains the Liquamen of the Metal, on which, if the
purest Alcaly be poured, it is praecipitated indeed, but not into a Black, but
into Colcotar, Spirit of Vitriol Dies the Teeth yellow.
constant in the Fire; wherefore they that use this Powder for Whitening the
Teeth, are much mistaken: it is true, it strengthens the Gums, but it dies the
Teeth, with a most tenacious Yellowness, as Vitriol it self makes them Black;
for perpetually and necessarily something of moisture does exhale from us,
filled with Alcaly, which also about the Cavities or Alveoli of the Teeth,
precipitates Colcothar out of the aforesaid Spirit, which sticks to the Teeth,
and makes them Yellow.

CHAP. XVII. Upon Occasion of Vitriol, the Salts of Vegetables are more exactly
and thoroughly considered.
I Have formerly told you, 'That neither Acid nor Salt, nor any other Sapor,
does overcome and destroy Vitriol, but Alcalyes alone, but the Juice of unripe
Galls, falls in with Vitriol, Things much different do most of all accord.
Hi^p. L. 1. de Diaet.
and makes a coalition therewith into black, destroying and absorbing the
Acidity thereof; and therefore this Juice is to be reckoned amongst Alcalyes;
after this manner, Ink, and all Black Tinctures are made: yea, when the Acidity
of the Vitriol is not, to sufficiency, combibed by the Alcaly of Galls; which
comes to pass, when the Galls are too ripe, and are washed by the Rain; then
the Alcaly does expire, as it happens to all Vegetables, of which hereafter in
its place; then the Vitriol erodes and eats out the Cloth, and it becomes as
rotten; whence the Vulgar say, The Stuff is spoiled in the dying.
La robba e brusada, nella tinta. So also, Letters written with Ink, boiled
with the aforesaid Galls, do wax pale, because the prevalent Acidity of the
Vitriol, consumes the weak Alcaly of the Galls, being washed with the Rain,
after the same manner as any Acid Spirit spread upon a Writing, presently
destroys the Black Color (i. e.) the Alcaly, which another fixed Alcaly does
again recover and reduce. So if you write with Water, wherein Vitriol of Iron
has been dissolved, when it is dry, no sign of of any Writing will appear, The
Ground of Cryp^^graphy.
but if you smear over the Writing with a simple infusion of Galls, in a moment
the Alcaly of the Galls makes the Writing Black, which by a powerful Acid or
Aqua fortis, is presently blotted out, viz. The Alcalyes being consumed by the
Acid. Again, smear over the Paper with fixed Alcaly, this will again consume
the Acid, and the Writing will re-appear. By what has been said, it appears,
that Vitriol does not dye Black, unless its Acidity has been absumed by some
Alcaly or other.

But that the Alcaly of Galls may be made more perfect, anoint them over, at
least with some Fat, Alcaly of Galls.
or with some Oil, the hidden Acidity of which enters into the Galls, being
placed in a pot, in a slow Fire of Ashes, leave them there till you see the
Galls become Blacker, but not so as to be reduced to Coals; then their Alcaly
will be more fit for Coloring, and an Ounce of such burnt Galls, does more
than a pound of others; yea it colors of it self, because the Acidity of the
Fat, by the Fire, has acted upon its Alcaly.

Very many Vegetables do abound with the like Volatile and Occult Alcaly, Rinds
of Pomgranates.
as the greater Housleek, Sage, Rinds of Pomgranates; all which do spend and
absume the Acid of the Vitriol, and cause the Colcotar to be much less black.

A certain Prince of great Renown, an Enquirer into the Mysteries of Nature,
wondered much, when he heard that a certain Gentlewoman of the Nursery in his
Court, had taken by Mouth, Rinds of Pomgranates (which are universally judged
to be Adstringent) which yet provoked the Courses in her, which had been
stopped some Months: To whom, when I declared the copious Alcaly, wherewith
these Rinds do abound, and that the stopping of the Menstrua did arise from
that Morbous Acidity, which the Alcaly of the Rinds had absorbed, it ceased his
wonderment.

But you must note, that Artificial Vitriol of an Azure color, Things thoroughly
mixed and divided are altered. Hip. l. 1. de Diat.
(which is falsely called (Cyprus Vitriol) does not become black, with Galls,
though they be burnt, but with Rinds of Pomgranates it tinges obscurely Yellow:
Now it is made of the spangles or thin flakes of Copper, by Spirit of Sulphur,
or of common Vitriol; both which in a cold place, are Coagulated into somewhat
long-angular little stones, hardly dissolvable, and unfit for Distillation,
because it wholly wants that Cupreous Sulphur. This, with Urine, waxes Green,
and with the Alcaly of Urine, is cast into an Azure bottom, which by Fusion
returns to Copper.

So also Verdigrease (as proceeding from ripe Copper and Vinegar) does not wax
black with Galls, Distilled Aerugo yields Vinegar.
but becomes of a light red or Spadiceous color, and, by the Reformers leave,
I know, and have experimented, that nothing but Vinegar will be distilled from
thence, because the remaining Caput Mortuum, after Distillation, by the fire of
Fusion, is reduced to pure Copper, of which more hereafter.

Whence it appears, that burnt Brass, with tosted Galls, produces not a black
tincture, as Alexius of Piedmont promises, with which process the Women of this
Country do wonderfully vex themselves, that therewith they may black their
hair; for as far as this composition tingeth any thing, it ownes that Virtue to
the tosted Galls; Alexius his Secret.
the burnt Brass contributing nothing thereunto.

But Cyprus Vitriol, is truly Hermaphroditical, richly furnished with natural
Acidity, and Cupreous Sulphur; The Metaphor of Mars companying with Venus, does
not unfi^ly suit here.
for which reason it is always moist, and never of it self conctetes into small
stones, wherefore it very easily grows black with Galls; which is a sign, that
it partakes of the Nature of Venus and Mars (for Vitriol of Venus, without
Mars, does not grow black with Galls, as I have showed.)

For Iron and Copper, are of affinity one to another, as Male and Female. This
Secret ( says Basilius) you may take notice of, but conceal, for it is of
great use. This Vitriol, De Vitriels.
dissolved in water, is of a Tawney color, if burnt Brass be dissolved in it,
or flakes of Copper, or Iron, then it concretes into little stones, and becomes
vendible, but inferior to that which is Medicineable.

The White Vitriol which comes from Gosloria and that also from Carinthia,
White Vitriol.
does participate indeed of Mars and Venus, but are not rich in natural
Acidity, for which reason they very slowly wax black with Galls, a drop of this
Solution, mixed with Galls, and falling on Paper makes a Party-colored Iris,
after it is dry.

But Roman Vitriol, which abounds with Iron, Roman Vitriol.
though poor in Spirit, yet it colors quickly, because of the Iron; So
Artificial Vitriol, which is made of the fileings of Iron, Vitriol^m Martis
artislciale.
with Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, does tinge most readily; and therefore
Dyers, for want of Sweet Vitriol, do add fileings of Iron to the Humid, and by
consequent the sharp which it does Corrode, and so the Vitriol is Dulcified.

So also Crocus Martis (which is made of artificial Vitriol, burnt in a covered
Crucible, till it be red) being dissolved with Spirit of Salt: and digested
with Spirit of Wine, C^ocus, Martis, Solutus.
acquires a golden color; and becomes a noble Medicine. One drop alone of this
Solution in half an ounce of the Decoction or Extract of Galls, becomes
perfectly black; pour out this black, and wash the vessel with clean water, and
the Ablution will be of the color of an Amtihyst; A drop of the former, on
Paper, after it is dried, of its own accord represents diverse colors, as a
Peacocks tail, curious to the eyes of the beholders.

Whilst I was busied heretofore about these curious experiments, I perceived
my fingers to be tingedwith a Purple color, as it happens from Gold dissolved
in Aqua Regia: and the tincture endured for some days; This Basilius calls
Sanguis Veneris and Martis, The blood of Venus and Mars, and commands us, not
without reason, to observe it accurately, and to conceal it.

Gold corroded by Aqua Regia, and coagulated into the shape of Vitriol, Gold.
does tinge the fingers, as I have said, of a Purple color; and with the
infusion of Galls, the liquor becomes like yellow Amber, with which, if with a
liberal hand you dawb over Paper, after it is dried, it shines as Varnish.

Silver corroded in Aqua Fortis, Silver.
of Nitre, and Alome, with an infusion of Galls, does not change its nature; if
you write on Paper with this mixture, after two days every black letter, is, as
it were compassed with a Silver and shining list, which cannot be without
Alcaly: Hence this rare Man may understand why the Ancients Metaphorically
called Gold the Male, and Silver the Female: A drop of this Solution, if with a
large hand it drop on Paper, after the silver lift it draws and makes another
of a Chestnut color, a pleasant Spectacle, as if it were so painted on purpose:
So also, Tinn, and Lead, being reduced into Salt or Vitriol, Leed, Tiau.
with the juice of Galls, as also with Alcaly of any sort, yields a white
bottom (i. e.) the Alcaly of the Galls drinks up the Acid, and the Metal goes
to bottom; but not so in Gold, nor Silver, nor Copper, etc.

Quick silver dissolved by Acid things, Mercury.
and re-coagulated with the aforesaid juice of Galls, waxes but slowly Yellow,
imitating Gold; which is to be observed.

Wherefore of the seven Metals, being dissolved by Acids, Iron and Silver, with
Galls, do tinge of a black color: Yea, Silver does the same without Galls, and
the blackness appears after the Acid Spirits are spent. Other Metals, though
dissolved and re-coagulated, do show as if they were Vitriol, but perform not
the actions of Vitriol.

Find out the cause, if you can, for it is not unpleasant to discover it.

A Semi-acid-Salt Spirit, Distilled from the Caput Mortuum of Tartar and Sal
Armoniack, An admirable Spirit.
was mixed with Bole Armonick, of which above. This Spirit, with juice of Galls
was greenish in a moment; From which I learned, that the Bole Armonick did
necessarily contain in it immature Copper-seed, which the soresaid Spirit
caught away with it in the torture of the Fire; I call it a Copperseed, for
Vitriol made of Copper, with Spirit of Vitriol, being precipitated with juice
of Galls, appears of the same green color, as I showed above: but when it is
made of common Bole-Armonick, then it is black.

Whence it is clear, that the Volatile Salt, or the Alcaly of Galls, or of
Pomgranate Rinds, Foundation of black colout.
or of Vulnerary Herbs, do not dye of a black color, unless with Iron,
dissolved in an Acid Mineral.

There is another observable thing, that a pure Acid natural Spirit, cannot be
extracted or acquired by any man; for being Distilled from Vitriol, however
rectified, it never forsakes the Liquamen of the Metal; neither can it be
precipitated from it, by any Alcaly, after the common way; for in these it
clothes itself again with a new body, and returns to what it was, as I have
showed in its place, yet Paracelsus does praise that Acid Spirit, which is
found near the Village Veltin in Helvetia, as in some sort pure, as I have
elsewhere observed.

Add hereto, the Counterseit, which the Reformer boasts for Magistery of the
Seed of Kermes, which yet is nothing else, but the Alcaly of Alum; Pharm.
Regia^ fol 282.
which sucked up the Occult Acidity, from the very grains, for fear of a
Vacuum, inasmuch as it lost its own proper Acidity in the Alcaly of Tartar.

CHAP. XVIII. Pass we now out of the Mines (Underground) into a pleasant
Garden, to the more hidden Volatile Alcalyes of Vegetables.
ALl Vegetables, Mechanical Instruments of Vegetables are the two faculties of
Hippoc. L. 1. de Diaet.
as well as Animals, have Vital Instruments, which they make use of, for their
increase and propagation. The prevailing Acidity therefore lies sleeping in the
Seed (as in an Egg, or in a Stomach) with a little Alcaly, for its
sustentation, and with the specific Rector (of which elsewhere) but when it is
cast into the earth, it is dissolved by Humidity, and excited by Heat: The
Acid, as being igneous, begins to act upon the Alcaly, to which the Humid also
comes, and the Rector, by the assistance of Heat, informs it: So invisibly, the
Acid assumes the Alcaly, and the Alcaly again swallows up the Acid, they tend
to each side, as Ferments do, yea they cease not, The Mystery of Fermentation
was heretofore hid on purpose.
till they have finished their several and prefixed Courses for their proper
ends; one Spirit draws, another protrudes, as Hippocrates in the forecited
place.

So that, the Humidity of every Vegetable, contains Acid and Alcaly; in some,
the Alcaly predominates, in others the Acid: The Acid is most known, but the
Alcaly yet known to few; which I will now demonstrate to the Eye, in the sweet
expressed juice of Grapes, as most known; wherein, the first days the Rector is
Dormant, who, a while after, applying the Mechanical Organs, the Acid begins to
Corrode the Alcaly, and This absorbs the Acid; and so there happens a vehement
Contention and Fight, which from the Heat or Boiling is called Fermentation,
which lasts till the Acid, as Victor, has overcome the Alcaly: Fermentum; quod
servendo erescit.
In this Fight both the Faculties (or Tastes, or Sapors, Instruments,
Mechanical or Architechtonical, call them as you please, or else the Archeus,
or Innate Heat etc.) undergo a great overthrow, there being made a mighty
slaughter, the Acid being swallowed up, destroyed, and enfeebled by the Alcaly,
both mutually fall in a mutual embrace into a Cadaver (in respect of Wine)
which is called Tartar.

If you Distill this Tartar out of a Retort, Spirit of Tartar.
the Acid is excited by Heat, and begins again to act upon the Alcaly; and This
likewise on the Acid, and so a new Fermentation begins, for which you must use
a very slow fire, and though the Receiver be great, yet the incondensible Odor
of the Fermentation (which Helmont calls Gas) is perceived a far off; yet at
last, the Alcaly overcomes the Acid, and does plainly absorb it, and both of
them, for the greatest part are fixed. The Liquor and Oil in the Receiver are
Saturated and Impregnated with Volatile Alcaly, which is of excellent use of it
self, yet known to few. If you again re-infuse the Distilled Liquor and the Oil
upon the Caput Mortuum, then the Volatile Alcaly, which the Liquor did contain,
is drunk up by the Acid in the Caput Mortuum, and becomes fixed, but that which
then re-distills out, will be of greater Affinity, to the Element of Water, and
so of less efficacy. But the Reformer here, as every where else, grievously
mistakes; Mantis Herm. f. 745.
for he says, That Common Spirit of Tartar, which is not rectified from its
remaining Caput Mortuum, is by no means to be accounted for pure Spirit of
Tartar.

From this his Rectified Spirit of Tartar (and out of his own insipid Brain) he
compounds a Medicine, Mantis. f. 750.
truly lamentable, which he calls, A mixture of Three, from the Spirits of the
Minerals.

First, The Volatile Alcaly in the Tartar, is Saturated with the Acid of the
Sulphur of Antimony; That he calls the Tartarized Spirit of Antimony, if by
chance, some of the Volatile Alcaly, do yet remain, what does he then? He
mortifies it with Vinegar from Verdigrease, and the Acid of Vitriol; whence
this hurtful, though artificial and unprofitable Composition, consists of
Elementary Water and Vinegar; this mixture the Ancients called Posca, to which
the Reformer adds nothing, but the stinking smell of Tartar. But the Spirit of
Tartar, being prudently Distilled by an Hippocratist, is not Acid, but somewhat
bitter, and full of Volatile Alcaly; on which, if you pour Spirit of Vitriol,
it waxes hot, that you can hardly hold the pot in your hands; which is an
evident sign, that the Acid of the Vitriol has drunk up the Alcaly of the
Tartar; as it happens when water is poured on Lime, and as in the slacking and
heating of Lime, the Salts dye, and it degenerate into a Neutral; the same is
to be understood of Spirit of Tartar, with whatsoever Acid it be mixed; so my
Master Hippocrates teaches.

I return now, Things thoroughly mi^'d, undergo alteration. L. 1. de Diaet.
whence I digressed (i. e.) to the Chemical Fermentation of Wine, for whose
sake, the Tartar fell to the bottom, as a Cadaver; But the Acidity spread
through the Liquor, has dominion over it, and does defend it, and is called
Wine, the Acidity whereof, is grateful to the Palate, because of the Alcaly,
with which it is joined, and tempers the Acid, till at length the Acidity,
weary of the Alcaly, or excited again by Heat, strives to overcome the Alcaly,
and so a new and insensible fight begins, and the Wine foures more, and is
called by a common name, Vinegar: from which if the Acidity be separated in a
Limbeck, Without Art, there is not found a pure Acid in Nature unmited with
Alcaly, and on the contrary. Hippoc. l. 1. de Diat. Aust. 1. Phys.
and the bottom burnt by fire, then the Alcaly is found out of that Tartarous
bottom, though it seem impossible to some, to find Alcaly in so great an
Acidity; yet it is true, and it is That which the Philosopher means, when he
says, That it is impossible there should be any matter, under which there
should not be some form.

Pour or superadde Distilled Acid on this Alcaly, and evocate the watery
phlegm, having the smell of Aqua Ardeus, or hot water, then from the Acid and
the Alcaly, you shall have a re-generated Tartar, which out of a Retort, yields
a fat Oil, and a bitter Water, full of ^olatile Alcaly; out of the Phlegm,
through a Phyal of a long Neck, So the Rector by degrees vanishes from our
External senses into nothing, that Man cannot find out the work which God
operates. F^cl. 3.11.
evocate the Fat burning watery part, which we call Aqua vitae; the other part
is elementary water; the Fat re-assumes the Alcaly, out of which again, extract
the Elementary Water, and repeat this operation, and the whole substance of
Wine passes into Water and Elementary Earth, void of all taste and smell.

Hence it appears, that the Juice of Grapes has preserved the Alcaly, and the
Acid (in which the Rector does inhabit) in various hazards, and several
alterations, even unto its last annihilation.

CHAP. XIX. An untrodden Path discovered.
THat which I have spoken in the precedent Chapter concerning the Juice of
Grapes, the same is also to be understood of the Juice of all Vegetables; for
in them all there is Acid and Alcaly, more or less, as Hippocrates and
Experience also show; but with this difference, that in those Vegetables, which
we call Cold, the Alcaly does predominate, and they are not fermentable, unless
by the help of an outward Acid, or being excited by heat; but in those which
are hot, the Acid prevails, and therefore they are easily fermentable, as in
the Progress will appear. Also the Alcaly of some Vegetables is nearer to
fixed, and therefore it joins in with Acid Minerals; All things are corrupted
mutually by themselves the greter by the less, and the less by the greater.
Hipp. L. 1. de Diaet.
as I have showed in Galls, in the greater Housleak, in Rinds of Pomgranates,
etc. The Alcalyes of others, are much more delicate, so that Acid Minerals do
presently absume them, in as much as they are nutritive and fit for the
digestion of Animals, which consists in a milder Acidity: of which sort are
Winter-green, Sanicle, Bettony, Fole-foot, etc. Which therefore are called
Vulnerary Herbs, whose Alcaly restrains and hinders the injust Acidity vising
in the Stomach, as it lessens it also in wonuds, because all Acidity out of the
Stomach, is hurtful, morbous, and accompanies putrefaction, which the Vulgar
call heat, from the effect, for it causes a Feavour, and putrefies Wounds; many
skilful Chyrurgeons have taken notice of that Acidity in wounded men, as the
beginner of heat and putrefaction, and have therefore forbade them the use of
Wine, and not without cause, least the subtle and evaporable Acidity of the
Wine should increase the Disease, I say, the Alcaly of these is not discovered
with Acid Minerals, Nature delights in its like nature.
but because they themselves are Nutritive, therefore the said Alcaly
associates it self with its similary Nutritives, and with gentler Acids, than
Minerals. As for Example, Dissolve a dram of Sal Saturni (made with Distilled
Vinegar, for that resists not the Digestion of Animals) in about three Ounces
of Distilled Water, which has no Volatile Alcaly) of Rosemary, Lavender, Rue,
etc. Suffer the Lees to settle: This Solution being sweet in taste, contains
Occult Lead; drop the clear Juice of the foresaid Vulnerary Herbs, into this
clear Solution, and it presently grows as white as Milk, which is a sign that
the Alcaly of the Herbs absorbs the Acid from the Lead, which falls by degrees.

For as fixed Alcaly, praecipitates Mercury, and Alcaly, nearer to fixed,
praecipitates Vitriol, as I have showed before: so also here, a milder Alcaly
requires a milder Examen.

Paracelsus, first observed That hidden Alcaly of Herbs, and it is probable
that by the like Examen he took notice of their several minute degrees; he had
taken notice, that in wounds, putrefaction came from Acidity, and from thence,
arose feavorish heats, and corruptions of Wounds; he also first prescribed
Vulnerary Potions, and did happily restrain the said Acidity and putrefaction,
Paracelsus his Analytick knowledge of Bodies.
and called the Herbs Vulnerary. And though John Taugaultius, a French Man, and
Gabriel Fallopias, an Italian, both famous Physicians, and excellent
Chyrurgeons, do condemn and endeavor to explode Vulnerary Potions in the Cure
of Wounds, affirming, that by their heat they inflame, and extenuate the Blood,
and excite its eruption from the Wound; yet though simple Vulnenary
Medidicaments are not known to every Chyrurgeon, and and are prescribed without
distinction and knowledge of their degrees (for all cannot attain this pitch of
Science) nevertheless Experience shows, Ulcers of the Feet or Thighs, and
Wounds, are Cured by Potions; why may they not do the same in the Lungs?
that the aforesaid Potions are useful; with which, also Paracelsus cured the
Ulcers of the Lungs, (as Histories witness,) and also the Hectic Feavor (as I
have also experimented) which is an universal and inept Acidity, and that of
the solid parts, which in one word, we call Heat, and which, the aforesaid
Alcalys do more readily absorb and consume, than Milk; as I have showed in its
place, and the cure it self demonstrates.

Therefore Vulnerary Potions are not to be rejected, but used with good
Success, in the curing of Wounds.

Many of the accuratest sort of Chyrurgeons, The brevity of this Compendium
will not allowme to discourse of Specific Acid. Yet see chapter 21.
and Physicians have taken notice, that Acid^ty is the cause of Heat and Pain;
as also that burnt Hartshorn absumes in it self Vinegar, and other Acids of
all sorts, whence it comes to pass, that it is given with good success in
Feavors, in a great dose, from half an ounce, to an ounce, in any cooling
water, containing Volatile Alcaly; For, as they have observed to their great
joy, that the said burnt Hartshorn, absorbs and imbibes the Acid Volatile Salt
from Vinegar, so it takes away the Acidity accompanying several sorts of
Feavors.

Besides Vulnerary ones, Occult Alcalys.
there are also more Occult and Volatile Alcalys in Herbs, which we call
Cooling, as Lettice, Purslane, Coltsfoot, Endive, and its species; whose
Alcaly, is very Fugitive, and is found, not only in their Juices, but also in
their Waters carefully Distilled: Whence we may learn, that such Herbs being
dried, are of no value, because their Alcaly has evaporated.

So also the Distilled water of Frogs-Spawn (the whole Spawn with Patience is
elevated in e Balneo into a pure water, the black and dry Grains or Specks,
Cooling waters have an occult Alcaly.
being left behind, which are not to be rejected) does abound with Occult
Volatile Alcaly, and does presently precipitate Lead out of the aforesaid
Solution, more readily, and copiously, than any other cooling water: This water
is much to be esteemed in many diseases, arising from a peculiar Acidity: I
have known a desperate Hemorrhage from the Womb, happily cured by it, in as
much as at first it sucks up the Acidity of the Blood, afterward it restrains
and expels it.

Also this water applied to the grieved part in the Feet-Gout, presently
asswages the pain, in as much as it mortifies and alters the Acrimony: But when
the pain is more violent, then the Acidity is in greater quantity and vigor,
and the Volatile Alcaly consuming the cause of the pain, Volatile Altalys ease
the pains of the Gout.
then must needs, be more manifest, for it indubitably takes away the pain;
whence we learn, that the cause thereof proceeds from Acidity, if otherwise,
the principal indications are to be taken from things helpful and nocent, as
Avicen teaches.

Foolish therefore, and almost Frantic, is the opinion of certain Canonical
Physicians; who, against the Doctrine of Hippocrates, out of ignorance do fear,
and persuade the simple, that a greater mischief is occasioned by undertaking
to Cure by contraries, and by endeavoring to repel the Catarrh, by such
Simples.

For Hippocrates shows, that Volatile Alcaly is empty and void, and that it
takes away all pain of the Feet-Gout, (I mean not the knotty and coagulated
Gout) all Arthritick, The knotty Feet-Gout does coagulate, as the Stone, a^
least by a diverse Acid. Hippoc. l. 1. de Diaet. Simple water does nourish, and
there is a great Secret in water, as Hermes says. Let Canonical Physicians
observe, that the Alcaly of common water, does not ascend in a Limbeck.
Wherefore, distilled, it cools not, as the water of Frogs-Spawn before spoken
of.
Nephritick, Sciatick, and such like pain, in a very short time, if it be but
outwardly applied, in as much as it presently imbibes and assumes (being
impatient of Vacuity) the Acidness, which is the cause of the pain.

But not only waters, Distilled from cooling Herbs, but also common water both
of Wells and Rivers, contains an Occult Alcaly, by means whereof it nourishes
Animals and all Plants; Red hot Iron, quenched in water, acquires strength
thereby, as Hippocrates teaches in the forecited Book, and daily Experience
shows; for Iron has too much of the Volatile Acid, whence it readily passes
into Scoria and Rust, but when the Acid is imbibed by the Alcaly, then it is
made more compact, and resists more; therefore Cutlers of Knives and Swords,
anoint their work with shavings of Horns, heating their blades till the
shavings melt, and thus they draw the Alcaly out of the Horns, and their blades
become stronger. hence it is, that such as pass by their shops, do sometimes
perceive the stinking smell of burnt Horns. But it is easily proved, that an
Occult Alcaly is in common simple water, by the forementioned solution of Sal
Saturni, which presently grows white thereby: So, if Silver be dissolved in
Aqua Fortis, and you add simple water to the Solution, it presently waxes white
as Milk, but when the same water has been distilled, then the Alcaly, does not
ascend, neither does the Solution of Silver grow white any longer thereby. For
which cause John Baptista Porta, advises Water to be twice, or thrice
distilled, for a Tree of Silver and Mercury, Lib 5. Magnatur. c. 3.
which the Vulgar foolishly call the Philosophers Tree: So also Water distilled
from Cephalic herbs, does precipitate neither Silver nor Lead from the
abovenamed Solution; For these, as I have said, contain not Alcaly in their
Juices; So that the Water, distilled only, from cooling Herbs, as also common
water not distilled, do contain a Volatile Alcaly; by means of this Alcaly,
Water does nourish: Hence Lactantius says, From Water are all things; L. 1. c.
5.
which, before Hippocrates, Thal^s Milesius, also knew, perhaps by the benefit
of this Art, as Laertius witnesses in his Life; So the Ancient Hermes, Water,
says he, is susceptible and producible of Nutriment in Men, and other
creatures: And without Water, Nature operates not, etc.

Now because our discourse is fallen upon Cooling Waters, I shall not pass over
in silence the abuse of Rose Water, which is said to cool, but it is disproved
by this Experiment.

At Venice, Rose Water, as commonly all other waters, are distilled out of a
Copper Vessel (sometimes lined within with Tinn, though oftentimes the Tinn,
for age, is worn away.) This Water is prescribed to Children, because it kills,
and expels Worms, and sometimes provokes Vomitting, which Operation, and
Virtue, is Vulgarly ascribed to the Rose Water, whereas Rose Water is not
simply cold, but of a temperate nature, as containing an occult and insensible
Acidity, Rose Water does not cool unless it be distilled through Lead.
which is unseparable from it, never leaving it, till it be annihilated; but in
flowing through a Copper Limbeck, its Occult Acidity abrades and takes off
certain Atoms from the Copper, which are invisibly mixed with the water; if
you would discover or separate the Copper, drop into a little quantity of this
water, one or two drops, of the Alcaly of Urine, and presently all the water
turns Green, because the Acidity of the water does more greedily catch the
light Alcaly, more similary to it than the Metal, which therefore by little and
little, subsides into a greenish bottom; Then the same water, does no longer
provoke Vomit, nor kill Worms, but will be like That which is Distilled through
Glass Vessels; but melt the green bottom with Borax, and then it returns to
Copper again.

Neither is this Occult Nutritive Alcaly found only in Vulnerary and
Cooling-herbs, All Pot Herbs contain a Volatile Alcaly and cooling, and, as all
wound herbs beget Milk in Nurses; for Acidity is an hindrance to Milk.
but in all Pot Herbs whatsoever, which are therefore desired by the Stomach,
abounding with Acidity. This Alcaly is the cause that such as eat boiled
Cabbage or Coleworts, before a fit of Drinking, are seldom inebriated, for the
Alcaly of this Herb, as it moderates the inebriateing Acidity of the Wine in
the Stomach, so it absords and consumes That in the Glass.

But why certain simples do specifically Cure some Diseases, Specifique
Medicines.
as the Juice of Yarrow, the Haemorrhoides; Fumitory, the Jaundies; Butchers
Broom, the Distempers of the Urine; Guajacum and Sarza, the French Pox, and the
like; and wherein all the Faculties of Purging simply do consist; it would be
tedious to declare in this place, let it suffice to have given some small hint
of it, at least in this Writing, wherein, even against my will, I have been
enforced to discover Salts hitherto

But I hear some whispering an Objection, that I endeavor to show the Volatile
Alcalyes of Vegetables with dissolved Lead, whereas all Salt things do also
precipitate Lead from this Solution (as we have confessed before) but with this
difference that the Lead falls down with the Salt in the form of a Powder:
Distill the clear swimming upon the top, and you will have Vinegar, which
carried the dissolved Lead, but it falls from the Vinegar, because Salt has a
greater affinity with Vinegar than Metal; but mix the Alcaly of the Herbs, or
rather drop the Juice of the aforesaid Herbs into that Solution of Lead, then
it does not hastily fall down in form of a Powder, but becomes as a Pultiss:
Distill the supernating Liquor, and then you shall draw from it, not Vinegar,
but an Insipid Water; which is a manifest Argument, that the Alcaly has sucked
up the Acidity.

How much Light this Hippocratical Doctrine may give to a Physician, Solation.
as well in compounding Medicines (that one ingredient hinder not another, yea
the Virtue of Simples may by this Knowledge be wonderfully exalted) as in
Curing Diseases, let those judge who know how to distinguish Tastes and Sapors,
and moderately to invert and vary them, which at present I shall only
demonstrate in that one Example of the Nettle, which being fresh and moist,
stings and blisters, Virtue of the Nettle.
but dried, astringes, and stops blood: the Juice thereof is coagulated in
dissolved Lead, into a Black Gobbet, which again in fixed Alcaly is presently
diluted into an obscure, but penetrable color; whence we learn, that dried
Nettles boiled in Alcalizate Lie (yet sweet as they call it) do hinder Gray and
Hoary Hairs, if every day they be kembed with them; with Vitriol, it again
concretes into yellowish clots, which, with the Spirit of the same Vitriol, are
again dissolved into a clear and pellucid Liquor. Such, I suppose, were the
hidden virtues of Roots, and the differences of Shrubs, of which Solomon
speaks, which he learned from the wise Artificer of all things, in his
Disputation from the Hyssop to the Cedar of Lebanon; for it is not credible,
that He unnecessarily discoursed of first Qualities, and of Elementary Degrees,
which our Botanicks boast to measure, as it were, with their tongues: of These
it cannot be said, that they are, hidden virtues.

This is the meaning of that Speech of Arnoldus de villa Nova (though on other
accounts, his Works want correction) Where Simples are at hand, In Aph.
it is deceit to use Compounds: Whilst I heretofore applied my Self to this
study, I was much assisted by that Eminent and Skilful Botanick, and diligent
Apothecary, Johannes Mar^a Fero, of this City, who, with singular Care and
Study, gathered together all sorts of Vegetables, to whose Industry I do owe
very much, and accordingly I render him my real and hearty thanks.

By the help of this study, I have also found out a Compound Powder, A Powder
against a Qarta^.
equivalent to, if not exceeding, the virtue of Chinella, in a Quartan, as they
can witness, who have bought, and used it, in order to their Health.

CHAP. XX. The Spiritual Representation of Plants.
OUt of what has been spoken and declared, we may discover the foundation, on
which the Spiritual Regeneration of Plants ought to be built, of which
Quercetan speaks in his Book against Anonymus, which he said he had seen at a
certain Cracovian Physicians, who knew how to prepare the ashes of every plant
so Elegantly, and how to preserve their Spirits (the Authors of their Virtues)
so Exactly; that, having above thirty of them in several Glass Vessels, Sealed
with Hermes 's Seal, if any one asked to have a Rose, or a Marigold showed him,
then he would put the bottom of the Vessel, wherein was the Rose-ashes (and the
like of any other Flower, which he was to show) to the Candle, to warm it a
little, and then that fine and impalpable Ashes of it self, would represent the
evident form of a Rose, increasing and growing by degrees, manifestly
exhibiting the figure of a living florid Rose, which shadowy representation,
when the Vessel was removed from the heat, would again return to ashes. This
Secret, says he, I sought after with great study, but could never attain it.

But this Spiritual Resuscitation of Plants, seems not so difficult to the
Hippocratical Philosopher, especially when it is prosecuted, The Vulgar burn by
Fire, the Ch^mi^s by Water.
not with a violent, but a soft fire, therein imitating Nature, as our Master
teaches. I have invented a way for it, which yet by reason of the incommodity
of this place, for such kind of Studies, I have not confirmed by Experience:
yet for the sake of the Curious, I will here set it down.

I have Ocularly demonstrated out of Hippocrates, that Acid and Alcaly, the
Architectonick Instruments of Nature, are in all sublunary things; These, when
they are not subjected to the Artificer, but left to the government of Nature
alone, then That subject increases and grows strong, as the meanest Flint
declares, of which I have spoken in his place: If then it increases and grows,
of necessity the Acid, and I have elsewhere showed that the Spirit, is the Bond
joining Soul and Body.
Alcaly must have something, which directs their Operations to their proper
ends.

This, I elsewhere call the Rector, give it what name you please, provided we
understand the thing; for I shall not quarrel about words. These Three, Hermes,
that most ancient Philosopher, calls Body, Spirit, and Soul; Nature is like in
every thing, as Hermes, Pythagoras, and a terward, Hippoc. teaches.
So that these Three are latent in that Terrene Receptacle, which represents to
us the figure of a Seed.

Let half a pound of this Seed, for instance of Poppy, from a full flower or
head, be gathered in ^^ir weather, which you must keep in a temperate place
till the next Spring, then in the Evening, observe the clearing of the Sky,
whether it promise a fair Night, for the Night must be fair wherein the Seed is
to be exposed on a large board of Glass, with the edg turned up, that it fall
not down, and placed in a Meadow or Garden full of diverse Flowers and Herbs
(for unless the soil be fruitful, the Dew will be but barren) In the Morning
before Sunrising, you must carefully take away the Seed, now moist with Dew,
from the Glass-Board, and put it into a Phyal, They were small Vessels, says
Quercetan.
fit for that purpose, having its mouth close sealed with Wax, and so keep it,
least the Dew should evaporate (which is very light by reason of the Spirits)
these Spirits in the following Chapter I shall show See Cosmopolita.
, being occultly Acid and Volatile, yea being the hidden Food of Life; with
which the Dew is so impregnated in the Air, that when it is included in an
Egg-shell, and put upon a Which I think ought not to be round.
Spear placed obliquely, then the Egg is lifted up by the heat of the Sun, to
the top of the Spear (as In Magia Natura.
Hildebrand teaches) but that the said Dew may be sucked up by the Seed:
Afterward in a clear Night, re-expose the said Glass-board with the Seeds,
into the aforesaid Meadow, that it may re-attract and draw in the Dew, which
you must also again seal up in the aforesaid Phyal, before Sunrising, that it
exhales not; so the Seeds by little and little, by means of the Dew sucked in,
will begin to swell and be turgid, the Acid and Alcaly, acquiring strength from
the Dew, and Heavenly Influences, which the Rector will then begin to direct.
Let this setting out, and taking in, of the Seeds, be so long repeated, till
the Signs of Germination and Vitality do appear. In the interim, whilst these
things are a doing, you must, in the same Meadow, stretch and spread abroad
clean Linnen-cloths, on wooden-sticks, and so gather the Dew on them, and wring
it out, keeping it in a Glass Vessel well stopped, which in its Settling, will
afford or depose some Faeces (from the small dust flying up and down in the
Air): of this pure Dew, pour as much on the Seeds, as may be about an Inch
above them, and so place them, in a Vaporating Bath (for It Testamen. c. 24.
Raimund teaches, That what Nature does, by the heat of the Sun and Stars, the
same it will do by the heat of Fire, provided it be so ordered, as not to
exceed the motive and informative Virtue, which is in the matter of the
Celestial Insluences) stopping the mouth of the Glass with melted Sulphur: The
Acid and Alcaly, in the Humid and Calid, then begin to act upon one another,
and so they will be freed from the Earthly body of the Seed, in which they were
included; and in the space of a few days, this natural Composition, will wax
Green at the top (as it happens to Stagnant Waters, in shadowy places, by the
ambient heat of the Summer.) Under this Green Film, is the union of the
Faculties perfected, which I have showed to be Volatile, and together with the
Rector, As Hipp. L. 1. of Diet.
unseparable from the Acid (being immortal per se) which union may be called
Confermentation.

The Receptacle, or body of the Seed, will be a dead Substance, which in a few
days will suck up the Viridity, (i. e.) the Bubbles of Fermentation, with the
Superfluous Liquor (as we see in Pools, growing green at top) and by little and
little, it is turned into a most fine Powder, like Ashes, when it is come to a
ripeness. This Vessel, being warmed (so doubtless Quercetan saw it) the Levity
of the Dew, being Confermented with the Rector, and the Faculties of the Seeds,
will represent the image of I^oppy.

The mouth of the Vessel, if it be melted with Glass, I judge, will never decay,
and because the Practick part does not attain to, nor follow the Speculative,
word for word, there is therefore need of a Skilful and Ingenious Operator.
Hitherto, as I have said, I never had a fit place at Venice, to make this
trial, nor ever shall, for want of fruitful and pure Dew, which is here
troubled by the continual steaming of Malltre is made of Echalations of
stinking Urine, and other mixtures, embracing one another. Lib. 1. of Metcors.
Halinitre (as the Walls of all the Houses show) with which, the very Dews
being also subtle exhalations (as Aristotle teaches, and our own experience
confirms) are mixed, and so they fall down mixed again,

Such a shadowy Regeneration of things, was hid by Paracelsus (being
illuminated in this Natural Hippocratical Doctrine) under the Vail and Metaphor
of the Generation of Man, whom, certain Grandees of Physic, Sennert. de
Consil. Edi. C. 4.
being ignorant of this Doctrine, understanding literally, judged him, as an
Impious Man, to Banishment.

I add, that in the whole School of Philosophy, there is nothing, though never
so diligently sought for, which does more lively demonstrate to us the Mystery
of the Resurrection, than these proper instruments of Nature, being cleansed
from their Refuse, by an Hippocratist, and again conjoined, reunited, and
re-produced, if the said Mystery be at all demonstrable by Natural things.

CHAP. XXI. A Summary Rehearsal of what has been spoken.
THe Alcaly, and the Volatile Acid, in the family of Vegetables, are burnt
together by Fire, into a Fixed, or a truly Alcalizate Salt. Fol. 788.
The way is indeed promised by the Resormer in his Mantissa Hermetica, in lofty
words, but no where to be found; in the mean time, he finds fault with those
Salts, whose ashes are burnt with Sulphur; and he blames Hartman, as a bad
Writer, In his Appendix. fol. 101.
and says that nothing can be more fo^lishly taught, than to mix Alcaly Salts,
with Acids (as if he himself had not taught to mix the Alcaly of Vipers, with
the Acid Spirit of Salt; as also the Spirit of Vitriol, with the Alcalizate
Salt of Wormwood, Mantiss. f. 788.
under the title of Coagulated Spirit of Vitriol: and again, in his Appendix f.
100. he extolls, such mixed Salts, with great Praises) and a little after he
again admits Ashes to be calcined with Sulphur: When uncertainty is the
Mistress, what can be chosen?

Know then, that no Vegetable has any fixed Salt, of what kind soever, unless
it be burned with actual Fire; So that the Acid, in burning, may act upon, and
apprehend the Alcaly, The Air death Volatize.
and likewise the Alcaly on the Acid, as I have showed in Juice of Wine, and
its Tartar: As may be seen in rotten Wood, though you reduce it, never so
carefully to Ashes, in what fire soever, you will never get Salt out of it; for
the Acid, and the Alcaly, being both Volatile, are already absumed by the Air,
and have left nothing but an unprofitable Cadaver behind, but if it be burnt
before Putrefaction, then you may obtain your desire.

Wherefore our chief care and labor in this Work, must be, This action may be
called Fermentation, for the instruments of Nature are changed.
that the Herbs may be fresh, and not withered; for then, in burning, the
innate Humidity, when it boils up, does dissolve the Acid and the Alcaly,
which, being dissolved, do act mutually one upon another, and one apprehending
the other, they are both fixed, according to the property of the Concrete: But
that part, which flies away with the flame, and was not catched by the Acid,
turns into Soot, from whence, you may by an easy Method, draw forth Volatile
Alcaly, but never Fixed Salt, yet by ingenuity it is reduced to a Consistency.

This action deserves to be called Fermentation, for both the instruments of
Nature are changed into one Artificial, which, as in the Sope-makers and
Glass-makers Art, is turned with the Acid, its contrary, into a Neutral thing;
so also it happens in Man's body, when it is administered, with its contrary, by
a prudent and Hippocratical Physician; for it is the same Operation, L 1. of
Diet.
as our Master teaches.

Take Green Wormwood for an Example, when it is green, fet fire to it, and
kindle it in a Chimney, or open place, but take great heed that it does not
flame out, it is enough to turn it only into Ashes, which, after the burning, put
in an Earthen-pot, large, and low, or also upon an Iron-plate, the edges turned
up, and Coals being kindled under it in a Wind-furnace, that the Vent-hole, or
Portal, as need requires, may be either opened, or shut: Stir these Ashes with
an Iron Spatule continually, till they be very white, and then lay them in a
Linnen-bagg Acuminated (or if there be but few, on Acuminated Paper) and pour
on Common Water, which as it runs through it, being pregnant with Salt, is
called a Lie; coagulate this strained Lie in an Iron Drying Pan (not greased in
the Kitchen) with a quick Ebullition, and make it up into a Lump, and when it
is as thick, as Honey, continually stir it with a Spatule, and it will be dried
into a gray Powder, which presently put into a Pot not glazed, the mouth of the
Wind-furnace being stopped, and cover it with small Coals, mixed with their
powder, and leisurely heat it, scarce to Brunity, or Browneness, but not that
it may melt, then cool it, and put the Salt, into a Glass Vessel, that it may
be dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Water; stir it oftentimes with a
Wooddenstick, then suffer the Solution to rest, two or three days, and when it
is clear from the Lees, without much stirring, pour it out, and in a Leaden, or
Glass Vessel, placed in Sand, suffer the Water to exhale, without Bubbles, till
a Saline-Cuticle grow a-top; then remove the Vessel, and the next Morning,
gather together the shining grains of Salt, which you must swiftly wash in
clear water, and then dry: put again the remaining Lie, in the Sand, that the
water may exhale, as before, unto the Cuticle. Both these Salts are to be kept
together, in one Vessel, which being prepared after this manner, do resemble
the Crasis and Disposition of their Concretes. The rest of the Lie, being of
the taste of Urine, and of a stinking smell^ is to be left to wash Glasses.

This is the easy and natural way of preparing Salts of Vegetables, which do
never melt of themselves, nor are of an ungratesul taste: A Pound of these
Ashes, will yield near four ounces of the purest Salt; but four pound of the
Ashes of dried Herbs, will scarce afford an ounce of Salt.

Alcalyes, What Herbs yield Alca^yes, Salt or Acid, I have safficiently showed
before.
out of Vegetables, are made after the same manner, of which yet some are
easily turned into Liquor, for they are empty, and therefore desire to be
satiated from the Air; as I have hinted above in the Occult Acidity of the Air,
which may suffice.

The Reformer teaches, that the ashes are to be boiled, and the Lie thickened to
Siecity, Mant. f. 789.
and afterward committed to the melting fire, without discretion; So, in the
place of the Vegetable Salt, there always comes an empty and caustic Alcaly;
for the Salt of Wormwood, in its Fundamental Point, is of the Acid Salt, and
not purely fixed, as I have shown; but if it suffer Fusion, then both Tastes or
Sapor act upon one another, and are fixed into an Alcaly, as it happens in all
Acid Salts made by Art; wherefore from the Regimen of Fire alone, things are
altered, and they change their Name, Virtue and Efficacy. This is the cause,
that the virtues of Salts, prepared by ignorant Persons, Fire is a Public
Professor.
are never equal, viz. when they are Alcalyz'd, they are commended by the
Unskilful (for example, Salt of Wormwood) to have done good in the Colic
(which then came from Acids, which had been drank) but when it is prepared from
Salt-Acid, and Volatile to boot, by the Skilful, it is good for the Stomach, and
against Old Obstructions, and is then the Basis in the Cachectique Powder of
Quercetan. A Cachectick Powder.
The cause is ascribed to Noxious Humors; So, many Salts, are made fixed, if
they be managed with a due Heat, and with all Requisites, as the Subject can
bear, which otherwise were Volatile; for the fixation of Blood requires one
kind of Heat and Instruments; All things are done by them through Divine
Necessity. Hipp. l. 1. de Diaet.
the fixing of Nitre, and Arsenick, another; when the whole Nitre, by Odor
only, is turned to Earth, it requires another Tractation; when Mercury of it
self, does as it were grow fixed, there is need of another Fire, and Vessel;
there are other Requisites, when Antimony and Sulphur are fixed; So also there
is another operation of Salts, which are all Volatile, as I have showed in
Rotten Wood.

This is the reason, The Venatians Ingenious.
why the wife and prudent Senators of Venice, do cause the Timber, of which
they make their Ships of War, while it is green, to lie under water many years,
in their gallant and well-provided Arsenal, least the Air should penetrate it,
and by this means, under the water, it becomes almost as fixed and as hard, as
stones.

But if it begins to be quailed in the Air, before it be watered, then they
must burn it a little, that the Acid and Alcaly, may be melted together, and as
it were incrustrated; and so it will endure many ages and never rot: In like
manner those pieces of Timber are incrustrated, which are rammed into the Earth
for Foundations of great Buildings, least they should rot.

The Gardeners in these Islands do reduce their Herbs, being dried, in the Air
or Sun, to Ashes, and sell the ashes on their Words and Credit to the
Apothecaries: who, finding they can get little, or no Salt out of them, do
blame the Gardeners, alleging they were naught; Their answer is, that in
Transporting the Ashes, the Seawater has robbed them of their Salt: many do
easily believe this Excuse, being ignorant of any other cause.

But when fresh Vegetables are reduced to Ashes, To this sense Bisilius speaks
of Sal Armon. When my Wings are cnt off, and ^^om prepared to the Bath
as is done in L^tuania, Scandia, and Muscovy, for Potashes, then, in the
Igneous Ebullition, the Acid and Alcaly apprehend one another, are melted and
fixed together. But when they are urged with a melting fire, as the Reformer
teaches, then they change their Nature, and are turned into Vitrifying Alcaly,
as On Exodus
Zoar has observed: which yet was not much less fixed in the Concretes, before
they passed through the fire; which again by Inversion, does not only put on
Volatility, but is also reduced into Elements, as I have showed in the Alcaly
of Tartar.

But if Alcalyes, be boiled with their proper Distilled Oils, in a just
proportion, observing a due time, with an artificial and occult Circulation,
and in a fit Vessel, they afford Ens Mirabile. So Oil of Cinnamon, Oil made
Salt.
being absorbed, by its proper Alcaly (being deprived of its Vestiments)
effects in the Palsy, and such like Diseases, as much as can be hoped from it;
Oil of Tartar, being Volatile and Fat, with its proper Alcaly, in a just
proportion, is made Soap.

When the Reformer heretofore had been informed by me, Evil departs not from
the unthankful Man's house.
by word of Mouth, of this example of Tartar, he presently boils the Alcaly of
Vipers, with Oil of Tartar, being of a diverse Nature, after a Rural fashion,
and with little heed, which, by Coction in a Glass of a long neck, with the
Alcaly, acquired the consistence of Soap, yet he blames me for my Friendly
Information, in a very long Letter, Saying, The Oil of Tartar, you advised me
to pour on, became like very Pitch, and that so thick, when it was cold, that a
man may cut it; So that I perceive you deceived m^. It Is true, I heard from
your mouth before, that the preparation of this Salt, would give great light to
Chemistry, etc. This great Naturalist had not so much Salt (as we say) in his
Brains (though he writes and seribbles of Salt) as to enquire into the
necessary cause of this Inspissation, but presently calls that, which he
understands not, f. 487.
A Cheat, and an Imposture. But like, as he has observed the cause of this
Inspissation, which is known even to the Vulgar, and to all those who make
Soap; even so with the same heed he has observed the Things, which he Reforms.

Hearken therefore to me, All Oil, and also all Pingue-Does or Fatts, have an
Occult Acid, on which the Alcalyes act, and consume it, otherwise Soap could
never be made: for the distilled Oil of Olives, does corrode and dissolve
Silver insensibly, when it is cast on it but a short space, which would not be,
unless Acidity were in it; the remainder being thick, better preserves Iron
from Rust, in as much as the aforesaid Acid has been taken away by
Distillation, and is turned, by a strong fire, into a Coal Alcalized, which is
plain to the Eye, by the affusion of any Acid Spirit. This is the reason, why
the Chief Armourers and Overseers of the Arsenal of this Famous City, before
they Oil their Armor, cause the Oil to Evaporate at a gentle Fire, almost to
the half.

So the common People in sharp Pains (proceeding ordinarily from Acidity)
desire to be anointed withthe Oil which burns before Images, Thick Oil of
Olives resembles Alcaly.
and That asswages their Pain. This Relief, the Superstitious People of Greece,
attribute to the Image, before which the Lamp burns; But the true cause is, the
Spissitude in the Lamp, loses its more subtle Acid part by the flame, and so
being destitute thereof, it grows impatient, and desires to be Saturated with a
new Acid, and finding That in the grieved part, it draws it out, and unites it,
to it self; and so the Grief either wholly ceases, or is at least mitigated and
abated.

The Vulgar believe, Why old Oil grows moldy.
that Old Oil is as good as Balsam, because the Oil of a Hundred years old in
the Castle of Breschia, eases many from their pains, arising from Acidity; in
which Oil, by reason of its antiquity, the Alcaly has in part mastered the
Acidity, hence at-last it grows very musty; So Venerable Antiquity prescribes
Old Oil in Compositions for External use.

For the same reason, rotten Apples do cool, Rotten Apples.
more than boiled ones; which therefore we call, Anodynes.

Fresh Butter has more Alcaly than Acid, and therefore it cooles more than
Oil; Hence Schola Salerni, Lenit, and humectat, solvit sine Febre, butyrum.

Butter mollifies, moistens, and dissolves, yet without a Feavor; for this
cause, it is not coagulated in the Milk, Butter.
unless the Milk be sowred before, and if in making or Churning of Butter,
fixed Alcaly be cast in, which consumes the Acid, the Butter will never come;
for the Acid must coagulate the Alcaly.

So also Alcalized Salts do easily flow, and are dissolved in the Air, but as
soon as Acid is poured on them, to overcome the Alcaly, they harden, and are
coagulated.

Sulphur, in its Fat has an hidden Acidity, Sulphur is Acid.
and is most readily dissolved, not only in Oil, but also in Alcaly, but never
in that which is manifestly Acid, though it be most powerful; but if it be
fired under a Glass Bell, then its hidden Acidity is turned to Smoke, which is
compacted into a most Acid Juice, and the Alcaly which erst did friendly
embrace the Sulphur, now is destroyed by It, and a new production is made,
different from the former.

But Sulphur is praised by Dioscorides, in the Diseases of the Lungs; though
some say, it is the Anima thereof, understand, when it is evacuated by an
Hippocratist, and fixed into insipid and milky Earth, then it becomes impatient
of Innanition, and again desires to be satiated with its like: Wherefore it
greedily attracts, and absorbes the putrefactive Acidity of the Lungs, which is
firmly believed to descend from the Head, but without this preparation, it is
found altogether unprofitable, for those Diseases, as the Enquirers after
Truth, by Nauseating experience, do daily find. This earth is then called by
the Skilful, Milk of Sulpbur.
Lac Sulphuris, and that worthily, for it performs many things, which Crollius
has mentioned under its Title.

Moreover, Distill also Vinegar (in which I have showed, that there is Fat Oil,
and Aqua Ardeus) drive the dry Faeces out of the Retort, and there will come
forth Acid, and Pingueous Oil, reduce the Coal left into Ashes, from These,
Elicite the Alcaly, by common Water, which again imbibes, and absorbs its own
Vinegar: out of the Phlegm is made Aqua Ardeus.

From the Alcaly, and the Acid, you shall have regenerated Tartar, so there are
All, in all things (i. e.) you shall every where find the Acid and the Alcaly.
All things in all things.


Camphire (about which, it is strongly disputed, whether it be hot or cold:) is
a Volatile Alcaly, furnished and saturated by Nature, The often smell of Aqua
Fort is breeds an Atrophy, with most bitter pains, See Helmont. c. 9. f. 71.
with its proper Fatness, as I have showed, like things may be done by Art; for
it imbibes into it self the stinking and corroding Acidity of Aqua Fortis,
which Suffocates by its very Smell, and with it, makes a Mock-shew and
resemblance of Oil; but not with a benign, sweet, and grateful Acid (as,
Vinegar, and other Acid Juices) which is to be marked: After the same manner,
Camphire, given at Mouth, does presently attract to it self that Malign,
inwardly Venomous, Stinking, Corroding, and Suffocating Acidity, which in Acute
Diseases, does range through all the Veins, and torments the Patients without
intermission; whereby the Vital Spirit is made purer, chearfuller, and acquires
strength, which Avicen, amongst Practicioners, first observed; whence he
rightly commends, and calls it, Camphire.
A Treacle against hot Poisons; The Vital Spirit, says he, acquires Subtilty,
and exceeding Sprightliness, and Vivacity, from It, and therefore it chears and
comsorts, even in spite of that Vulgar Proverb, Castrat por Nares, Camphora
odore Mares.

(i. e.) Smelled Champhires dose,
Castrates by the Nose.
I add this, in regard all that I have known, If I speak no^ the Truth, let me
be ashamed.
employed about purifying of It, from its Dreggs, by Sublimation, both at
Venice, and Amsterdam (they are called Resinatores) whose houses, smelled of
nothing, but Camphire, are most Salacious, Procreative, and full of Children,
as, if you will not believe their own Confession, their numerous Offsprings
may evince.

Camphire so dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and precipitated, or rather reduced,
with plain Simple water, is made Soap, wherewith Woman's hands being anointed,
and afterward washed with water, it takes away that roughness which
exasperates the Skin, and makes them soft, and as white as Milk; a singular
Ornament for the Female Sex; for our In his book of Precepts.
Master teaches; That the care of the Sound and Healthy is to be also
undertaken, fox Comeliness and Beauties sake.

As the Alcaly of Camphire drinks up nothing, Antimory.
but Acidity alone; So also does Antimony, being destitute of its proper and
innate Acidity, which consists in a subtle venomous Exhalation, not at all
weighty, as its Glass or Powder, called Mercurius Vitae, does show, out of
which with Acid Wine (its like, but not, with Sweet) is Extracted a Poison,
which the Stomach abhors, and there-there this Wine taken at Mouth, with great
violence is rejected from and by the Vital parts, both by Vomit and Seige; and
by accident, it sometimes Cures the Diseases of the first Region. Hence
Helmont, De ^^br^^. c. 15, 6.
As long as Antimony provokes Vomit, it is no remedy for an Honest Man.

But when, That Poison is expelled out of the Antimony either by the flame of
the fire, or by kindled Nitre (of which, I have spoken in its place) then the
Alcaly of Antimony is again Saturated with the aforesaid Acid Spirits, which
yet, The Mines of Vitriol in Caria bia, being emptied, in a few years, in the
open Air, are filled again by it. So are also the empty Mines of Sa^-peter, at
Padua, whence it is called, Anima ^^undi, or Spiritus Multifor^^is, by the
Wise. For this reason Basilius praises Alcaly of Aesenick as the Treasure of
Health; yet I would have none but the Learned to deal in it.
coming from flame or Nitre, are not proper to Antimony; So that in a few days
space, out of the Air, It draws an Aliment, like it self, as I have showed in a
Flint, which, out of the Air, extracts a nourishment like it self, not like the
life of a Dog; So, That, which erst did gently provoke Sweat and Urine, now,
like the very Glass of Antimony it self, moves Vomit; Wherefore the flame, as
also the Acidity of the Nitre, as they are not Poisons, so they are not proper
to the Antimony, now dispoiled and evacuated; and so the Antimony, being
reduced to Alcaly, and robbed of all taste or sapor, which they call
Diaphoretick, if it finds any Venomous thing in Man's body, it attracts it, and
is Saturated by it (For Nature rejoices in its like Nature) retaining it, and
rejoicing therein, more then if it wandered up and down in Man's body:
Wherefore that empty and Diaphoretick Antimony, profits nothing in Diseases,
unless when They are accompanied with some Acid Poison, either occult, or
manifest, as in the Plague, burning Feavors, Petectriales, or Spotted ones; and
in diverse inward Ulcers, in what place soever they be; the venomous
exhalations of which, being absorbed by the Antimony, then the Pores do open of
their own accord, and the Antimony becomes Diaphoretick, otherwise not: Hence
Basilius says, That this Powder is of great force, In Repet. Antiquiss. Lap. f.
80. in my Edition.
to Cure many old Vlcerated Diseases, etc. (i. e.) whose Acidities are
putrefying and escarotick or corroding, for These, this Powder imbibes and
destroys, and hereby, as I have said, the contraction of the Pores is enlarged
and relaxed (this action, the Vulgar call, Exsiccation, for which cause it is
also an Ingredient into that Plaster, which Paracelsus calls, by a barbarous
Name, Oppodeldock. But what this Absumption, Imbibition, Precipitation, or
Exsiccation are? and how they are effected? I shall again Ocularly demonstrate
anon, when I speak of the properties of Iron) and though Pearls, Corals, and
other Cordials, do also absume the Acidities, arising about the Heart; yet
These are not putrefactive, neither joined with an hidden Venom; So that, it is
one kind of Acid, which, emptyed and Alcalized, Antimony does imbibe: Commonly
it is cailed by the general name of Heat.
another kind, that Pearls Attract, in the Palpitration of the Heart: another,
which Crabbs Eyes draw forth in Wounds and Bruises: another, attracted by
Goats-blood, in Pleurisies: another, by Iron, in Obstructions and Loosnesses:
another by the Volatile Alcalyes of Vegetables in Hecticks; another by thd
Bezoar Stone, when rich men fall into a Swoon (I say rich men, The weight of a
dram was given to King Edward, see Monardus.
for unless the proportion of this precious Stone, which is very dear, be
correspondent to that Acidity, which is hateful to Nature, it is given in vain.
Hence Crato says, he never observed any good from it, though it were frequently
given; which I persuade my self to be true, especially it being prescribed by
Grains, as Books persuade: The skilfullest Practicioners of this City, have
observed this Defect, as well as Crato, who therefore perscribe Western Bezoar,
not that it is better than the Eastern, but because it is cheaper, and
therefore it is given in a greater Dose. For it is commonly believed, to
provoke and expel Sweat, which effect yet it does not produce, unless it has
first consumed the Morbous Acidity (as Chapter p. of Pestilert Flavors.
Hercules of Saxony, a Physician of note, has observed) for this Stone is
considered by them (as many other Simples) to act upon the Body, as a Wedg
driven by a Beetle, not remembering, that, the Extraneous Sapor, being consumed
by the Stone (or its like) the contraction of the Pores is enlarged, and then
the whole Body transpires of it self, as old Hippocrates teaches: the truth of
whose doctrine, is confirmed by a fly falling into the Eye, whose lids are
presently with great violence contracted, not that the Fly contracts them, but
the Sense abhors a Foreign Inmate; but as soon as the Fly is taken out, the
Eyelids are again gently relaxed.) I say, it is one sort of Acidity, which
Paracelsus his Libium does consume, in the Dropsy; another, which the Spiritual
Salt of Tartar destroys, in Hypocondriacal Melancholy, and all other Diseases
of the Spleen: another, that Ostiocolla does waste, in the rupture of Bones;
another, that Corals, with their specific Alcaly, destroy and absorb in the
Gonorrhaea, etc. But the aforesaid Simples, do not imbibe (nor so much as enter
into) the proper, I have showed before by Alcaly, that the Seeds of things in
the Macrocosin, are Acid, so in the Microcosm, as well in the Healthy, as Sick.
Nature studiously Observes the same consent as this daily and common Praris
does declare.
innate, and manifest Acidity of the Stomach (as I have showed) whereby it
Concocts, and changes the food into an Acid Vital Juice, which is to be
admired. Hence it appears, every Acidity, or Aura (call it as you please)
expects, and willingly entertains its convenient Compar and Fellow (as I have
erst showed in the Earth of Carinthia, evacuated of Vitriol) wherewith it
delights to be altered, absorbed, and transmuted, and one disturbs not the
course or province of another: Hence Man has obtained the Name of the
Microcosm, and In Tabula.
Hermes says, The things which are in the Superior, are also in Inforior
Bodies. These are the foundations of Physic, according to the nature of Man,
as its inventors first found it out, and judged it, an Art worthy to be
ascribed to God, and it has been so accounted, as the De V^t^r. Med^^in.
Old Man teaches; for, says he, in the cited place, It is not Siccity,
Humidity, Heat, nor Cold, etc. but Sapors, which he there reckons up, These, my
Lib. de Art.
Hippocrates shows, to be in the Cavities and Ventricles, saying, That Man's
Body has many Ventricles (or Sapors) as they can witness, who are solicitous
to know them (he means only Chemical Philosophers, for by and by, he subjoyns)
of all the aforesaid things, there is none visible and conspicuous to the Eye:
Wherefore they are called obscure by me, not that they remain always so; and do
ever fly from our understanding, but, as much as is possible, they may be
understood and known. For it is possible (to Chemical Hippo^ratical
Philosopher) as far as the Nature of the Sick, does assist in the
consideration, and as far as the natures of the Enquirers, are fit for that
purpose: For with much labor, and no small space of time, they are known and
exhibited to the Eye. For those things which escape our bodly Eyes, are
comprehended by our Followers, by the eyes of their minds, so far he.

Many of these things, by the Authority of Hippocrates, I have clearly
demonstrated to the Eye, as much as the brevity of a Compendium will allow, but
not to the Intent, that every Hippocratist should imprudently practice or
prostitute this Doctrine to, De P^is^a Midic.
and before the Unskilful; Our Master vehemently forbids That, saying, It seems
best to me, that they who undertake to speak of this Art, should discourse only
of those things, which are known to the Vulgar, not enquiring into any other,
but the Diseases, to which they are usually Obnoxious: which is as much as to
say, Speak, as the Many, Think as the Few. Arist. 1. Top.
if thou record other things, besides the four Exerementitious Humors, to be
the cause of Diseases, and does not pretend to expel them with their
Concomitants and Attendants, the same way that others do; thou shall be called
a Fugitive, an Emperick, and a Paracelsian: Since therefore, our Master was
afraid of Plebeian ignorants, an Hippocratist should often ruminate on that
saying of the Comedian, Quodscis, nescis.

To make no further Digression, Out of what has been spoken, we may conclude,
how meet it is, that all Alcalyes, without Acids, should be empty and inanous
bodies; for fixed Alcaly, saturated with fixed Acid, Alcaly is a Vacu^m in
Nature.
is made Petrous, as I have showed in Lime; but when It undergoes a melting
heat, then they pass into Glass.

The same fixed Alcaly, boiled to maturity with an Occult Pingueous Acid, the
Humid-way, is made Soap.

So fixed Alcaly, mixed with Acid Spirit of Salt, is made Common Salt, having
all the properties thereof: So also fixed Alcaly, with the Acid of Vitriol, is
made Vitriol, which is called Tartarum Vitriolatum; and though Writers affirm,
that the Acid of Sulphur, per Campanam, No body at all does perish, nor is made
That, which it was not before. Hipp. L. 1. de Diaet.
does not differ, from the Acid of Vitriol, yet it is not true; but, as all
Acids do retain and preserve the properties of their seed, even unto the very
Elements, as I have showed before in Wine, so does this Acid Liquor; for when
it corrodes a natural Body, as Sand (for Example) having not yet undergone the
fire, then out of It, is sublimated natural Sulphur: Wherefore nothing in the
world dies, but all things are transmigrated and changed, as In Pimandro.
Trismegistus rightly determines: and Lucretius also, All things into their own
bodies are dissolved, L, 2.
nothing by Nature is to naught resolved. Fixed Alcaly, with the Acid Spirit of
Nitre, is turned into Frigid Nitre, conceiving Flame, and is a Remedy for the
Quinzey.

The same Alcaly, with the Acid Spirit of Wine, is made Tartar of Wine, as I
have above largely shown. After this sort, says my Master Hippocrates, does
Nature also proceed, which turns the Aliments, replenished with a Volatile
Alcaly, with and by the Acidity of the Stomach, The Ferments of the place which
they call Mumail.
first of all into Chyle manifestly Acid, and in the subsequent Ventricles, the
Alcaly is coagulated, according to the property of the Occult Acid, which the
Cavities contain within themselves; So the Alcaly of the Excrements of the
Belly, though it be an hundred times rectified, is troubled of its own accord,
as I have showed in its place: An Odorous smell is inseparable from the Alcaly
of Urine; the Alcaly of the Sweat of a sound Man, does not stink; so there is a
different coagulation of the Stone, as I have shown in its dissolution and
concretion. That Acid is different, which hardens the Alcaly in the Bones;
another, in the Blood; another, in the Veins; another, in the Hair; and another
must necessarily be in the Nails (Reason it self dictates so much) for
otherwise every thing would be generated of every thing; So also Soap made with
Oil, differs from That made with Axungia, and this again from that, made with
Tallow or Suet. All the Muscles (says I. de Aste.
Hippocrates) have their proper Ventricle; intimating, that every Specific
Coagulation, does also require a Specific Coagulator, which though he be
Occult, yet, by Mechanical necessity, he must needs be Acid; as I have
evidenced in Oil, Suet, Milk, etc. otherwise, nothing at all in the Universe
would be Coagulated; For the things, which have been spoken (says my Doctor)
none of them can be seen with the Eye (i. e.) none can understand my Writings,
De Art.
unless he be versed in this Chemical, and Salt-fusory Art.

Wherefore Hippocrates found out those things, which, by a grateful consent,
The book of Nature is to be read, but Paper ones, are not to be rejected.
are subject to the Empire of Art and Nature; On this Foot he places the
unmovable Foundations of Learning, and from these he has deduced all
Mechanical Progresses, and Explications of Causes, so firmly, that if all Paper
Books, with their Authors, were lost; yet by this Method, out of the Great Book
of Nature, they may be all again retrieved.

Hence it appears, how many Fables have been ascribed to this worthy Man, which
he never so much as dreamed of, yea many things, published under his name, suit
not with his Profound Wisdom, so that if he were alive again, he would be
ashamed to own them.

The permixture and alteration, which I have demonstrated in fixed Alcalyes
with Acids, the same also L. 1. of Diet.
my Hippocrates would have to be understood, of the Volatile Alcalyes of
Animals, for, the Volatile Alcaly of any Animal whatsoever, being saturated
with the Acid Spirit of Variol, assumes the nature of Vitriol; but, not having
the Colcothar of Iron, it is precipitated, by juice of Galls, into a bottom of
a Purple Color, like to White Vitriol, of which above.

Out of what has been spoken, it is as clear as Noonday, that the Spirit, is
the Vehicle and lodging place of the Soul, and the Bond joining Soul and Body;
which I shall also show by the following Experiments.

For the same Volatile Alcaly, of what Animal soever, with Spirit of Nitre, is
made natural Nitre, conceiving Flame, and is melted in the fire, like ordinary
Nitre; The same Alcaly, I say, with Vinegar, is made Tartar, which is wholly
Distilled into a Salt liquor, as I have showed in Mindererus his Water; the
same may be said of other Acid Juices; for as fixed Alcalyes are vacuous and
empty bodies, so are also the Volatile ones of all Animals, whose preparations
the Reformer indeed teaches, which yet is very inane and empty, as all Alcalyes
are. Hence my Hippocrates, moved to a smiling laughter, pleasantly says, L. 1.
of Diet.
They know not what they do, but they obey their destined fate. Wherefore the
Alcaly of Vipers, being a vacuous and empty body, is saturated by the Reformer
(as empty) with great labor and cost, with the Acid Spirit of Salt, Pharm. f.
486.
and what else, I pray, but Common Salt, can issue from it? Behold the Cheat
and Imposture, which the Reformer has at last found out, with so much labor,
of which triumphing before the victory, he thus scribbles, Whosoever thou art,
never think there is any other way of Fixing; having spoken this, by and by
he^recants, Pharm, f. 486.
saying (with a low voice) If yet there be any Man, who has greater Experience
in these Operations, I give him occasion, for the Public good, that, what he
has Experimented herein, he would not suffer to die with him. Alas poor Man!
why not? but go too, Let us comply with his desires, he has made a fair
Oration, and no doubt deserves a Statue from the Commonwealth of Physic,
Append. in Animadu. fol. 75.
for having so politely distinguished the Acid from the Salt, for the benefit
of Apothecaries.

CHAP. XXII. A Childish Opinion Discovered.
I Will briefly now run over the Acids, In Append. f. 52.
which the Reformer teaches, as contrary to Salts, which Doctrine yet, with
many others, I find to be false, and full of Ignorance; Fire, both Internal and
External, Explains the Book of Nature, as the ordinary professor of the Creator.
as shall be demonstrated by Fire, keeping to the Terms usually received (for
Fire is here the public Professor and just Judge; Logic has no such way of
distinguishing, for That only handles true Sciences already found out, and
propounds Methodically, and clearly and profitably to treat of what is to be
known, in every knowable thing. But I have before distinguished the Tastes or
Sapors of Salts, as much as was necessary for the understanding of this present
Compendium. Let there be made a Powder of Nitre, The Calcining of Gold, the
day, way.
and Common Salt, Ana, four Ounces, and two Ounces of Alum, to which add
Simple Water, as much as is sufficient for the solution of the Salts (which act
not, undissolved) and you will obtain a Salt Liquor, to which add two Drachms
at least, of Leaf-Gold, mingle the Gold with the Salts, and boil them in a
glazen pot, to Siccity: toward the end, increase the fire, till it affords a
smell like That of Aqua Fortis, so the saltness of the mixture erodes the Gold:
Dissolve the white Mass in a pot, with Common Water, let the Solution rest in
the Glass Vessel, till the Faeces of the Salt do subside: when it is clear,
pour it out by inclination; to this clear solution, instill by drops, some fixed
resolved Alcaly Ex. Gra. Liquor of Tartar, which presently absorbs the more
subtle Acid Spirits, and the Gold presently falls of a Purple color: In this
Operation, the Salt hinders not the Acid Spirits, as the Reformer teaches, but
the Alcaly of Tartar, consuming the Acids, destroys the Compositum.

The same way, but with great force, distilled water of Nitre and Alum, in
which Common Salt has been dissolved, Galcining of Gold the morst way.
dissolves Gold, for if the Salt were not dissolved in water, it would not
corrode the Gold: Wherefore Salt does not destroy the Acid Aqua Fortis, neither
in the dry, nor moist way, but adds Vigor to it, like to Sal Armoniack; Hence
Basilius, What is found in the Eagle, is also to be met with in me.

Hence it appears, that Gold is not dissolved, but by Salts, but why the Acid
Spirit of Salt does dissolve It, I have elsewhere showed, viz. by corroding the
Spirits, it returns to That, which it natively and originally was, viz. into
Salt.

CHAP. XXIII. Obscure things, made manifest.
I Will show another Experiment, very pleasing to the Eye, manifesting, that
Salts are not contrary to Acids.

Take three pound of dried Vitriol, Tincture of Gold.
two pound of Nitre, fix ounces of the Flowers of Common Sulphur, and five
pound and a half of Common Salt, and Powder of Bricks, as much as is sufficient
(least the Salts should be melted with the Sulphur:) Let there be six pound of
this last powder, mingle the small powders exactly, and distill the water, at
least out of Sand, put Gold Money into this water, without rectification
premised, and in a few hours hours in a warm place, you will see the water
tinged with a Golden color (by occasion of this Tincture, It comes to my mind,
that not without great labor, by the help of Fire, and much Diligence, a
Volatile Alcaly (of which I have elsewhere spoken) ascended of a grateful
smell, so rare and light, that it can scarce be perceived by the touch,
sometimes of a gray, sometimes of a white color, of a Salt taste, biting the
Tongue, and so subtle, that, without the irritation by fire, in an open Vessel,
of its own accord, it evaporates to Air; whereas of it self it remains constant
in fire: I say, by the property of this Alcaly, Gold, Silver, Quicksilver,
Crystal, etc. are made truly potable, so that, it is not only impossible, they
should return to their bodies; but moreover they are so freed from the bonds of
Coagulation, that we may freely dally with them, etc. But these, and the like,
being not proper for this place, I willingly pass them over.) Pour out the
aforesaid water, and super-adde other, and again distill it in a hot place, till
the water be sufficiently tinged; mix and shake the tinged waters together in
another Phyal, and into that water put plates of Silyer, first cuppelled, then
the water tinged with a Golden color, presently grows Black, and in a few
moments, all the Silver is invisibly dissolved, and all falls into a black
Calx, which the Skilful in the Art, without contradiction, call Gold: But
observe, that water not tinged by Gold, dissolves not, no nor any way affects
the Silver.

Hence Of the propertie^ of Blanets.
Basilius de Argento, I have devoted my Soul, my Spirit, and my Body to my King.

Wash the Gold-money, and you will find it something paler, but to have lost
little or nothing of its weight: This Experiment is worthy of consideration,
but when the aforesaid powders are distilled with a naked Fire, and open, more
of the dust of Bricks being added, then it draws forth no Tincture, but wholly
dissolves all the Gold: I say, this Experiment (though it seems useless, yet is
pleasant, and of great consequence) does not succeed without Salt: So that Salt
does not hurt these Acid Spirits.

So also simple Aqua Fortis of Nitre and Alum, Sulphur of Antimony.
or Vitriol, corrodes not, nor dissolves Crude Antimony; but add to this water,
so much fused Salt (i. e.) clean and finely powdered, as it can dissolve, The
Minera of Antimony from the Raurian Mountains, with red spots or Veins, so
dissolved, melts Gold.
Superfuse This water on the Antimony, only grossly pounded, like the grains of
Millium, and presently, with a gentle heat, it acts on the Antimony, and
corrodes the Regulus of it; on which presently pour cold water, and you will
see the Sulphur separated, which swims a-top of the water, like Pitch.

But mark, that at one operation, you should dissolve not above two drachms, or
there-abouts, for in a greater quantity, the Sulphur is also corroded by the
water, and turns to Faeces. Dulcify this Sulphur with cold water, and it will
look like the Common, only a little greener. This separation also succeeds not
without Salt; so that Acids are not hurt by It.

Of this Sulphur, adding two simples, A Febrisuge Oil.
you may make an Oil, with which, if you anoint the Backbone, Hand-wrists,
soles of the Feet, one hour before the fit, you may cure all intermitting
Tertian Agues and Feavors.

This Sulphur is the Basis of the Artificial water, wherein if Silver be
dissolved, it precipitates the greatest part of it, into a black Calx, which
Aqua Fortis afterward will not touch.

If Crystal be coemented with the same Sulphur, as also Crude Antimony, marked
with red Spots, Christial tinged like Ruby.
mixed with a little Orpiment and powdered, it acquires the color of a Ruby,
but take heed of the wind, for that will make it chink, and crack, or break.

This is that Sulphur of Antimony, which Tract. de Verbis, Herbis, and
Lap^dibus. Remedy of Tympan^tis.
Helmont advises us, to extract, scarce different from the Common in sight,
only it is a little more greenish; how much this Sulphur avails in the Dropsy
called Tympanitis, They, who having used it, know, as well as I: yea, I firmly
maintain, that Ruland', Ba'sam of Sulphur
Rulandus his Balsam is elicited from this Sulphur: Helmont goes on, make, says
he, Cinnabar, I know many do much disquiet themselves with this Operation, but
I will now openly and clearly discover it. Melt this Sulphur of Antimony in an
Iron spoon, with a gentle Fire, when the Sulphur is melted, of which let there
be E. C. an ounce and a half, add about six drachms of Mercury, a little over,
or under, it is no great matter (for the Sulphur receives as much as it can
mortify) mix them continually with an Iron Spatule, till they be cooled, reduce
the Mass into Powder (which many fire or kindle with live coals, that the
superfluous Sulphur may deflagrate) put this powder into a Retort of a large
neck, (I say large, lest it be stopped by the Cinnabar ascending) and by
degrees Distill it from Sand; then, that which is superfluous, either of the
Mercury or Sulphur, runs down through the neck of the Retort; which gather up,
Cinnabar of Antimony.
then increase the fire, that the Cupple may be hot, and the Cinnabar will be
elevated; when all is cold break the Retort, reduce the Cinnabar to Powder,
which you must seven times more sublimate per se, in a fit Glass Vessel, or
Retort, and you shall have your intent. By the same way, Common Cin^^^ar.
Common Cinnabar is also made, but without repetition of the Sublimation.

Helmont here purposely concealed, There must be but one Rector.
that it must not be Common Mercury, but That taken from the very body of
Antimony. Errors sought after, are sound out by Operation, not else.
To what purpose is this superfluous industry (Let me whisper this word to Our
Chemists) when as the same Cinnabar is Sublimated, after Distillation of Butter
of Antimony, unless Mercury of Antimony, be here required.

CHAP. XXIV. Nocuments are Documents.
HItherto in those Operations, The Reformer is ignorant what Hermes thought of
these Trifles.
which are all persormed by Acids and Salts, it no where appears, that they
destroy one another; now let us proceed to the Rhapsody of the Reformer, which
he proudly calls Mantissa Hermetica, as we are told in his own Book, Where the
true preparation of Mercury Sublimate and Corrosive is, Mantis. f. 801:
(as he says) presented to us. Good Wine needs no Bush, as the Poet says, why he
adds, True preparation to the Title, I see not. I suspect, that after his
accustomed manner, he has a mind to cheat us with fair words; but let us do
the best we can to prevent it.

Mercury (says he) is rightly sublimated with Salt and Vitriol ('it is a wonder
he did not fear, lest the Salt should destroy the Acidness of the Vitriol) but
because he found it so Writ by others, at length he adds, That the Vitriol must
be warily Calcined, lest it be deprived of its Acid Spirlt. He thinks he has
advised some great matter here, as also by telling us, That the Sublimation
must be twice, or thrice repeated, with new powders of Salt and Vitriol. But
why, and to what purpose, this repeated Sublimation with new Powders? for
Mercury, being once saturated with the Acid Spirits, what needs any Reiteration
of the labor? especially if it be true (as it is most true, in Nature) That
all things are governed by certain Numbers, Weights, and Measures, according to
that of the Poet.

Est Modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
(i. e.) A mean, and certain Limits, all things bound,
Beyond, or this side, which, the right's not found.
So that the nature of Mercury, once saturated with Acid Spirits, has absorbed
and imbibed, as much as it can bear, and as much as it wants, from its first
Subllmation, and though it be re-sublimated afterward, and hundred times,
either by it self, or with new powders, yet it still remains the same Sublimated
Mercury: So that, to reiterate the labor, is to make havoc of the Powders,
and to lose time.

This is that, which the wise Man says in the Proverbs, Chap. 20. v. 10.
Ealse Weights and deceitful Balances, are an abomination to the Lord.

I know the way of Sublimating Mercury, is coveted by many, because they fear,
That which is Sold up and down, is mixed with Arsenick, which, as a dangerous
Drugg, ought not to be added to Mercury in its Sublimation, by reason of subtle
Poison, which it breaths forth in Sublimating, and choaks the Operators: I can
show, that it is a subtle Poison, by the danger I have experimently found in it,
my self.

For heretofore, Arsenick
when (by the persuasion of Johannes Agricola) I essayed to sublimate Arsenick
so often, that at length it might remain fixed in the bottom of the Vessel, for
at that time (out of my eager desire after Knowledge) I feared neither Smoaks,
Vapors, nor any other danger: After many Sublimations, when I opened the
Vessel, I sucked in a breath so sweet, so grateful and benign to the Palate,
that I even admired it, as having never felt the like before; but after half an
hour, I perceived my stomach to be contracted and to ache, with a convulsion of
all my Members, I breathed with difficulty, I pissed Blood, with incredible
Heat; suddenly after, I was taken with the Colic, and wholly cramped for the
space of an hour and half; being recovered by Milk and Oil, I was indifferent
well, yet a slow Feavor, like a Hectic, stuck by me all the Winter, which I
cured by Decoction of Vulnerary Herbs, and eating the tops or buds of
Cole-worts and Colly-flowers, boiled tender in Water, and seasoned with juice
of Oranges, Oil, and a little Salt; yea I did so covet this meat, that I could
scarce restrain my Appetite, till Supper and Meat-time: and by these Remedies,
I grew perfectly well.

But in spite of the danger, there are some, who can burn pure Tinn into
Powder, Geber de Argent. c. 18. and Basil. de Propriet.
which, by no Vulgar Art can be again reduced to Tinn, as other Metals; yet
with Arsenick, it is made Scoria, part of which, by a singular Skill, 7 Metals
De fove.
becomes pure Silver. Sigismund Wan, a Citizen of Wondsied in Voitland, knew
and practiced this Art of Separation, to his great benefit; Tinn yields Silver.
for in the year 1464 he built and endowed a Famous Hospital there, which, as
Gasper Bruschius relates, is this day to be seen with the Epitaph of the
Citizen aforesaid. Now that Silver may be made out of Tinn, with Arsenick, 2
Vol. Theatri Chym. fol. 39.
Clavius proves in his Apology against Ernstus; to whom I refer you. So much
for Arsenick, for the sake of the Curious.

I now return to Mercury, whence I digressed, which is sublimated in this
proportion:

Take of Mercury or Quicksilver 280 pound (so much one bundle weighs, as it is
brought out of Hydria in Sheepskins) of Mercry Sublimated, twenty pound; of
Common Salt, and Saltpeter, ana 200 l. of the reserved Caput Mortuum, fifty
pound; of Vitriol Rubified 400 l. All these must be severally reduced to
Powder, under a Millstone which is to grind them, turning round and standing
upright.

The mixture is made after this sort; The common sublimation of Mercury.
The Quick Mercury and the Sublimate, must first be mingled with a part of the
Common Salt, and of the Saltpeter; and although the Salts be dry, yet, by this
Mixture, they become moist; so the Mercury, in being mixed with the said
Powders, dies: then add the other part of the Salts, proceeding to mix them
with an Iron Instrument, till the Mercury appear no where, quick: This Mixture
is very moist, to which if you have a mind to add Rubified Vitriol (which is
very dry) it consumes the Humidity in a moment, and they become altogether as
hard as stone: wherefore instead of the aforesaid Vitriol, you must add the
Caput Mortuum, either reserved from the first Sublimation, or from Aqua Fortis,
it is all one, so the Mixture becomes moderately dry, which then, you must
agitate through a Sieve: afterward you may conveniently mix the fifted Powder,
with the Rubified Vitriol. Thus the Mixture is made, with which, fill sixteen
great Glass Vessels (let the fourth part of them be empty) place them on
Stillatories, and you will sublimate Mercury out of the Ashes (but not with an
open fire, as the Reformer dreams) in four little Furnaces, each of which may
hold four Vessels; set Limbecks to the Vessels, at least loosly, with their
Receivers: Let the fire be slow for twenty four hours, in that time, the Salts
will dissolve the Mercury, and in the Operation it smells like Aqua Fortis,
which hurts the Lungs, yea it almost strangles those that suck it in (as the
smell of the Vault at Puteoli near Naples, does, a Dog) after twenty four hours
the smell ceases, and then the Mercury begins to be Sublimated (gather up the
Aqua Fortis, which is fortified by the other Powders, and serves for the
precipitation of Mercury) continue that heat, till you see the Mercury
separated at top from its Caput Mortuum, in form of a Cake, which commonly
happens about the fifth day, if you have not erred in the Operation. When all
is cooled, by reason of the great weight of the Sublimate, the Glass Vessels
will break of their own accord (you must gather up the pieces by themselves,
for they have some Sublimate, which you may scrape off, wherewith at another
time, running Mercury may be mortified:) Take heed of the Ashes, lest it falls
through the chinks upon the Cakes, which they curiously take off, with both
hands, and lay aside (they call them loaves) of which every one, will weigh
about Twenty five pound, or thereabouts, according to the capacity of the
Vessel, which held more or less of the Mixture; So that of 280 l. of the live
Mercury, and 20 l. of the Sublimate, you may gather 380 l. of the Sublimate.

Now the live Mercury, thus increases in weight, Eighty pound, not from the
Acidity of the Rubified Vitriol, as the The Reformer's Error.
Reformer thinks, which he therefore says, must be warily Calcined, but only
from the Common Salt; which I prove thus.

Let the same Mercury be Sublimated, Mercurius Dulcis Sublimated, of a Red
Color.
with the same proportion of Nitre and Rubified Vitriol, without Common Salt,
then the Mercury ascends Red, and acquires nothing of weight, or of the
Corrosive.

So also, Common Mercury precipitated.
if the same Mercury be precipitated with Aqua Fortis from Nitre and Vitriol,
then it waxes shining Red, and acquires no further weight: The cause is,
because the Sulphurous Nitre, elevates the sulphur of Vitriol; which do
jointly act, at least upon their like (i. e.) upon the External Sulphur of the
Mercury, and so it can increase nothing at all in weight, nor assume a
Corrosive Virtue.

CHAP. XXV. Minerva Treated.
NOw, That, Vulgar Mercury, has a Sulphur, external and separable from the
effence of Mercury, 2 Part. L 2. Sum. Perfect.
besides the testimonies of Geber, and other wise Men, Experience also shows
(the furest School-Mistriss, both here, and every where) by this Operation:

Put clean and pure Mercury into a Glass of a plain bottom and very narrow
mouth: boil it in Sand, first with a slow and moderate, afterward, with a
stronger fire, to that degree, that Mercury may endeavor to ascend; which, if
it happen by a simple motion, cause it to subside again. This way, without the
addition of any thing, but External fire, it is precipitated shining Red, like
That, Sulphur rubifies Mercury.
which was precipitated with Aqua Fortis, out of Vitriol and Nitre; and it
neither gets, nor loses in its weight, in as much as the small portion, if its
proper Sulphur has mortified and rubified it: as I have showed in Aqua Fortis
from (Sulphurous) Nitre. For it is the property of Sulphur, to rubify Mercury,
as I have also demonstrated in the preparation of Cinnabar; which also gets
nothing in weight; which our Chemists must attentively consider, for it is of
concernment.

Mingle this red Precipitate (either made per se, or otherwise, of whatsoever
condition) with Common Salt, urge this Compositum with a moderate fire, and
then it will be elevated into a Sublimate Corrosive: neither does the Salt here
hinder the Acid Sulphurs, yea, without Salt, it would never be made Sublimate
Corrosive, out of red precipitate, neither would the Mercury increase in its
weight. So, That precipitate, which Crollius calls Turbith Minerale, in as much
as it is made with Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, is not red, because little of
the Sulphur of Vitriol is elevated, without Nitre, in the Distillation; but
because of the affinity and symbol which it has in acting, upon the Sulphur of
Mercury, it grows Yellow, and has acquired no weight, after the aluminous
taste is washed away with hot water.

The strength and Virtues of all the aforesaid Precipitates are equal, they
provoke Vomit, corrupt the Gumms, and, taken often, do cause the Execrable
Ftyalism. Hence Helmont, Of Feavors, c. 15.5, 6.
As long as Vulgar Mercury can be revificated, it is no good Man's Remedy. For
as all Medicines, are Poison in reference to us, and not to the Excrements;
assaulting us, rather than Diseases: So also is the Vulgar precipitate of
Mercury. Hence That of my Of Purging Medicines.
Hippocrates, No Physician can primise Health, by prescribing the assuming of
Laxatives.

And although many affirm, That Mercury precipitated per se, without the
addition of Corrosive, does mightily provoke Sweat, and for that reason cures
all Feavors, as well continual, as intermittent, and six or seven times given,
wholly cures the French Pox; yet it is not true, but, as I have said, by reason
of its Sulphur, though it be diligently handled the common way, yet it remains
the same Mercury still. And although Sulphur, with great ingenuity and Art, be
separated from it, yet, not enduring a Vacuum, in a small space of time, it
regains new, like the former, L. de Diaet.
as our Master teaches, Apart, it is sufficient neither for it self, nor any
other: Nay, besides Experience, Geber confirms it, and other learned Men. Hence
the Author of the Book called Aureum Seculum, f. 90.
Very elegantly; S^turn, his Grandfather, out of mere anger, again changes it
into what it was before; and therefore this Spirit has obtained the name of
Multiformous and of Mercury. Those that have passed through these painful
labors, I am not ignorant, that Mercury is a perfect Metal.
know this to be true. But when it is regenerated and resuscitated out of
Silver, or any other perfect Metal, and also cleansed, as much as is necessary,
and, with his requisite, precipitated to a Redness, it becomes a Medicine not
to be despised; which provokes neither Stool nor Vomit, unless in an undiscreet
dose: yet, it is not the Aurora of the Philosophers, though, as it were,
Rain-bows, Peacocks-tails, with sundry admirable colors, appear in the sides
of the Glass, Every like is not the same.
and in the matter it self, after the same sort, as it happens in Sulphurous
Steel, whiles it is under the hand of the Workman; neither let any Man believe,
that this Precipitate is that Pana^aea, which About the midst of his Sixth part.
Crollius saw at Michael S^^ndivoius's (whose name he expressed in his Preface,
with great Letters, here and there, in these words,

Apud Magnum aliquem, cui in aeternum been sIt, It Is a point of Art, to read it.
Cum primis egregium Helioc Antharum, bor Ea^em, nunc in Christo quiescentem
cujuSmodi, IENtis DenIque consueVerunt lat^tare tempOrum curnIcVliS:) because
it is not by the first Universal matter, reduced to its first matter; But what
the first matter of the Philosophers is, besides Hippocrates, Ov^d also does
indigitate, Metamorph. L. 15.
Tempus edax rerum, (i. e.) the first matter in time does consume, whatsoever
is produced in or from it: Hence the Ancients Fabled, that Saturn did devour
his own Sons, as the Venerable Pythagoras does witness; All Secrets (says he)
are in Saturn (i. e.) in the most Ancient and first Matter: Of which enough at
this time.

Wherefore, the External Sulphur in the Mercury is the cause of Vomit and
Salivation, and not the Corrosive Spirits, with which it is Precipitated or
Sublimated; Sulphur of Mercury, is Poison.
which the inunction with Quick silver it self proves, which is not perceived
by the Taste, but the most Acid Sulphur of Mercury, as I have showed, first
pierces the Skin, after the manner of Acids, Then it creeps to the Ventricles,
or cavities of the Muscles, which in healthy Men are turgid and full of Spirit,
for so they are called by Hippocrates; L. de Art.
Then the second, or at least, the third day, Those who are anointed, either
whole, or sick (for now it is all one, to the Mercury) begin to languish; the
Tortor abides in the Anointing, until at length, The Catholic Hippocratical
Doctrine is every where alike.
in all the Ventricles it does disorder, alienate, and destroy the Occult Acid
and Alcaly, or the faculties (as my Hippocrates speaks) which I have showed to
be, and to operate there, That venomous Acidity of the Sulphur of Mercury,
absorbs the Alcaly of the Ventricles, and makes its fellow, otherwise Occult,
with most strong Poison, more Acid, and manifest; So one faculty is
extinguished, and the Acid, multiplied tiplyed by Poison, goes on in working,
and acts Retrograde: and, resolves, as Causticks do, all the Aliment into a
putrid Mash: This, the Vital Virtue or Nature, (call it as you please)
endeavoring to expel by fit passages, it partly dissipates it by Sweats,
partly, by its purging faculty, it expels it by Stool, with great gripeings;
Whence it appears, why many who have been Cured by Salivation, after a long
space of time, Relapse into their ancient Diseases, it is because the Malignant
disposition is still left in the Body.

This Occult, Hippocrates resolves this Doubt for us.
but Venomous Acidity of Mercury does primarily then hurt the Teeth and Gums;
for as all Sulphur has an Occult Acid (as I have showed before per Campanum)
so Mercury has an Occult Venomous Sulphur, Sulphur of Mercury Acid.
which does precipitate and rubify it with a gentle, but constant, Fire (like
Common Sulphur) which, I have demonstrated above, not only by fire, in an
Experiment, but also by the authority of Geber.

Now all Acids, especially Putrefactive ones, do offend the Teeth, and Gums (as
the Scurvey shows) and dissolve the Nerves: then the Blood sowres there, and
putrefies, becoming more stinking than a Jakes, with such a Contagion, that the
Lips, by touching it, contract Ulcers, and the Cheeks ulcerate within; and this
happens not only from its External Unction, but also the live Mercury, taken
often, in a small quantity, by the mouth, performs the same thing, as
Experience shows, and Rondeletius and Platerus have also observed. Of this sort
are the Pills of live Mercury called Barbarossae: The old Verses of Mathesius
suit herewith; In Saropta.


Terram Mercurij, producta Metalla Veneno:
Esse ferunt, verum est, nil nisi virus, habet.
Metals produced with Poison full, Men say,
Are Mercury's Soil, which Venom de display.
Hence it appears, what we are to think of, that Sulphur, which, at this
season, in the mouths of some Nobles of this Court (Fear not your Teeth in the
case) under the credulous pretense of a fine, sweet, and Vital Steam, or Aura
gives forth a sad, filthy, truculent, and stinking Smell. In such cases my
Hippocrates says, with a loud voice, Unskillfulness is an evil Treasure, etc. De
Lege.


Hence we may see the reason, why Gold-guilders, and they which suck in the
steam of Mercury, do often in progress of time, either tremble, or are cramped
in their Joints; but that I may not be too Prolix, I pass over these things in
this place.

Wherefore I have observed, Mercury Regenerated, an Alexipharmacum for the
French Disease.
That Mercury regenerated out of Silver, or other perfect Metals, although
boiled a whole year, with a different fire, in the abovenamed Phyal of a plain
bottom, yet it can be precipitated per se, in no degree; and therefore this
regenerated Mercury, must needs want that external Sulphur, as appears by
Mechanical necessity; in the want of which Sulphur, it may move Sweat, and
sweetly perform its Operations, Reason, and Experience confirming as much: But
by great Judgment it being divided into its essential parts, and re-conjoyned
with new and perfect Sulphur, Then it becomes the subject of all Wonder: L. 2.
Of Occult Philosophy.
as H. C. Agrippa says in his Scale of Unity, but because it is not my purpose
now to treat of it, unless only as it serves for Vulgar use in Physic, I will
keep my self within my bounds.

It appears then, that neither Vitriol, nor Sulphur, of what kind soever, do
add either Corrosive Virtue or weight to Mercury; as the Reformer would make us
believe, saying, That therefore Vitriol must be warily Calcined, last the
Spirits should perish. For Mercury in Sublimation wants Them not, but only its
Humid Sulphur; which, as I have said, is elevated by the Spirit of Nitre; and
they both conjoined, do act at least on the external Sulphur of the Mercury.
But if it be urged with a stronger fire, it arises into a red Powder, not
Corrosive, which Huserus and Crollius believed to be the Aroanum Corallinum of
Paracelsus, but they understood not his meaning, but were mistaken in their
opinion; but when Common Salt is added to Vitriol and Nitre, then the Mercury
is dissolved deeper, by reason of the Salt sapor, and the Sublimate, grows
white, becomes Corrosive, and increases in Weight. And here also, does not the
Acid acquire strength by the Salt? so far is it from destroying it.

So also the Caustic water distilled from Vitriol, or Alum and Sal^p^tre,
which is called Aqua Fortis, acts at least about Sulphur; and unless the Acid
Sulphurous Spirits, are in part washed away, or are put to flight by the fire,
they are Coagulated, with the Mercury, into an Aluminous body, Astringent, and
Corrosive.

This Corrosive Mercury, our Reformer would have to be mixed in the Plaster of
Froggs, Pharm. f. 681. Plaster of Froggs with M^^cury.
with the Mercury of Vigo; An Absurdinvention, says he, that Mercury can be
mortified by Spittle: As if Johan. de Vigo knew not the Corroding of Mercury,
who was the Inventor of that Vulgar Precipitate, from him now called Vigo's
Prec p^tate. He, I say, made an Emplaister to mitlgate the pains of the Joints,
arising from a Virulent Pox, persuading himself, that Mercury was the true
Alexipharmick of this Disease, but he mingled the live Mercury with things,
easing Pains, and sometimes with good success; wherefore he advised to mortify
the Mercury with Spittle and Oil of Bays, which is done in a moment, and
afterward to mix it with the other Ingredients.

This Mortification of Vigo, The Vulgar judges of few things by the rule of
Truth, but of most things, by Opinion.
the Reformer laughs at, and perverts that excellent Man's Text and meaning,
adding Reproaches and Calumnies to boot; and in stead of quick Mercury, he
teaches to add Corrosive, without any Alution, or increasing the fire to expel
the Spirits; but whilst it is yet a Liquor, he enjoins Fat and Oil, to be
super-added, as if the Corroding Acid, would die in the Fat.

Hence it appears, that the Reformer of the Auspurgh Dispensatory, has not so
much as a spark of distinguishing Judgment. Surgeons, to consume Proud-flesh,
mix the Precipitate Mercury of Vigo, which is commonly sweet in Taste, with
Fats and Ointments, not that the Corrosive Virtue may be destroyed, but that it
may not sall off.

So then, if the precipitate of Vigo, being sweet, and insipid to the Taste,
mixed with Ointment, cats up the flesh, surely This Caustic and corroding one
of the Roformer does exulcerate, and in the place where it ought to assuage
Pains, it raises new ones.

This is the Artifice, which our Reformer instructs us in, to whom I may well
apply that of Plautus.

Ibo ad medicum: atque ibi me Toxico morti dabo.
I will to the Physician hye,
That by his Poison, I may dye.
But Sublimate Mercury does revive, when its corrodeing faculty is taken from
it: This, Antimony does, and also Alcalyes. This Antimony, simple Aqua Fortis
does not dissolve, by reason of the Sulphur mixed with it, Butter of Attimony.
as I have showed above, but, Salt being added, it presently acts upon it, and
separates its Sulphur, that it swims atop, like Pitch. This in the moist way.

So also in the dry way, mingle Antimony with Mercury sublimate, which I have
demonstrated to be Salt, Mers. Vitae.
and presently the Saline Spirits desert the Mercury, and corrode the Regulus
of Antimony; but when the Spirits are driven out of the Retort; they run down
Saturated with the dissolved Regulus, in the form of Butter, which if it be
washed with cold water, the powder of Antimony falls small, rare, light, and
very white, Powder of Algerotti.
unfitly called Mercurius vitae. But when this Ablution is made with hot water,
then it turns Yellowish, and is called Pulvis Algerotti.

But the same Butter, if it be dissolved in Spirit of Nitre, which again by
reason of its similitude with Sulphur, does again corrode Sulphurous and
dissolved Antimony, and is abstracted by Cohobation, and afterward applied to
the Fire: then (after its manner) it remains constant or fixed; and begins to
be called Bezoar Minerale, Bezear Minerale.
a Cure for great Diseases. But the Mercury, being freed from the Corrosive,
representing Metalline Alcaly, is saturated by the Acidity of the Sulphur of
Antimony, which is also Metalline, Cinn^bar of Antimony.
and they both constitute an Occult Salt thing, which by the increase of the
fire, is elevated into Cinnabar; and this again, with a lighter Alcaly, is
reduceable into running Quicksilver, as I have showed in its place.

So that, Gold is not dissolved, without Salt, in Acids, as neither is Antimony
nor Mercury it self; wherefore Salt does not destroy Acids, nor on the
contrary. Laborious Minerva has discovered This Mystery, which few hitherto
have been able to attain unto.

In fine, Salt, if it were at any enmity, either Occult, or Open, with Acids,
it would surely be made manifest in the Butter of Antimony alone, which is so
sensible a thing, that if but one drop of water fall into it, presently the
Acid Spirits do associate themselves with the water, and the dissolved
Antimony, grows white; but cast common Salt, either natural or artificial, or
other salt things, and that in quantity, into the said Butter, and it will not
be moved nor troubled at all; so far is it from being destroyed thereby.

CHAP. XXVI.
Dicta cum Factis componit.
Words and Deeds compared.
BUt if any Acid be destroyed, that comes not to pass, by reason of the Salts,
I hive showed that Alcaly is in water, and now that Acidity is in fire, though
by a rude Example, yet it may suffice for our Chemists.
as I have said, but the Alcalizates, or those of affinity with them, and It is
changed into another nature, according to the difference of the Acid; as for
example, The Reformer teaches, how to prepare Crocus Martis, which he calls
Aperitive, with Acids, I approve his way in it. He also teaches to prepare
another Crocus, which he calls Astringent, in Flame only; not considering, that
the flame of fire is also Acid; so that This latter Crocus must needs be like
the former, you may call it Astringent, or Aperitive Crocus; according to the
effect it works. All inflamable things communicate Acidity to the flame, as
Wood, Shrubs, Herbs, etc. The Reformer braggs that this inflamable Acidity, is
the Acid spirit of Sal Armoniack, In Append. f. 73.
and in this place he plainly is ignorant of it.

It may seem to many, that I speak a Paradox, when I say; that the flame of the
fire is Acid: I am so far from Recanting it, that I further affirm, Fire comes
nearest to the nature of Salt, consisting of Alcaly and Acid; Nature alike in
every thing.
for which cause it is biting, sharp, acetous, subtly cutting, piercing,
pure, incorruptible, incombustible, Pro^erties of Fire and Salt.
and is that which preserves from Corruption. Now as in Salt, I have separated
the Acid part, so I shall show, by this Experiment following, that it is
separable also in Flame.

Lead with Acid dry Wood is burnt into Minium, but 100 l. Lead made M^^ium.
of Lead, after it is turned to Minium, makes 110 l. I demand how the Minium
gets 10 l. in weight? certainly nothing had been added to it, but the flame
only: The flame therefore assumed a body in the Lead, and this body, which
increased the Lead from the flame, is of an Acid taste, as the following
experiment proves.

Distill, out of a Glass Retort, with an open sire, some of the self same Wood,
with which you burnt the Lead, and there will extil a Liquor, of an Acid raste;
which, That Volatile Al^aly is distilled from Soot, is known to all.
out of the Retort in form and manner of flame, embraces the Lead, and is mixed
with it, and fixed into Alcaly.

Melt again the Minium into Lead, and there will be only 100 l. as before, so
that the ten pound gained, was neither Minium nor Lead, but the Acid expelled
from the Wood. But This not being of the nature of Lead, is not Colliquated
with it, and because it is not sufficient for it self singly, as Hippocrates
says, in the reducing the Lead, it flies into Element, as I have showed before
concerning Salt of Tartar, Oil, Vinegar, etc.

This artificial Alcaly out of Lead, being turned into Minium, with fire and
vegetable Acid; or the same Lead with Mineral Acid, Lead made Litarge.
made Litarge, if you boil it with Oil and Fat, then the Alcaly acts upon the
Ocoult Acid of the Fat, after the manner of the Alcalyes: and the Acid again
upon the Alcaly, and so they are coagulated in a Neutral thing.

Thus is made the Emplaister, Plasters of Lead most Ancient, Prepared by
Chemical Art.
Triapharmacum, as also That of Cerusse and others of the like sort, as I have
shown in Soap, the cause of whose inspissation, was hitherto unknown to the
Reformer, as appears by his Epistle to me, to wit, That the Oil of Tartar, with
the Alcaly was inspissated like Pitch (as Chap. 21.) And he writes thus to
Apothecaries, That these are boiled, according to Art. But among Metals, there
is none that does more readily associate with fixed Acid than Lead: For
according to the species of the Acid, it changes its form, as I have said of
Alcalyes. The steam of Vinegar turns It into white Ceruss; Acidity in flame,
into red Minium; Lead yields Colors, and Glass.
by the Acid of Sulphur, fire being added, it is turned into black; with Acid
Minerals impure and mixed, 'tis-turned into a double Litarge; with the Acid of
yellow Clay, it is burnt into Glass of a box-like color; with the Acid of black
Clay, into a swarthy vitreous color, as the Glass-men know; For which cause,
Melters and Refiners of Metals do honor it very much, because it absorbs all
sorts of Acids, and clears the Metal from all spots.

The Ancients have observed, that all inflammations in living creatures, arise
from Acidity ( In his Book of Ancient Medicine.
Hippocrates attesting the same; In Man, says he, there is Acid, bitter, most
Acid, and hundreds of other things, which according to their quantity and
strength, have various faculties:) For which cause they devised several
Ointments and Plasters of Lead; How Lead cools.
That they might take away that Acidity; and the oftener those foresaid Unguents
are changed, the sooner is the Acid consumed, and the Distemper cured. This
consumption of the Acid, in condescension to the oapacities of the Vulgar, we
call re-frigeration, in as much as it mortifies the cause of Heat.

CHAP. XXVII. A further Probation, that there is Acidity in Flame.
REverberate whole Corals in an open fire, Tincture of Corals.
twelve ounces (for example.) for six days and nights (the fire serves the
Skilful for distilling Spirit of Vitriol) and you will find fifteen-ounces (i.
e.) three ounces increased, and turned into a most fine powder; this increase,
is nothing else but the Acid from the flame, which dissolves the Corals, and is
coagulated and fixed with them, after the manner of Acids, into Salt. If you
pour distilled Vinegar on this Salt, it does not send forth Bubbles, as it
otherwise happens in Corals, not reverberated; for they are saturated with
Acid, and it dissolves Them into a pellucid Semi-Acid Liquor, which though
transparent, and colorless, yet it has a Latent Sanguineous Redness, which,
the affusion of Spirit of Vitriol, in a moment makes manifest. 'Twas neither
the Vinegar, nor the Spirit of Vitriol, This Tincture is the Rector or Archeus,
as long lifed as Coral it self, of great Virtue, not destro 'd by fire it self,
as I have showed in Wine.
which introduced this redness; for then, the Mixture would be always red, when
the Magistery of Corals is prepared the common way: wherefore of necessity,
this redness must be secretly Latent in the Coral, and by the help of Fire be
produced to maturity: of which I shall now forbear to speak more, it is enough
that, contrary to the sleepy Doctrine of the Reformer, I have showed, that Acid
has not destroyed this Salt, and that, Tincture of Corals, abides constant in
the fire, which you may by ingenuity separate, and it will commend and praise
it self.

So, place the Regulus of Antimony, Antimony fixed by Acid, from fire.
being elevated into Flowers; E. C. twelve ounces, on the flower, or hearth, of
the Glass-mens Oven, or Furnace, in a large fit Earthen Vessel, well covered,
lest the flying Ashes should fall into it, and remove it far from the Eye where
the flame plays, that it be not melted; so let it stand eight days, afterward
draw the Vessel nearer to the Eye, every fifth day a little, until about the
fiftieth day, then you will find the Flowers of the Regulus fixed into a small,
light, and most white powder, and increased by two ounces, by the Acidity drawn
from the fire, which pierced the Earthen Vessel, without hurting it, after the
manner of Spirits.

This Regulus, was erst melted, with a gentle fire, now it resists (even
Antimonial) Fusion, unless it be urged with quick blowing Bellows, then the
Acid Spirits return, from the fire, to their Elements, and you will find twelve
ounces of Regulus, as I before showed in Lead.

In like manner, deal with Crude Antimony, and it will part with its Volatile
Acid Spirits, and assume other more fixed ones from the fire, and is turned
into a white powder, like Antimonium Diaphoreticum, of greater virtue, in
Physic, then that which is burnt with Nitre: the reason is, that here, so much
of the Sulphur does not deflagrate with the Nitre, but it is here fixed, by its
proper Regulus, by the fire, which this Mechanic shows: Boil Antimony in
simple water, let it be mixed with three parts of Nitre, and by turns kindled,
and calcined, in that Ebullition, Milk of Sulphur of Antimony, of great Virtue.
the Nitre (from the Sulphur of Antimony being burnt to Alcaly) dissolves the
Sulphur of the Antimony, which is now fixed (as the boiling or bubbling Alcaly
of Tartar does dissolve common Sulphur, for Milk, as Crollius has it:)
sprinkle Vinegar on this Solution, being filtrated, warm, (and you shall
perceive the Odor of the Sulphur) which presently is drunk up by the Alcaly,
and the Sulphur falls into a white, small, rare, Fixed Antipesti ential
Antimony.
light, and spongy Powder, which you must wash: A dram of this, given with
Vinegar, in the Plague is more worth than an ounce of that which is not boiled
nor dissolved.

Hence it appears, That the Sulphur of Antimony, which elsewhere deflagrates
with the Nitre, here is fixed by its proper Regulus by the Fire, in the
abovenamed Vessel, and so becomes more perfect, so that there is Acidity in
the flame of Fire, which I have showed to be imbibed by Corals, and Antimony,
as well as Lead, and so by Iron it self, which with this, and all other Acids,
is with fire turned into Rust. So that there is no difference, betwixt that
Crocus Martis, C^ocus Marth.
which is made either with manifest, or Occult Acids; both of them are either
binding or loosning.

CHAP. XXVIII. The ways and necessities of Precipitation discovered.
THere are Varieties of Opinions amongst Writers, concerning the Properties and
Operations of Iron, and how, and by what manner, it performs them in Man's
body, L. 3. P. 2. sect. 2. C. 7.
Sennertus gives us a Catalogue of them, but few of them have hit the Mark, by
reason of their ignorance of Hippocrates his Doctrine. L. 1. de Diaet.
I will therefore show how It adstringes and how it loosheth.

Iron does manifestly bind, and consequently it strengthens the Stomach and
neighbor parts. Therefore it is good in the Dysentery, Lientery, Diarrhaea,
and all Laxative diseases, etc. But I hear some object, that Iron Medicaments
provoke the Terms in Women, and restore the defects of the Liver, and Spleen,
and so do rather Loosen than Bind? Lanswer (not as that Canonical Physician,
who asserted, That the stones of Crabbs, were a Mineral, and therefore an enemy
to Nature:) but my answer is from the works of Nature, in which I have
demonstrated out of L. 1. de Diaet.
Hippocrates, That these things must needs so happen by Divine necessity; To
wit, that there is often observed to wander up and down in us, a certain
dissolved Salt, the Generation whereof, I have showed before in its place, It
consisting of Acid and Alcaly Compounded, less agreeing among themselves, and
unfit for Transpiration and Sweat. This, by reason of the inequality of the
Sapors, does not obey Purging Medicines, as Experience shows: Call this, if you
will, an Humor truly excrementious, lodging either in the first, or in the
last region of the Body, produced either by the Womb, Liver, Spleen, Reins,
Sweetbread, Mesentery, or Stomach; as to this point, it is all one. Iron then
being taken, which as I have showed Mechanically, does easily imbibe all Acids,
presently, That Noxious Liquid-Salt, or Excrementitious Humor, runs hastily to
the Iron, and adheres to it, that it may dissolve it, and so that Saline
Excrement, according to the kind of the Sapor, whiles it sticks to the Iron,
and corrodes it, is coagulated (as we have seen it, with the Acid of Vitriol to
be turned into Vitriol, with the Acid of Wine into And becomes the Tincture of
Mars of the Reformer in his Appendix, fol. 83.
Rust: So also it happens in Copper, which, if Vinegar corrode, it becomes
Verdigrease; if the same Copper be corroded by Spirit of Vitriol, it becomes
Vitriol of Venus; Consonant to this Doctrine is, what I have formerly Ocularly
demonstrated concerning Alcalyes and Acids) but sithence It cannot be assumed
into Aliment, therefore it is purged by Stool, It does not ^scend the
Viaphragma.
with the dissolved Iron, of a black color; which color arises, when the
Acid Salt, corrodes the Iron, and the Alcaly precipitates it into Colcothar, as
I have showed above in its place.

But when Iron is drank, As appears in Acid Fountains.
dissolved in an Acid Liquor, but grateful to the Stomach, The same Liquors
being taken, and thoroughly admitted, the Iron presently, being unfit, as I
said, for Aliment, is separated from the Acid, by the Virtue of the Alcaly in
the Mixture; In which Segregation the aforesaid Salts or Humors flow to the
Iron, and adhere to It, as we see it happens to Silver dissolved in Aqua
Fortis, if thin Plates of Copper be cast into the Solution, then presently the
Acidity of the Aqua Fortis deserts the Silver, and corrodes the Copper, and the
Silver adheres to the Copper, I speak not of him, that never few any thing in
his life, but stinking Excrements.
as a compact Powder. Again, put a thin plate of Iron into the Solution, which
is now greenish from the Copper, and the water presently leaves the Copper, and
corrodes the Iron, and the Copper adheres to the Iron, whiles the Vitriolate
water of Goslarla corrodes the Iron, then the Copper falls from the water into
the place of the Iron, which contained the Vitriol unripened, this red powder,
melted in the fire, turns to Copper: This Precipitation, many learned Men (but
ignorant of Hippocrates his Doctrine) have believed to be the transmutation of
Iron into Copper): even so Mechanical reason and necessity also do Dictate,
that it must be in Man's body, especially, since Nature is alike in every
think, as the Old man speaks. For unless the excrementitious Humor were of a
certain Semi-acid Nature and Taste, the Iron would not be dissolved in the body
into a green or black mash, as we daily see, that it is, and I have also showed
in its place. And unless the Excrements be so tinged, Iron is unadvisedly
given, for it finds not a fit Humor to dissolve it; and in that case, Iron is
Astringent, The use and abuse of Acids.
though the Aperitive Crocus Martis of the Reformer had been taken by the
Mouth. The same thing is to be understood of Acid Spirits, as of Vitriol,
Sulphur, Glass, and Salt, for These, if they find not a wandering Alcaly in the
body of Man, an enemy to Vitality, and therefore Morbous (which the Acid Spirit
may receive into it self) they do more hurt than good, for then by their over
much Acidity they infect the neighbor Aliment of the Stomach, and make it
unfit for Nourishment. A Physician of Rome, a friend of mine, Anno Dom. 1656,
in the time of the Plague, used Spirit of Sulphur, in quantity, for a
Preservative, who thereupon became The Remedy of Arthritis is by Alcalyes.
Arthritical, and was afterward restored by the Alcaly of Animals, as I have
elsewhere showed, concerning the Feet-Gout. For the Alcaly imbibes the Acid,
wanderingly dispersed over the the body, which was the cause of Disease and
Pain in the Ventricles, not being accustomed to things manifestly Acid; for so
Of Purging Medicines.
Hippocrates teaches. If any one prescribe Acid meats inconsiderately and
without choice, they do no good.

On this principle of Precipitation, was the Golden Nail of the great Duke of
Florence made; which Ferdinand the first of happy Memory, graced with this
Testimony, which is to be seen with the Nail at Florence.

Mr. Leonard Turneisser in my sight and presence, A Golden Nail.
turned an Iron Nail heated in the fire, and immersed in Oil, into Gold; done
at Rome the 20th. day of November after Dinner: Such Nails, I have also, in
Sport, sometimes made, with my own hands, but such as deal in Metals the vulgar
way, think it altogether impossible that Gold and Iron should Conglutinate; and
therefore they firmly believe, that This Nail is really changed out of Iron
into Gold, and that which confirms their belief, is, that Gold does not adhere
to Iron; yea Gold melted, corrodes It in a moment, and turns it into Rust As
Common Sulphur does.
. But Gold is connected with Iron, by means of Precipitation, as I have said,
on the same reason and ground, for which Iron precipitates Copper: Cut then an
Iron Nail into two parts, moisten the end, at least with Spittle, and presently
touch that part with Cupreous Vitriol, and in the very punctum, the extremity
of the Iron, waxes red, and has now acquired the nature of Copper; The
passage from one Extreme to another, is impossible withcut a Medium, as the
Philosopher says. 6. Phys.
Now Gold is easily associated to and with Copper; and so fit a Guspe, or point
made of Gold to this Cupreous Iron; and with Borax and Golden Solidature or
Soder (which is made of Glue of Gold.
Copper money, a little Silver and Gold melted at the Eye is better) melt it
after the accustomed manner, in a fitting Coal-fire, and then you shall have
the Golden Nail so much spoken of. Turneisser tinged this Nail with Ferrugo,
wherewith he hid the Gold, and so (without doubt offered it to that great
Prince, to handle with his hands, which being so disguised, the Skilfullest
person, that is, would have judged to be Iron. And then heating it by the fire,
and dipping it in a certain Oil (as the Testimonial says) and washing away the
Ferrugo, the Gold appeared. This was the Artifice, if it be worthy of that name.

But let us return to Iron, which taken at Mouth, frees from Obstructions
arising from the aforesaid Excrement, and so becomes Aperitive by accident,
Iron Opens, and Binds.
in as much as it absorbs that coagulating wandering Acidity, proscribed by
Nature, yet of it self, it is still Astringent; wherefore it is Aperitive by a
specific and appropriate Virtue, but it Binds by a second quality.

CHAP. XXIX. Nux Cassa.
Shell without Kernel.
I Have declared, that Copper is turned by Vinegar into Aerugo, or Verdigrease.
This the Reformer advises us to Distill, Append. f. 7^.
I remember (says he) that I have made mention of a certain secret Menstruum,
which hitherto the Canine envy of some Malignant and Ungrateful Fools has
caused me to keep socret, amongst my other Arcana's; A sad severity in
Countenance, but no truth in his words, Ter. Andr.
but now leaving the revenge of all injuries wrongfully offered, by what hand
soever, to God, being pressed on by a good conscience, and the benefit of the
Public, I am resolved to publish it, on which the greatest of Remedies do
depend, at their main Pillar: What will our Princely Doctor now reach us?
Spirit of Venus, and an hidden Menstruum, which for unworthy Men's sake (who can
forbear laughing!) he determined to conceal. Oh unskilful Rudeness! who would
ever have expected from him, such a great and liberal Contribution, for the
public good, unless he had told us so himself?

O Curas hominum, O quantum est in rebus inane!
O curious Study and vain Care,
Of Men, that vain and empty are?
'Twas more than a hundred years since, that Basilius Valentinus published this
Distillation of Vinegar (in a Book, which he calls, A Manuduction to Physic,
Written in the Germane Tongue, and Reprinted at Frankfort by Luke Iennis, An.
1625. in Quarto) under the Title of The true Solution of Pearls. The Reformer
borrows it from him, suppressing the Author's Name, for there it is word for
word, In Aq. Epilept. Pharm. Regia. f. 170.
and this he boasts, not only for an Universal Solvent, but (seigns it also to
be his own Invention, and inscribes it, Our Spirit of Venus) for the Liquor
Alcahest; So that, not without a fatal Prediction, John Frederick Bauz,
prefixed the Reformer's Name before the Dispensatory, with an Anagramme worthy
of him, as may be there seen. To what purpose these uncouth, costly, laborious,
and nauseous Compositions, if Vinegar, which is grateful to all, does the deed.
But the Reformer adds without blushing; This most excellent Spirit is not only
of great virtue in Physic, as being highly Curative of Epileptick,
Apoplectick, Hysterical, and Hypochondriacal Distempers, being duly and
lawfully exhibited; but is as the Liquor Alcahest, and not as other Acid
Spirits, who suffer and are destroyed by Solution, and so are turned into
another Ens, etc. I could wish Basilius, when he taught us how to distill this
Vinegar, had been afraid of Impostors, as Hippocrates, Paracelsus, and others
were. Then the Reformer had never obtruded This, for the Liquor Alcahest, nor
had loaded it with so many Encomiums, thereby deluding the World. He advises us
to buy this Vinegar at any rate, adding these Vainglorious and Magnificent
words; Enjoy Courteous Reader, Turpe est Doctori, etc.
this Secret, and let me continue in thy good grace, for my faithful
Communication of it. In good time? draw near all ye inquisitive ones, behold a
great Secret manisested' never so much as dreamed of before? But Nature laughs
to see such lies held forth for truths: There are some, who, without any great
labor, time, or expense, do distill a like and much more powerful Liquor out of
Lees of Vinegar, into a great Receiver, which yet they proclaim not for
Alcahest.

Let us therefore take notice of the Subject from which the Reformer distills
this Wonderful Solvent, which, with a worthy Name, he appropriates to himself,
and calls it Our Spirit of Venus.

It is Aerugo or Verdigr^ase, which is thus made, thin Copper plates are put
into Mother of Wine, when it is sour; this Acidity corroding the Copper, is
coagulated with it into Salt, as it happens to every Acid by Corrosion, as I
have Ocularly demonstrated in Lead and Coral: The Reformer mundifies this green
Salt with Distilled Vinegar, from which surely nothing but Vinegar can be
distilled, as Basilius in the forecited place, does ingeniously confess; as it
happens to Spirit of Vitriol by corroding Copper, it becomes Vitriol; from
which, if you distill it, you can extract nothing else but the same Stagma or
Spirit of Vitriol, which you poured on it, according to the Old saying,
Nihildat, quod in se, non habet: Melt the remaining Caput Mortuum or Faeces, in
a Pipkin, adding thereto a little Nitre and Tartar, then the Copper returns to
Copper, as it was before it was changed with the Vinegar in Verdigrease. This
is the Secret and mysterious business the Reformer out of his overflowing
Liberality, is willing to communicate for the Public good, and persuades us to
buy at any rate, saying, Enjoy, Reader, this Secret, etc. Away with this
Cheating, Secrets discovered, lose their esteem.
which even the Vulgar do deride, not believe? Men know well enough, that
Secrets are not to be revealed, but in Parables, Allegories, Metaphors, and
such like Disguisings; So H^ppocrates advises, and both He and Venerable
Antiquity does the same: Speak not (says the Wiseman) in the ears of a Fool,
for he will despise the Instructions of thy mouth. So Johannes Picus in his
Book of the Dignity of Man, Pythagoras, Plato, Boethius, Macrobius in Scipio's
Dream, Cornelius Tacitus, etc. All of them, with one Mouth, affirm that Secrets
are not to be divulged, that so unworthy men may not be partakers of them.

But go to? may we not use Vinegar simply distilled with less labor and
charge? since it is one and the same thing? Do not the Writers of the Elements
of Chemistry teach us to prepare Salt of Pearls and Corals with Distilled
Vinegar? and afterward to wash it? which yet is found to be unprofitable, in
as much as the Acids are coagulated with the Solution, as I have often showed
before.

But to contract all in a few words, The Vinegar and Spirit of Venus of our
Reformer, are nothing but water impregnated with an Acid Volatile Salt, which,
if it corrodes any thing, it is presently Coagulated, which afterward by
combustion is fixed into Alcaly.

Wherein now does the Magistery of Corals and Pearls of the Reformer exceed
That which the Rudiments teach? What Prerogative one has above the other, we
may learn from Spirit of Vitriol and Sulphur, which precipitates both; the
reason whereof is, that the more potent Acidity apprehends the Solution, and in
it undergoes Coagulation, and therefore increases in weight, neither can you
fetch it back, Append. f. 13.
but by a violent fire.

Is it so indeed? does our Reformer so satisfy God, That Experiment is
fallacious, if Knowledge precede it not.
his Neighbor, and the Truth? as he affirms in his Animadversions? Are these
the Inventions taken from true Reason and Experience, hitherto seen, and
observed by none else, for the comfort of Mankind? As he boasts in the Preface
of his Appendix.

Was Haerus so to be deluded? to whom he promises in his Epistle Dedicatory, to
discover what he knew not, to wit, to rectify the Genuine and usual method of
compounding Medicines, and to free it from Errors, lest the People should be
put to the loss of their Money and Health, He that speaks the Truth, may do
it without labor and trouble; and I wonder you sweat and labor so? Dant^^, In
Append. f. 13.
but that they may live more happily. To wit, by proclaiming Vinegar for
Alcahest.

Are these the things, Which leaving his necessary businesses he published to
the People with so great labor, as his Epilogue speaks?

This Reformer being drunk with his own Vinegar, cants out Wonders, Our Spirit
of Venus (says he) Extracts an Adstringent Tincture from Flings of Steel. News
indeed! as if all Vinegar with Iron filed, did not grown Red? it is known f.
798. Vinegar grows Red with shavings of Iron, but Spirit of Vitriol is
coagulated with it into Vitriol.
to do so to all Blacksmiths. In his Mantissa Hermetica, a little before he
teaches, that he can prepare Adstringent Crocus most exactly by Revorberation
alone, without the mixture of any other thing: Now, to procure Credit to his
Vinegar, he grants both: What is this, but impatiently and foolishly to play
the Trifler, yea to pretend to teach the contrarieties of Salts and Vinegar,
and yet to know neither.

CHAP. XXX.
Exitus Acta probat.
The End crowns the Action.
OUt of a desire of Knowledge, I red the Pharmacopaea Regia, Writ by our
Reformer, out of a vain itch for Glory, but full of many Absurdities. He
promises to Kings a Narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol, under the Title of Laudanum;
but it amy be truly said, of it, f. 849.
The King escaped by the help of Fate, and not of the Narcotick Sulphur of
Vitriol, which is no where found in the whole Book of Receipts: So also he
promises to Queens a Ludus Praeparatus to beget Milk, which yet he never saw or
knew: Hence came the common Proverb, Mentiris ut Medicus. This Sulphur of his,
and that Ludus Praeparatus, change not their Soil, nor pass beyond the Seas;
they like well the place of their Nativity, and love not to stir further, viz.
then the brains of the Reformer.

So in his splendid Appendix to his Pharmacopaea Regia, almost in all his
Compositions, we have these Pompous words, Magisterium Nostrum Solubile. An
Ostentation so vain, that it would raise laughter in Heraclitus himself, which
yet is nothing else, In Append. to Animad. f. 53.
but Pearls and Corals corroded with Vinegar, as is known to every Fresh Water
Physician. But he himself undervalues and laughs at the long Receipts of
Writers; but who ever saw or read longer than those in his Pharmapaea Regia?
who, f. 123.
more Inelegant ones? Take that Compositum for an example, which, by a specious
Title, he calls Pilulae Regiae, where Opium produces all the effects which he
promises. To what purpose then is the corroded Gold, which, being Simple, has
no affinity with Opium, the ground of the Pills; of these Homer sings,

Pharmaca mixta salubria multa, and noxia mul^a.
Of mixed Druggs, some hurtful are, some good.
Truly the huddling together of Simples, made by unskilful hands, Hipp. 1. Aph.
1.
do infatuate and destroy Princes, and causes the nick of the Cure time, which
in a moment passes away, to be spent in uncertain conjectures. I shall add but
this one thing. 'O^e matter alone cannot have two Species together; which our
Chemists must diligently ma^k.
I advise you to avoid Receipt-mongers as much as Juglers, who do boast of
their Prodigious Compositions, and so Huckster and make Merchandise of our
Diseases, and as it were, cast lots for our Lives: I say it is impossible, or
at least very difficult, to determine any thing certainly, unless only
Putatively and Conjecturally, as I have showed in the Nettle only. But as often
as simple things do not effect what was desired, then its is that they want
Composition, as I have clearly showed in Vulnerary Potions, in Tinctures and
Inks; and I will yet further evidence by this one example: Take two parts or
pugils of Juice of Sage, of Vitriol of Mars one part or pugil, both of these
mixed, do suddenly grow black, for the Occult Alcaly of the Sage does absorb
the Acid of the Vitriol; In an hour the Acid, as it is a Mineral, does conquor
the feeble Alcaly of the Vegetable, and the Compositum waxes green: To which
add further, three parts of Vitriol, then it assumes not a black color (as
might in reason be thought) but the Alcaly then consumes at least the subtle
Acid as turns the Vitriol into Ocre, as it happens to It, when the Spirit by
little and little decays; but whither do I digress, seeing I know that what
cannot be changed and altered, is to be born?

But the Reformer does perpetually commend such Compositions, Append. f. 48.
saying, That both the Sick and Physicians too, would be in an happy case, if
such Medicines which are truly Royal, were at hand, and yet of so small a
price, that they may be used by the poor, etc.

Now to you therefore, O ye Ingenious Pharmacop^ans, do I direct my speech, I
beseech you to cast up the account, and to judge (not of many unprofitable and
laborious Compositions, which if they were all at hand and in readiness, the
whole City of Auspurgh would scarce contain them, but only of the distilling of
this Vinegar from Verdigrease for corroding Coral, for if you reckon up the
Vessels and Instruments of Art requisite for the purpose, with the Time which
is to be spent in it, where will there a poor man be found that can be at such
expense? but if this and such like artificial Compositions be dispensed and
sold for a small price,

Tunc labor in damno est, crescit mortalis egestas.
Then our Labor procures Loss,
And Poverty becomes our Cross.
But if I should longer insist on all the gross and Erroneous Opinions of our
Reformer which are scattered here and there, I might swell a Volume, which may
be plainly seen in his first Syrup. Of Wolmwood, Pharmas. f. 17.
This, as others, was invented by the Ancients, that it might be Administered to
every individual person, and so be in readiness and at hand in Shops; but
seeing many persons can hardly endure the smells, especially of Spike, without
belching and turning of the Stomach, yea they resist Digestion, as appears in
Meats seasoned with Spice, who do destroy the ferment of the Stomach; Hence the
Ancients commend simple Food as most wholesome. For this cause, Simple Food most
profitable; the heaping together of Sipots is Pestiferous. Plin. l. 11. c. 53.5.
even for this Syrup, they chose Pontick Wormwood as less Odorous, and boiled
it in old Wine, together with Spike, that the Odor, together with the Spirit of
Wine (to which it is easily associated) might wholly be expelled and gone;
which, the addition of Juice of Quinces shows; for unless This had been the
Intention of the Ancients, instead of this Syrup, they had used Quince-Wine and
Wormwood-Wine, as we may L. 5. c. 49.
see in Dioscorides. They preserved the remainder with Sugar from an hoary
Vinew, and thickened it into a Syrup.

So also sundry sorts of Wines, mixed together and drunk, as is usual in Feasts
and Banquets, do not only create trouble and labor to the Rector in Man (which
I showed above, Chap. 15. out of Of the Humors.
Hippocrates, has his seat in the mouth of the Stomach) to unite them, but
moreover do easily Inebriate Men, and by tender Persons are sometimes violently
cast out by Vomit; Gic. Loccat. Nov. 7. Fab 2. observed this also.
but when the Juices of the same Grapes (though Multiformous and Various) are
united together by Fermentation, then from and by diverse Rectors, one wholesome
drink is made, not offending the Stomach; even as Treacle is made out of
diverse simples, co-united by Fermentation, over which, one only Rector does
Predominate: Hence It is commended by Avicen, as of wonderful Virtue, as I have
noted in my Preface.

But since it is none of my Intent to discover Pebbles in the Seashore (as the
Proverb is) where there is such an infinite number of them, especially not
being delighted with this kind of Writing, it is against my Genius to insist
any longer on these Trifles, and therefore I will now withdraw my Pen and Hand.

This is the Stress of the Matter, The Reformer came to act his Part on the
Stage before he knew That Nature did act alike in every thing.

Now for a Conclusion, a word or two to our Friends in their ears; the Acid
does inform the Alcaly; with These, the ancient Foundations of Old Physic and
of the Viperine Salt, do absolutely agree in a perpetual Concord and an
immutable Similitude, The specific Rector dwells in the Acid, which i^ forms
the Alcaly.
(as I have showed to those that uderstand me aright) from the decree of Nature
it self, and out of the Doctrine of my Hippocrates, by the most Harmonious and
Mechanic Reason, and the highest necessity.)

My pretended Friend endeavoring heretofore to learn this consent of Nature
and Art by examples, and not being able to do it, he rages like a mad Dog, and
bites all that come near him; prefering himself far before others, as appears
throughout all his Writings; So every Bird likes his own note best, neither is
any thing more unjust than an unskilful Man, (as Tirence speaks) Who thinks
nothing well done, In Ad^^. act. 1 sc. 2.
but what he does himself.

FINIS.
AN INDEX Of the Experiment (...) other Remarkes (...) in HIPPOCRATES CHYMICVS
AFOREGOING, Fitted to the several Pages.
A
ACids diverse to be diversely taken away, Page 85. Acid retains the property of
Seed, p. 87. Acid, its diversity in the Body, p. 88 Acids, not contrary to
Salts, p. 90. Acids, all offend the Teeth, p. 102 Acid Fountains, why they make
not the Teeth black, p. 53 Acid Waters, when to be drunk, p. 54 Acid destroys
Black Color, p. 57 Acids forbidden to wounded Men, p. 65 Acids expel and put
to flight Metals, proved by experience, p. 20 Of Acid Spirits only spirit of
Salt dissolves Gold, p. 25 Acid in a sound Stomach, p. 38 Acid Juices differ
one from another, p. 39 Acids, their Use and Abuse p. 113 Acid and Alcaly in
Lime of Flints, p. 8 Acid Coagulating Milk, threefold, p. 40 Acid and Alcaly in
Milk, p. 41 Acid and Alcaly in Lime, p. 8 Acid, out of the Stomach, Morbous, p.
41 Acid and Alcaly Volatile in the Stone, p. 44 Acid of the Stomach, and Alcaly
of the Aliments produce a salt Chyle, p. 46 Acids more sharp, Precipitate
Bodies dissolved in an Acid Liquor less sharp, p. 48 Acidity, the Vital
Instrument in all things, p. 49 Acid, manifest in the Stomach, p. 49 occult in
other members, p. 49 Alcaly is a Vacuum in Nature, p. 87 Alcalyes fixed, their
Mutations with Acid. p. 87 Alcalyes (...), their Mutations with Acid, p. 89
Alumen catinum, the same with Saltcaly, p. 7 Alcaly fixed, its Degrees and
Kinds proved by diverse Experiments, p. 14 Alcaly fixed of Tartar, p. 14 Alcaly
fixed of Vinegar, p 15 Alcaly of T^rtar and Lime, p. 15 Alkaly of the Herb
Kaly, p. 15 Alcalyes of Oak and Lime, p. 14, 15 Alcaly of Cephalic herbs, p.
15 Alcaly of Celandine, p. 15 Alcaly of Flesh, p. 45 Alcaly and Sea Salt in
Urine, p. 45 Alcaly of every thing preserves the Occult Acid p. 47 Alcaly of
Vipers commended in the Feet-Gout, p. 48 Alcalyes their diversity discovered
from the precipitation of the Colcothar of Vitriol of Mars, dissolved in Water,
p. 52 Alcaly fixed, not found in living Animals, p. 53 Alcaly of Galls made
more perfect by Oil, p. 57 Alcaly Volatile like Alcaly of Galls, abounds in
some Vegetables, p. 58 Alcaly in Vinegar, p. 64 Alcaly in Vulnerary Herbs,
proved by Experiments, p. 66 Alcaly Occult in Rain, and Well-water, p. 68
Alcalyes Occult in Cooling Herbs, p. 67 Alcaly and Acid Volatile of Vegetables
by fire burnt into fixed Salt, p. 75 Alcaly Volatile in Soot, p. 76 Alcaly of
Saltpeter, p. 16 Alcalyes invisibly hide calcined Metals, p. 23 Alcaly of
Herbs draws forth a like fixed Alcaly from Flints, p. 28 Alcalyes turned into
Salt, imitating Acids, p. 29 Alcaly of Animals, p. 30 Alcaly Volatile of Blood,
p. 37 Alexius his Secret, p. 59 Aliments have little Acid, and much Volatile
Alcaly, p. 46 Alcahest of the Reformer is distilled Vinegar. p. 28, 29.
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, how good? and for what? p. 84 Antimony, its Sulphur,
p. 90 Antimony is fixed by the Acid of Fire, p, 110 Animals have a Volatile
Salt, p. 5 Antimony, its Emetick force p. 83 Antimonium Diaphoreticum made
Emetick, p. 84 Argentum Potabile, p. 90 Arsenick, a subtle Poison, p. 96
Arthritick person from the use of Spirit of Sulphur recovered by Alcalyes, p.
113 Aurum Potabile, p. 92 Aurum Fulminans from the solution of Spirit of Nitre,
not of Salt, p. 17 Apples rotten, Cool, p. 81
B
BLood of Venus and Mars, Page 60 Blood by one drop of Acid made Morbous, p. 49
Balsam of Sulphur of Rulandus, p. 93 Balsam of Samech, p. 16 Bezoar Minerale,
p. 105 Butter of Antimony, p. 105 Butter fresh has more Alcaly then Acid, p.
81 Bezoar stone, its use, p. 85 Black Color, its foundation, p. 61
C
CAlx or Lime, what? Page 8 Calx petrified by contrary faculties, p. 8 Calx,
its bastard Spirit of Basilius, p. 13 Camphire, what? p. 82 Camphire with Aqua
Fortis makes a Mock-shew of Oil, not so with Vinegar and other Acid Juices, p.
82 Camphire absorbs the peccant Acid in the Body, p. 82 Camphire its workers
salacious, p. 83 Camphire helps the roughness of the skin, p. 83 Cementum
Regale, p. 21 Cinnabar Common, p. 21, 23 Cinnabar of Antimony, p. 94 Corals,
its ^ncture, p. 109 Corals increased in the Fire, p. 109 Contraries coagulated
by Contraries, p. 8 Coagulum, what? p. 41 Chrystaltinged with the color of
Rubies, p. 93 Crocus Martis aperitive, p. 106 Crocus Martis, p. 59
D
DIurectickness in a Flint, Page 11 Diuretic from a calcined Flint, p. 13
E
ELixir Parvum, p. 20 Emplaister of Frogs with Mercury, p. 104 Empla^sters
prepared of Lead, p. 108 Epistle of Aurel. Severinus to the Author, p. 36
F
FEbrifuge Oil, p. 93 Febrifuge of Riverius, p. 19 Fell vitri, p. 18
Fermentation how performed, p. 63 Fire, its flame Acid, p. 107 It comes near to
the nature of Salt, p. 107 Fire and Water in a Flint, p. 8 Fire changes the
Regiment, and alters the virtues of things, p. 78 Fire, its various necessity,
p. 78, 79 Fire, when strong, changes the nature of Salts, p. 19 Fire and Water
contain all things necessary for Generation, p. 38 Flint taken from its natural
place, grows, p. 8 Flint, its Powder, as made by the Ancients, p. 12
G
GOld calcined the dry way, Page 90 Gold calcined the moist way, p. 91 Gold not
dissolved but by Salt things, p. 91 Gold, its Tincture, p. 91 Gold called Aurum
Potabile, p. 92 Gold adheres to Iron by the help of Copper, p. 114 Gout, its
pain from Acid, p. 48 its Remedy, p. 68 Glass, how made, p. 10 its Axungia,
what? its Fell, p. 10, 11 its Burning, p. 11 Glass burnt, not Hurtful, p. 12
Glass, its Resolution, p. 12
H
HErbs have an Occult Nutritive Alaly, p. 70 Hartshorn burnt imbibes Acidity,
p. 67 Hemorrhage of the Womb, its Remedy, p. 67 Hectic Feavor cured with
Vulnerary Potions, p. 66
I
IVlip of Vinegar, made of Water and Sugar, p. 39 Ink, its foundation, p. 57
Iron Astringent, p. 111 Iron provokes the Terms, p. 111 Iron changed into
Copper, p. 112, 113 Iron Cpens and Binds, p. 114 Iron, why subject to Rust, p,
68 Iron, how it grows stronger? p. 68
L
LAc Sulphuris Antimonii, p. 110 Lac Sulphuris, p. 82 Latarge out of Lead, is
Preparaton, p. 108 Lie for Soap, its making and force, p. 9, 10 Letters writ
with Ink, why afterward Pale? p. 57 Liquor Acid, changes Aliments included in
a glass into Chyle, p. 40 Ludus Preparatus, p. 119 Luna Cornea, p. 24 Lead
increased in the flame, p. 107 its increase in the Fire is from Acid, p. 107
Lead delighted with Acid, p. 108 it absorbs Acids of all sorts, p. 108 Lead
cools the Heart, p. 108 Lead, p. 60 Lungs ulcered, cured by Vulnerary Potions,
p. 66 Like dissolved by like, p. 8, 9
M
MErcurius Sublimatus, its Reduction, p 105 Mercurius Vita, p. 105 Mercury
Sublimate, does not coagulate Milk, p. 41 Mercury, p. 60 Mercury out of Silver,
p. 23 Metals, one Frecipitates another, p. 112 Metal, its Precipitation by
Alcaly, p. 20 Minium, its Preparation, p. 107 Minerals are all associated with
Acids, p 20 Milk not Coagulated, but by Acidity, p 40 Materia Prima, p. 101
Medicaments Solutive, not to be dissolved in Diseases, p, 53 Menstrua their
Obstruction from Acid, p. 58 Mercury Sublimate, p. 94, 95 Mercury Sublimate
Common, p. 97 Mercury Sublimate sweet, reddish, p 98 Mercurius precipit.
Communis, p. 98 Mercury praecipit. per se, p. 99 Mercury praecipit. per se,
becomes Sublimate Corrosive, p. 99 Mercury praecipit. its Virtues, p. 99
Mercuries Acid^ty hurts Teeth and Gumms, p 102 Mercury of Metals is not
praecipit, per se, p. 103
N
NAil of Gold, p. 113 Nitre, its regeneration p. 25 Nettles, green and dry, its
different effects? p. 71
O
OCre, what? p. 55 Odors, many resist Digestion, p. 121 Oil is made Salt, p. 79
Oil Olive has Acid in it, p. 80 deprived of its Acidity, it helps Pains, p. 81
Oil old, why musty? p. 81 Oil turned into Watrer by Salt of Tartar, p. 26 Oil
made Strongwater, p. 28 Oil of Soap like that of Bricks, p. 27
P
POx French cured by a Decoction of Vipers, p. 31 Pomegranate Rinds provoke the
Terms, p. 58 Paracelsus his Coralline Secret, p. 103 Panacaea of Michael
Sendivogius, p. 101 Pl^urisy, its Remedy, p. 48 Plants their Regeneration, p.
72, 73 Posca, of the Ancients, what? p. 63 Protochymist dwells in the Stomach,
p. 47 Powder Antipodagrick, p. 48
Q
QVinzey, its Remedy, p 21 Quartan, its Remedy, p. 72
R
REgulus Antimonii, p. 21 Rector, what? p 27
S
SIlver separated from Tin, p. 96 Silver, p. 60 Silver consists of Acid and
Alcaly, p. 24, 44 Stone, its Analysis, p. 42 Stone, its regeneration, p. 42
Stone, how generated in the Body, p, 42, 43 Stones, Red, whence? p 43 Stones
concreter every where in the body, p. 43 Stones remedy, an Hedge-Hogs or
Histrixes stond how far good for it, p 44 Stones other Remedies examined, p 44
Stone, its true Remedy p. 45 Stone, its remedy out of Paracelsus and Helmont,
p. 48 Story of Sal Prunella, p. 21 Sage, its Juice grows black with Vitriol of
Mars, p. 120 Salt of Treacle of the Ancients examined, p. 4, 5 Sal Armoniack
natural in use among the Ancients, p. 5 Sal Armoniack natural, its Properties,
p. 5 Sal Armoniack Ours, what? p. 5, 6 its constituting parts, p. 6 the manner
of making it, p. 6 Salt Common does not wash, p. 6 Salt Kaly whence made, p. 7
Sal-Kaly, is not, unless made by Art; its Virtue and Properties, p. 7
Sal-Alkaly, what; where found, p. 7 its Multiplicity, p. 7 Soap, its making, p.
9 Sea Salt with Oil is not made Soap, p. 10 Salt of Vipers of the Reformer is
Common Salt, p. 31 Salt of Tartar fixed with Acid spirit of Salt, is Sublimated
into Spirit, p. 34 Salt of Vipers, its Inventor, p. 36 its foundation known to
Hippoerates, p. 38 Salt things do not curdle Milk, p. 41 Salt, as 'twas eaten,
found in Urine, p. 51 Salt of greater affinity to Vinegar than Metals, p. 70
Salt of Wormwood, its Preparation, p. 77 Salts Precipitate not Mercury, p. 16
Sal Fulminans, p. 17 Salts from Diuretique herbs are Acid-salt, p. 18 They
Precipitate not Mercury, p. 18 being Alcalized with a quick Flame, they
Precipitate Mercury, red, p. 18 Salts from Vulnerary herbs are Acid-salt, and
do not Precipitate Mercury, p. 18 in a melting Fire they change their Natures,
and become Alcalyes, which Precipitate Mercury sparkling and glittering, p. 18
Salt, Common, the perfectest of Salts, and never made Alcaly, p. 18 Salts of
Vipers, p. 18 Salt of Wormwood, Acidsalt, p. 19 it is Alcalized with a strong
fire, p. 19 Salts, their Nature changed without fire, p 19 Salt of Soot, p 19
Salt of Tartar, its Prerogative, p. 22 it converts any Metal into running
Mercury, p. 23 it is a Medium in which both Metals and Minerals do revive, p.
24 it is a Medium between a Mineral and a Vegetable, p. 29 it is turned into
Simple Element, p. 27 Salt Common, its Regeneration, p. 25 Sal-Armoniack
Artificial, p. 30 Salt Common and Armoninck, have an Acid communicable out of
the Fire, p. 30 Soda, the same with Sal Kaly, p. 17 Specific Remedies, p. 70
Spirit, the Vehicle of the Soul, p. 89 Spirit of Venus, p. 115 its Preparation
examined, p. 115 Spaw Water, why Transportable to other places, p. 15 Spirit of
Vitriol Acid, retains the Liquamen of Metals, p. 56 Spirit of Vitriol makes the
Teeth yellow, p. 56 Spirit Minerals, p. 61 Sulphur, how good for Diseases of
the Lungs, p. 82 Sweat proved to be Salt and Pinguous, p. 35 Sweat, how
excited, p. 85 Sulphur rubifies Mercury, p. 99 Sulphur of Mercury an external
Poison, but not the Acid, by which it is sublimated, p. 102 Sulphur of Vitriol
Narcotiqu^, p. 119 Sulphur has an Occult Acid, p. 81
T
TIn, p. 60 Tartar, how Generated, p. 63 Its spirit, p. 63 Its spirit, not
Acid, but bitterish, p. 63 Its Regeneration, p. 26 Tympanitis, its Remedy, p.
93
V
VInegar, how made, p. 64 Vinegar distilled, made fat Oil, p. 26 Verdigrease
yields Vinegar. p. 58 Vinegar Julep made of Water and Sugar, p. 39 Vegetables,
their Humid has Alcaly and Acid, p. 62 They have not sixed Salt by nature, p.
5 Vitriol in Substance coagulates Milk, p. 40 Vitriol of Mars separates the
Alcaly from the Acid, p. 53 Taken inwardly it tinges the Excrements, p. 53
Vitriol makes the Teeth black, p. 56 Vitriol of Cyprus True, p. 59 False, p. 58
Vitriol white, p. 59 Roman, p. 59 Vitriol of Mars Artificial p. 59 Vitriol,
its Regencration, p. 24 Vulnerary Potions diminish the Acid, p. 65 First given
by Paracelsus, p. 66 Urine of Drunkards passes noi through all the Ducts of the
Veins, p. 47 Urine of healthy men salt, p. 47 Urine of dying men, not salt, p.
47 Urine of men living only on Milk, has Acid and Alcaly, p. 51
W
WIne turned to Water and Elementary Earth, p. 64 Wine, what, and how made, p.
64 Wood fixed, p. 79 Wood, rotten, yields no Salt, p. 76 Water called Aqua
Regia, without Salt, does not touch Gold, p. 26 Water of Frogs-Spawn abounds
with much Alcaly, p. 67 Water distilled, differs from that undistilled, p. 69
Water of Roses causes Vomit and kills Worms, p. 69 Water of Roses not
altogether cold, p. 69 Water of Roses has an occult Acid, p. 69 Water of
Mindererus, for the Hearing, p. 32
FINIS.
OTTO TACHENIVS HIS CLAVIS To the Ancient Hippocratical PHYSIC, OR MEDICINE:
Made by Manual Experience in the very Fountains of NATURE.

WHEREBY, Through Fire and Water, in a Method unheard of before, the Occult
Mysteries of Nature and Art are Unlocked and clearly Explained by a Compendious
way of OPERATION.

Senec. Epist. A man can never more torment the Envious, than by applying ones
self to Virtue and Glory.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Marshal, at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1690.

Where is likewise sold Coke's Marrow of Surgery, Anatomy and Physic. As
also his Observations of English Bodies, of Eminent persons, in desperate
Diseases.

To the Serene and Mighty Prince, the Lord CHRISTIANVS ALBERTVS By the Grace of
God, Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswick, and Holsatia, Stormar, and Dithmarsh,
Earl of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, His very good Lord.
IT was the custom of the First Philosophers (Most Serene and Mighty Prince)
that whatsoever Secrets of Things, or Mysteries of Nature, they found out, they
would immediately impose Divine Names on them; and so, as much as they could,
hide them from the Vulgar; or else they would relate them under disguised
Words, Foreign and unusual Terms, Allegories, Aenigma's, and Metaphorical
Speeches, either because they feared the offense of the Unskilful Multitude, or
else being persuaded, that those Abstruse things would meet with no
approbation, if they were easily understood.

Hippocrates of Coos, treading in the same steps, that Divine and Venerable
Old Man, and deservedly Chief in this most Famous Art (in whose Praises the
Ancients, and all Neotericks have sufficiently Expatiated) shows the hidden
Foundation of this Noble Science, in these words. If there be any thing Divine
in Diseases, the knowledge and foresight also of That is to be sought after,
if a Man would approve himself a good and admirable Physician. But what that
Divine Thing was, he no where clearly discovered, nay, he Studiously and of
purpose concealed it, expressly affirming, that nothing ought to be spoken or
published in this Art, save what was known to Plebeians. On which account,
Physic was heretofore esteemed Sacred, and the gift of God, so that all the
Ancients were of opinion, that It could hardly be attained unto by Humane
Understandings, because the Foundations thereof seemed so abstruse, hidden, and
admirable, that They were not to be found out by the strength of Nature; And
although, heretofore, and in all Ages, Men of great account for acuteness of
Wit, and Skill in Physic, have Illustrated Its Doctrine, yet there is nothing
extant in their Writings in clear and express words, neither can any thing be
culled out from thence, but what is sullied with Obscurity: They all
endeavoring as much as they could, more to eclipse and darken It: Neoterick
Physicians who succeeded them, in Writing, Disputing, and desiring to increase
this Art, have fallen to pieces amongst themselves, and contemning that Divine
thing in Diseases, rail at one another, and are divided into several Sects;
neither does the Division cease to this very day: For one desires to be styled
a Chemist or Methodist, another a Galenist, a third a Dogmatist or Canonist, so
that this most Noble Ancient Hippocratical Medicine, which is but One, is now,
not only rent into many Sects, but is also overcharged with an infinite number
of Books, by which a lover of, and enquirer after Truth, is not only
confounded, but must needs be overwhelmed: There being such a vast Ocean of
Them, and so great a variety of Writers, subtly spinning out their Arguments
pro and con.

In the mean time, I was always of opinion that That beforementioned short
Sentence of Hippocrates was to be deeply weighed, and the rather, because that
Famous Man, whom Antiquity did almost reverence as a Deity, comprehended that
great Supellex and Furniture of Things which he had in his mind, in short and
concise Aphorisms and Speeches. Excited therefore by my respect and love to
Him, I began to Investigate what that Divine thing was; for without the Plenary
knowledge of It, the Art of Cureing Diseases would always be Mutilous, and only
Inchoative, never fully and absolutely complete in all its parts.

Some there are who do accuse those men of Impudence, and do also
Contumeliously reproach them, who do their utmost to restore and underprop
Sciences (delivered indeed by the Ancients, but now almost worn out by age, and
Adulterated besides) or else who do endeavor to add to them, or illustrate
them: moreover they labor to Degrade such persons from the first Knowledge of
things, and so to dis-inherit them from their possession of ancient Learning;
by whose Calumnies the Enquirers after Truth, are deterred and led out of the
right way.

If the ancient Philosophers had taken this course to reproach the Labors and
Studies of Those that went before them, they had never pierced into the inward
knowledge of Nature, but the Truth in many Sciences would as yet have been
buried in Obscurity, and very few would have attained to any light in the
Secrets of Nature.

But since Those Philosophers were pleased with another way and manner of
Study, not being deterred or taken off from their honest Labor by the tongues
of Revilers, but rather more earnestly applying themselves to their
Disquisitions and Studies; so that almost in every age, some one or other Art
and Science was hatched or else retrieved, and from small beginnings, promoted
to great increase.

Semblably, why may not I more clearly open the sense of Hippocrates? That so
the Ancient and Noble Science of Physic, and Method of Cures may receive an
advancement? why may it not be lawful for me to Contemplate that divine,
abstruse and admirable Thing, as well in Diseases as Remedies? and to restore
It from Darkness to Light? Let the Tongues of Slanderers be silent, let them
not blame me, that being but a Puny, I first of all bear the Lamp to all that
seek for Truth, in this Argument. Let all such Flies and Cantharides be
packing, for as the One pitches on the slourishing Corn, and the Other fly into
the sweetest Ointments; so these foolish and sloathful Calumniators cease not
to detract from the labors and manners of other men, persuading themselves
that they shall catch much Honor and Glory, by fishing for it in the
disgracing of others.

Avaunt such Thorny Medickes; Let them continually go a begging, and spend
their time in collecting raw Receipts, reformed neither by Reason, Method, nor
Judgment; which, Hippocrates disapproves and proscribes in the very entrance
into this Art, as unsafe, because not understood. Experiment, says he upon this
account, is fallacious: Neither let them Object to me, this my Institution, as
a new and unprofitable piece, whereas indeed It is most Ancient, and found most
true by solid Experience, not that I am so vain and insolent, as to boast my
self to be the Author of It, I only profess my self to be its Interpreter and
Explainer.

These things I determined to do in a Book by it self, and therefore I
pre-emitted my Hippocrates Chymicus, which Book seem ed necessary for the
demonstration of the Subsequent Doctrine by known Examples. But now, seeing
Malign Ignorance raigns in Our Art, I think it better to change my Resolution,
and to reduce into this Compendium, what and how much of Divinity is in Ancient
Medicine, as also in Natural Philosophy, and in all things; All which shall be
discussed, for the sake of the Prudent, in this Little Book.

I determined, Mighty Prince, and my gracious Lord, to Dedicate this my grand
Endeavor to You, not with an intent to Blazon the Genealogy of Yours and Your
Ancestors most August House, that be far from me, for I know that all Adulation
does displease Your Highness; but because You are a Favourer of hidden
Sciences, and of all admirable Things, and especially a Patron of the Muses:
which evidently appears, not only by that flourishing Academy which you have
lately erected, but furthermore by those great Largesses and Stipends,
wherewith you have endowed its choice Members, and learned Professors, out of
Your incredible Clemency and Favor. To which may be added Your Highnesses
singular Courtesy, Bounty, and Benevolence, extended toward Me in particular,
your poor Client, the last year; and also that unspeakable Beneficence, which
Your Father, of happy Memory, a few years since, showed toward me, which you
by a rare Example have also doubled and outdone: Which consideration alone had
been sufficient to have obliged me to make this Dedication to Your Self, and so
to hang up this little Table on the public Altar of Immortality, not only that
my Writings may hereby speak to the whole World, but that I might manifest the
symbol of a grateful mind, and might testify and profess my observance of You.

Be pleased therefore, Great Sir, favorably to accept of that admired Divine
Thing of Hippocrates, anciently adorned with somany Trophies, now consecrated
to Your Mighty Name, and let it find a place there, whither the Messengers of a
grateful mind are wont to be admi^^^^, which, as I supplicate with that
humility which becomes me, So I also beseech Almighty God from the bottom of my
heart, long to preserve Your Highness in safety and prosperity; so prays

VENICE the Ides of November, 1668. Your Highnesses most devoted TACHENIUS.

THE PREFACE TO THE COURTEOUS READER And Lover of the Ancient Hippocratical
MEDICINE.
IN the Inquist after the hidden Causes of Things, how prone Men are to err
and to be mistaken, without the help of True Experiments, it easily appears by
that common, and in this age, Epidemical Complaint (which I my self do also
think not altogether groundless) concerning the inconsiderate edition and
multitude of New Books; partly, beeause the rash publication of the Writings of
Sciolists and vain Persons, is of it self odious, partly also, because such a
multiplicity of raw Pamphlets does prejudice even our common Scanties, and
takes off the minds of many from Reading the Books of the Ancients, which are
full fraught with accurate Wisdom and Instruction: whence probably it may come
to pass, that the Studies of the Ancients, in enquiring after Truth, may be
less esteemed and regarded by us. And if any one demand, why do I then publish
this present Tract? A piece Composed with no Maturity of Judgment, but thrust
forth in great haste and temerity; and consequently, in no wise to be compared,
in point of Usefulness, with the Mouuments of the Ancients. To him I answer,
There are two Causes, which moved me again to put Pen to Paper, and to emit to
public view this Piece of Ancient Medicine, First, in the Year 1666, I Printed
the necessary Opinions of the Old Philosophers, under the Title of Hippocrates
Chymicus, and there showed by clear Arguments deduced from Exerience, p that
Fire and Water in essence, root, and property, ought to be esteemed the
Primordial Principles of all Things (since the Divine Old Man Hippocrates in
his first Book of Diaet treats of the same, after the manner of the
Pythagoreans, wittily enough, yet most obscurely, perhaps fearing the
ridiculous censure and inept confutation of such as the Austrian and Norinberg
Doctors of Physic, and their foul mouthed companions, who are craftily busied
with their Rustic Muse, only about the barks and outside of things) because in
finding out the secret and hidden Causes of things, These appear to be more
powerful, then all probable Conjectures and Vulgnr Placits of Philosophers; and
I did it, for no other end and purpose, but out of a desire to know the Truth,
which every honest man should cordially embrace; so Aristotle Teaches in the
first Book of his Ethickes, Chap. 4. It is better, says he, yea, it is our
Duty, so Truth may be secured, to alter and cancel our own Opinions and
Decrees. Now whosoever shall Read and rightly Understand the Books of the
Ancients, will unden ably confess, that I have as well in my Hippocrates
Chymicus, as in this little Book, spoken the Truth, and that I have discovered
Natural Principles and Rare Mysteries in a clear Vein of Speech.

In demonstrating of these things, I have observed the order of Geometricians,
who from the least point and most easy foundations, do gradually ascend to
matters most great and difficult, by which an ingenious mind at length climbs
even above the Stars: So also, The Ancient Hippocratical Medicine and the
Method of my Science, in a convenient order, first, show things less rare, yea,
things most commonly known, and ascending from them by degrees, It exhibits
things more choice and excellent. So Hermes from an Egg, Hippocrates from Arts,
Morienus from a Garment, Basilius from Ale, Cosmopolita from Colors, etc. at
length in an admirable manner; as well in the Great as Less World (for there is
the same Reason in both) have unlocked the Closets and Secrets of Nature, that
so the Principles, Reasons, and Causes of Things may be clearly seen, as it
were in a Looking-glass.

By this my private, plain, and safe method, many Learned Men (whom I shall not
name for fear of exposing them to the ridiculous Censure of the Deans and their
Fellows) being addicted to the Study of this Ancient Philosophy, have confessed
that they have reaped much benefit; for in this my way, they have found that
saying of Pythagoras, Nature is in every thing alike, to carry with it not a
counterfeit and disguised, but a sincere and infallible Truth.

But since it is an old Calamity amongst Men, that Virtue is always oppressed
by violence, but Vice and Falsehood, like froth and scum, swims a-top in the
impure pot of this World; so also some have endeavored to defame my
Hippocrates Chymicus, which is supported by Ancient Authority, Experience and
Reason, and to dispoil it of its Virtue and Truth, by mutilating words, and
perverting Sentences; that so they might not only cast dirt in the Face of
Ancient Medicine, but also be found falsaries and committers of the crime of
Defamation against Law and Right.

To prevent this wile, and to apply some remedy to this crafty machination, it
was altogether necessary for me to meditate and resolve upon a new Edition of
the Ancient Truth; for I began to think with my self, that Young Students might
reap much more benefit from my Doctrine, if what had been maliciously changed,
perverted and castrated, might come forth more entire and corrected; so that
this is the second cause why I again set forth this part of Ancient Medicine,
which I have Adorned and Confirmed with many excellent Experiments and Reasons,
drawn from the Ancient Fountains of Nature; And I have moreover so clearly
explained the causes of things, that for the future no man in his right wits
can reasonably impugn my Principal Foundations of the Truth. So that Students,
who love the Truth (of whom I hope there are many) may be much assisted by this
Isagoge and Manuduction.

There is no doubt but virulent envy, the inseparable companion of Virtue, will
object it to me as a crime (as it did heretofore, first, because I showed the
sincere way of sublimating of Mercury; which Calumny was heard by me not
without laughter, but that offense is to be pardoned to such Jejune
Interpreters of Nature, and their Repentance to be hoped for: and secondly,
because in the 28 Chapter of my Hippocrates Chymicus, I taught the way of
conglutinating Gold and Iron) I say, it will be imputed to me that I now
discover and bring to light, things hitherto secret and concealed. But do you
not, for this, rashly, and without thoroughly weighing my cause, condemn the
guiltless, for it becomes a Judge to hear the Reasons on both sides of the
Parties, betwixt whom he is to give Sentence: If it seem a fault that I have
exhibited the Truth of Hippocratical Medicine, hitherto unknown to all of you,
nakedly before you, yet be not presently enraged, nor cast forth reproachful
speeches against me, but first of all consider, whether it having been sullyed
with false receipts and impostures, comes not now forth, nearer to the clear
Truth, then remoter from it? and next, whether its luster be not more increased
than diminished? By means whereof, perhaps in a fitter season, she her self
will give thanks to her Fosterers and Refiners, neither will she deny them her
Patronage against the Crafts and Frauds of Impostors, nor withdraw her defense
from them against the fierce darts of ignorance, least the former, like wild
beasts, envying at another man's good, and the latter enraged and hood-winked by
it own blindness, should any longer contumeliously and petulantly break in upon
the pleasant Gardens and promising Crop of this Ancient Hippocratical Medicine;
and so tread down and lay waste the praiseworthy Labors of such Wise Men as
have gone before us.

It Is in vain for them to terrify me with their bug-bears, I scorn all their
endeavors; for I have chosen Truth for my faithful and powerful Protectress,
which shall now come forth and appear in open view, not as fools do in
licentiousness of revenge, repelling force by force, but with the rod of reason
and modesty, it shall smite and scourge such foolish detractors, that they may
repent of their simplicity and folly, and hereafter be ashamed to snarle at, or
bite this Ancient Hypocratical Medicine with their livid and impure mouths and
teeth. It is thy part, Courteous Reader, to stop the mouths of such Barretors,
furiously railing against me, and to bridle their lying and reproachful
tongues, lest they should glory in their own wickedness, and all the day long
their heart should meditate unrighteousness, and their tongue devise mischief,
like a sharp Razor, and love evil more than good, and so rashly accuse and
condemn others, according to the Psalmists words. But how easily their
incredible stupidity and ignorance may be, and is, obviated by me, by means of
this Ancient Hippocratical Medicine, there are no better witnesses then those
Noble and Worthy Persons amongst whom I live, and am daily conversant with. And
as the Rock breaks and repels the surging waves which assault it (it self,
remaining unmovable) so it becomes me patiently to hear, and at the same time
to contemn and despise the reproaches and non-sensical objections of unskilful
ones, without any perturbation of mind, and without any bitterness and wrath.

For on the 28th day of August, 1668, having received a Book, though Licensed
and Approved, yet full of ridiculousness and folly; a few days after (my health
requiring it) I went on a sudden to Millaine, to that Illustrious Person, The
Lord Marquess Fiorenza, a Noble Senator of that City, and I completed this
Hippocratical Doctrine in my Chariot on the way; yea, I had published it
complete, before the last of the Calends of November, the same year (I mean as
complete as the nature of the argument required) unless the censure of the
Inquisitors had retarded my purpose; which I think fit, gentle Reader, to
acquaint thee with. Favor me therefore, if thou art in thy right mind, and
remember Hippocrates his Advice, which is, not to divulge or make known any
thing, but what is within the Ken and Cognizance of Rusticks and Plebeians.
Farewell.

Otto Tachenius HIS KEY To the Ancient HIPPOCRATICAL LEARNING.
CHAP. I. Acid and Alcaly, the most Ancient Principles of Things, what they are?
TO know things is to know them by their Causes, as Aristotle Teaches in the
first of his Physics. Now the Causes are Matter, Form, and Efficient; Matter
is that, of which a thing is made, for in Nature there is no thing which is not
made of some pre-existent and subject matter; Form, which gives being or esse
to the thing, and by which the thing receives its name, is it self invisible;
the Efficient Cause is that, which moves the matter to its proper end.

Hippocrates reduces all these three Causes into two necessary and sufficient
Principles, calling them Fire, and Water: Raimund calls them Entia Realia; Fire
and Water.
Basilius Pugiles, and in another place, Gladiatores; others style them Lis and
Concordia; Attraction, and Repulsion; Rarefaction and Condensation; The
Principles of Hippocrates, Acid and Alcaic
Male and Female, etc. But I, for the clearer knowledge and explanation of
them, do call those two Principles of Hippocrates, Acid and Alcaly, because all
things in the Universe are made up of those two Universal Principles, as I
shall gradually show by Experience, (so is also, that one only Medicine or
Physic of the Ancients) To which yet a third does Inseparably adhere: Hence
arose Sal, Sulphur and Mercury, the Three Principles of some Philosophers, and
rightly to, as will more clearly appear in the progress. These two, either
perpetually burn in Love one toward another, or else are at perpetual
variance, are multiplied, and one is contrary to the other; so that the death
of one is the life of the other, and that which one produces another destroys;
that so from this another more noble thing may again arise.

Hence it is, that Hippocrates with good Reason affirms, That these two
Elements Fire and Water, or Acid and Alcaly, can do all things, and that all
things are in them. From the Acid do proceed two Masculine Qualities, to wit,
Hot and Dry, from the Alcaly, as many Female ones, viz. Cold and Moist, all
flowing forth for the generation of mixed bodies, for which reason they do
concur and are commixed. The two greater Lights do preside over those two as
Principle Elements. The Sun, is the Author of the Fire of Nature, and the Moon,
the Mistress of Humids. Matter or Hyle is therefore called the Principle of all
things, because all things in an invisible manner, are generated of Fire and
Water. From those two is made up the innate Calid of all things, which
Hippocrates says, is very much in them, as they increase; the matter will be
most clear when we shall speak not only to the ears, but to the eyes also.

CHAP. II. Acid, the most Ancient Principle, as being Spiritual, is not
subjected to the Sensure or Judgment of the Senses.
MY Hippocrates Chymicus, in the 10th and 18th Chapter, shows in Wine and
Tartar, that the Fire of Hippocrates, the formal Principle of things, can be
separated by no Analytick Destruction, nor by any Ingenuity of Art. This the
Prince of the Academicks calls Forma. The Ancients (as also the sacred
Philosopher) calls it Light, L^^^.
and Sulphur from its Similitude, because that (like Sulphur) it manifests it
self to be both occultly Acid, and also pinguous; to This they gave the first
place, styling it the Vital and Masculine Spirit, because in it, the seeds of
all things are contained (though imperceptibly as to our senses:) for we must
confess that all things do consist of insensible principles, as Lucretius
speaks Lib 2. and all things have their original from it, and there is nothing
produced in the whole world, but by it, it has its seat in the Air; A Child of
the Son.
because the Wind carries it in its belly; and the Father of it, says Hermes in
Parva Schedula, is the Sun, whence the lofty wited Lullius in Testament. Chap.
67. We, says he, with many others, call it the Child of the Sun, for first it
was generated through the influence of the Sun, by Nature, without the help of
Science or Art: And therefore Aristotle called the Sun the Father, and the
Earth the Mother of all Vegetables; because the Sun impregnates the Earth with
its vivifying heat; which afterward is turned into natural heat, and this is
multiplied by the help and assistance of the heat of Fire, etc. Hereupon
afterward, it was styled by the Philosophers themselves, The Son of Fire; The
Son of Fire
as appears by Bernard de Tresne in his third part, who calls Gold most pure
Fire So that if Gold be Fire, and Fire the Child of the Sun; and This, the
Vital Spirit, which the Wind carries in its Womb, as Hermes witnesses; then
without doubt these three must be Brethren and all Children of the Sun.

And as the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven, is judged by Wise Men, to be
incorruptible, constant, and perpetual, and by its Author is endewed with so
many Embellishments, that Himself is said to have placed his Tabernacle in it;
for which cause it is called the Form of Forms, or the Acid of Acids (though it
be not acknowledged for such by the Vulgar, as neither is Gold) or the
Universal Form, which in the work of generation infuses all Natural Forms, and
the seeds of all things into disposed matter; for every individual thing has
hidden in it a spark of this Light of Nature, or Acid, whose Beams do Occultly
influence the Seed with an Active and Moving Virtue.

So also Gold, being the Offspring of the Heavenly Sun, is incorruptible,
constant, and perpetual, of an entire Form, or a perfect Acid, and fixed,
though, as I said before, it be not owned as such by the ignorant Vulgar: For
unless it were a fixed Acid, Gold a fixed Acid.
how could the saying of Philosophers be verifyed and fulfilled: That which is
perpetual makes things perpetual, and that which is fixed makes things fixed.
And therefore in the beginning Light was created over the Universe and
contracted into this Body, being endowed with a vivifying Virtue and secret
Faecundity; I call it an entire or complete Acid fixed and constant, which yet
as Raimund says, will make the empty Brain of one who has seen nothing in
Philosophy, nor is ever like to see, to be altogether sottish and stupid, Yet
in my Hippocrates Chymicus, I have demonstrated the Acidity of Gold, by two
familiar Examples, which I shall now again recite out of my late Hippocrates,
for a solid confirmation of the Truth, and the shame of all Zoilusses and
Detractors; for if you dip the end of an Iron Rod in Gold melted or put to
fusion, the Iron in a moment will be turned into Scoria, or rust, as if it were
burnt with kindled Sulphur; Cro^us Mart^^
now unless Gold were Occultly Acid and pinguous. as common Sulphur is, it
would never corrode Iron. Those superficial and vain Writers, who are enemies
to the Doctrine of Hippocrates, cannot comprehend this fixed Acid, who had
rather seem wise, than be so; much good may their vain applause do them: I envy
them not, for they know no other Acid, but that which they dream to distill
from Copper, which they falsely call Spirit of Venus; because, out of sloth,
they deny that there is a fixed Acid in Nature; as if That in Copper were
Volatile.

Secondly, The purest Gold is dissolved in Aqua Regia, instill Alcaly of Tartar
into the Solution, which will drink up the Acid Spirits, even of the Gold it
self (my Hippocrates Chymicus, Chap. 7. shows the Reason, viz. Because the
Alcaly of Tartar embraces the Nature, even of Metals themselves) and the Gold
so drunk up, falls into a Powder of a Yellow Color. Croll us teaches this
Preparation in his Cordial; so does Beguinus, under its proper Title
Corannocryson: Aurum Fulmi^na^s,
In this slight Preparation, Gold has acquired a Fulminating or Thundering
force, because its Sulphur, being of its own Nature, acetous (to use the words
of Sendivogius) is associated with Artificial Nitre, which association is made
in the Alcaly of Tartar, in the very moment wherein it is poured into the Aqua
Regia, containing the dissolved Gold. The manner how this is to be done, is
laid down in Hippocrates Chymicus, Chap. 7. (for those things which have been
spoken elsewhere, and rightly by others, I will not unnecessarily repeat;) so
that Gold, unless it were Acid and Pinguous, Gold is Sulphur.
as common Sulphur is, would never perform Sulphurous Actions with Nitre, as
common Sulphur does, with the same Nitre for Gunpowder.

If then the Sun, according to Hormes, be the Father of that Vital Spirit,
which dwells in the Air, and Gold and Fire are its Brethren, the Sons must
necessarily partake of the quality, Fire Acid.
dispositions and properties of the Paren^t; so that it must needs follow by
Reason and Authority (Experience also a stipulating thereunto) that the Vital
Spirit of ours, the Child of the Sun, as also Gold and Fire are Acid and
Pinguous; wherefore Acid and Pinguous is a most Ancient Principle, the Life and
Fountain of all things: Writers give It several Names, as Fire, Sun, Gold,
Spirit, Sulphur, Form, Humid, Calid, Dry, and many other Appellations, all
which are Synonymous, signifying the same thing, but in different respects
diversifyed into several Names: But I both here and elsewhere, call it Acid.

This Acid does occultly lurk in all Seeds, because of its self it is a most
peaceable and quiet thing, in regard Nature has implanted more of Alcaly than
of Acid in every Compositum (except Sulphurs) and therefore it moves not unless
it be excited, as we see plainly in Dough of Bread; which being excited by a
very little Acid Ferment, and by Heat, is moved; and from that Heat and Motion
the Acid is multiplied; and unless it were bridled and restrained by a heat,
exceeding the inward (i. e.) by Artificial Fire, it would proceed to Vitality
and produce Worms. Hence it appears, That Natural Fire, is quite another thing
then Artificial; and that these Two differ much from one another: Natural Fire
Acid.
for the Natural or Soft Fire, according to Hippocrates (as I have showed in
Dough) does Impregnate, Cherish, Infuse Strength, and does semblably perform
all things in its Lesser World, which the Sun, its Parent, does in the Greater
World: Hence we may observe, A Microcosme what.
That the proud Name of Microcosme, does not belong only to Man, for every
Seed, every Worm, every Member, says Hippocrates, has its Ventricle, and may
be therefore called a Microcosme. But Artificial Fire is an enemy to all
Generation, it lives upon Prey and Rapine, it fubfists by others Ruins, being
the Destroyer of Life, and Enemy of Nature.

Wherefore from the Sun, as from a Fountain, Natural, Acid, and Vital Light do
flow forth; which, in reality are both one, only distinguished by their Office;
for it is the Office of the Acid, to pierce into the inwards of Nature, whereas
Light does only discover the externals of things however the Beams of the Sun
do operate both: So that the Sun is the first Natural Organ, by whose Access
and Recess all the Operations of Nature are variously governed, intended and
remitted. Hence the Ingenious Cosmopolita, If there were not a Vegetable power
in Sulphur (that is a Pinguous Acid, and Child of the Sun) Water would never be
Coagulated into Herbs. If therefore the Acid, flowing from the Sun, be infused
into Matter (as for Example, Mineral) presently it receives the determination
of the Nature and the Virtue of the Mineral.

The like may be said of other Animals and Vegetables too, as Lully speaks; and
because this Natural Acidity is coupled with all Matter in the World, it has
therefore the Name of Mercury given it by the Wise. And though the Eyes of the
Vulgar do daily behold this multiplication, and also incorporation of the
Natural Acid; yet they do not understandingly consider it. Take the Mine of
Saltpeter at Padua, The Mother of Nitre.
for an Example, which is now exhausted, but in Five or Seven years time, will
be filled again, for the Earth is its Nurse, as Hermes testifies; whence it is,
That this Spirit assumes a Body in it, and becomes inflammable Nitre.

But I have a greater thing to speak off, There Is an Island in the Tuscane Sea,
commonly called Little Elbe, Elbe the Mether of Iron.
containing twenty Italian Miles in compass, very Rich in Iron, from which,
that Metal has been dug out for many ages, and is so to this day; so that not
only the Mountains there, but the two Islands also must needs have been dug
through and exhausted; yet nevertheless Iron once dug forth in twenty years,
renews again, and now more and better than formerly, because the Alcaly, or
Mother of the Mineral there, is again exsaturated from the Vital Fountain; and
takes the determination of Metal, so becoming Iron. Also the evacuated Mine of
Vitriol in Carinthia, Mother of Vitriol.
first being exposed to the free and open Air, and afterward covered for some
years, is again replenished; so that Calid most acutely Teaches, That the Roots
of things are in the Air.

If these things are so, as Experience proves them to be True, why should not
the Acid flowing down from the Sun into the Matter of a Flint, The Mother of
Flint fired and constant in the Fire.
be multiplied in It, and be hardened into the fixation, constancy, and siccity
of the Flint? Since every individual has treasured up in it a spark of the
Nature of Light, by whose Beams the Body will be multiplied, as my Hippocrates
Chymicus shows, Chap. 3. and afterward, when the Flint by Artificial Fire is
turned into Lime, or Calx, its Acid does not therefore perish, which, since it
is fixed by External Fire in Vegetables, as I shall show anon, why may it not
be so also in a Flint? Fixed Acid in a Flint.
So that it is a sottish thing to deny, that there is Acid in Lime: but these
are vain Arguments and Subjects, forged in empty Brains: wherefore leaving such
false Conjectures, I turn my self to the Lovers of Truth.

CHAP. III. Alcaly, what it is? and how it is made, both by Nature, and by Art?
and whence it had that name?
AS in the former Chapter I have showed out of Hermes, and by Experience, That
the Sun is the Father of Acidity, now in this Chapter I will also demonstrate
our of the same Hermes and the same Experience, That the Moon is the mother of
Alcaly; and as the Acid does not discover it self but to the Natural
Philosopher, so also Alcaly comes not forth to view or light, unless it be
detained by the Acid, which she loves: And first, I will allege the Operations
of Nature, and afterward will Mechanically demonstrate how Art does ape Them
in her Imitations.

Thales, Heraclitus, Hesiod, Hermes, as well as Hippocrates, have affirmed,
That Water is the first matter of all things; The Writer of Genesis seems to be
also of the same mind: For all water is of a feminine nature, because it
contains and cherishes in it self the Seeds of things, and clothes it self with
various figures. In the Macrocosm it is made sometimes Wine, sometimes Vinegar,
sometimes Aqua Ardens, Caustic, Oil, etc. In the Microcosm, it is sometimes
Choler, sometimes Milk, Sweat, Blood, Urine, etc. The root of all these is
water, and that cold, which from the beginning was endued with a tenuious Acid
or Light, that so it might be fitter to receive the form of mixed Bodies; for
so, Fire is easily mixed with Fire, Light with Light, Water with Water; for
unless it had been endued with this slender Light from the beginning, the Vital
Spirit had never been able to assume a body in it: For our better
understanding, I now call that little body Alcaly, Experience so directing me,
See Hippoc. Chymicus chap. 19. Alcaly in Water.
The way which Nature uses in preparing that Alcaly, is taught us by that
Noble Polonian, the Ingenious Cosmopolita, in these clear and express words,
When Rain falls, says he, it takes from the Air, that Virtue of Life (which in
the Chapter afore-going, I have showed to be the Acid Spirit) and conjoyns it
with the Salt-nitre of the Earth, because the Saltnitre of the Earth, is like
calcined Tartar, by its Siccity, drawing the Air to it self, which Air in it is
resolved into water. Such a force of Atraction has that Salt-nitre of the
Earth, which also was Air, Alcaly the Child of th^^ Sun.
and is conjoined with the fatness of the Earth; and by how much the more
plentifully the Sun beams do then affect it, so much the greater quantity of
Salt-nitre is made, and by consequence a plentifuller crop of Corn is produced;
and this is done day by day. Thus far He, whose single Testimony, culled out
from many others, is a sufficient authority for me to affirm, That the Acid
Vital Spirit in the fatness of the Earth, by the Sunbeams, is fixed into
Alcaly, which again covets to be saturated with the Acid Vital Spirit from the
Air into Salt, which there is called Nitre of the Earth; the reason thereof
will more clearly appear in the progress. Hence it is, that he says, in another
place, That this Spirit has a Sister (Alcaly) which it loves, The Child of the
Sun loves his Sister Alcaly.
and is again loved by it, for it is to it as a Mother. What can be more
clearly held forth for the preparation of Alcaly, out of the Acid Vital Spirit
by the Operation of Nature? I add, That if this Spirit be shot down out of the
Air upon the Earth by Rain, then it must necessarily fall down also on the
Water, and the same Sunbeams, which by Reverberation do fix it on the Earth
into Salt-nitre of the Earth, do in like manner fix it in the Water, Alcaly in
Water.
if not into Salt-nitre, yet at least into Natural Alcaly; with which all
waters do abound, except such as are distilled from Cephalic Herbs: the reason
whereof you may see in Hippocrates Chymicus, chap. 19. and in some places they
fix it into Sea Salt, other where into Vitriol, and sometimes into Mineral,
according to the disposition of its Mother; as I have also showed out of Lully,
in the foregoing Chapter.

Upon this foundation proceeds the spiritual representation of Plants,
Regeneration of Plants proceeds from Hippocratical Learning.
concerning which, see Hippoc. Chym. chap. 20. If any one doubt of, or desire
to know its Inventor, let him consult and weigh this Ancient True Philosophy,
and the sincere Studier of Natures Secrets, maugre the Brawls of Scolding
Detractors, will soon obtain his desire.

As concerning the Ignorant, either Allowers or Detractors, who write without
any sure foundation, I am not solicitous about them; for I know that Calumny
(which is not in a Man's own power to avoid) leaves a guilt on him that casts
it; He, against whom it is directed, being innocent and faultless: Nay, nothing
is more pleasing to an Honest-man, then to undergo Reproaches for love of
Virtue; for it is undergone in this case, with Incredible Pleasure and
Alacrity, and being never long-lived, It again returns of its own accord
without any labor to its Author: But to return,

That Alcaly is found in the Earth, Alcaly in the Earth.
Experience confirms by the Extraction of it, because a Volatile Alcaly is
drawn and sublimated out of Earth, which has not yet attained any constancy;
whence, not enduring to be solitary and alone, it strives to avolate into the
Air.

So, That nourishing Alcaly is made out of Water, Alcaly in Water.
Paracelsus proves by the accretion of a Flint in a Phyalglass; for water is
the Liquor and Root of all things, as Hippocrates witnesses in his Books of
Diet: Fire, Water does Nourish.
says he, moves all things, but Water nourishes all things. Hence Lactantius,
Water is all things: Democritus also was not ignorant of the Virtues of Water,
who therefore affirmed that Truth was hid or immersed in a Well: So Hermes,
Water is susceptible and producible of Nutriment in Men and other things, and
without Water, Nature operates not: See Hippoc. Chym. chap. 19.

For confirmation of my Assertion, let us hear the Noble Cosmopolita; Nature,
says he, knows how to produce fruits in the Earth, out of Water, and from the
Air to supply them with life: Which is as much as to say, unless lus sifter (i.
e.) Alcaly, were in water, which this Spirit loves, it would not subsist of it
self, because it cannot be alone, as Hippocrates informs us; and by
consequence, it would produce nothing, but return into its own Soil and
Country.

Hence it is that Hippocrates again says, De Natura pueri: many things do
happen out of a few, because all things produced on the Earth, do Extract a
more copious virtue from the Earth, than they brought with them from their
Parents or Originals: It Is the same thing which C^smopolita said before for the
generation of Alcaly, to which he adds Water, coagulated by the force of
Vogetable Sulphur into Herbs; where it is to be observed, That unless this
Spirit or Sulphur (call it as you please) did find something in Water, which it
loved, assuredly it would never enter into it, and would coagulate nothing; for
if Water, by the force of Vegetable Sulphur, be coagulated into Herbs; the same
Water by the virtue of Mineral Sulphur, must be coagulated into Minerals: and
in like manner the same water by the help of Animal Sulphur into Animals:
whence of necessity it must be Nutritive, if it ought to undergo Coagulation
elsewhere.

So that Common Water is that Catholic and Universal Wine, which Animals, A
Catholic Wine.
Vegetables and Minerals do drink, each of them after their own peculiar
manner. And therefore to deny that Alcaly is in Water, is to fight against the
gravest Authors, against Reason, and against Experience. And they which in like
sort deny Water to nourish, gain nothing but universal Scorn for their labor;
but let us hear Hippocrates speaking in his First Book of Diet, against those
who deny water to Nourish, and to be Coagulated by the virtue of Sulphur into
Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, yea into Humane Bodies themselves, seeing
Nature acts every where alike. In those, says he, where Fire is overcome by the
presence of Water, some call such persons Sottish, others Amazed Ones, Stupids
or Dolts; which Temper is a certain duller species of Madness: Such persons do
Weep and Wail, when no man troubles or strikes them; they fear things not to be
feared, and are sadned at things not at all belonging to them, and do imagine
such things as Wisemen would never do.

Wherefore it is good to Purge such troubled Brains with Hellebore, provided
Anticyra have enough to do the Feat: Thus speaks Hippocrates against those who
deny that Water does Nourish.

Hitherto I have demonstrated out of the Shop of Wise Nature, how the Child of
the Sun, being Reverberated by the Sunbeams, is fixed into Alcaly, and how
That Alcaly does again incessantly Attract the Child of the Sun, and so they
are both condensed together. To this Natural Operation, I will now subjoyn That
which is Artificial, that it may appear how Venerable Antiquity did endeavor
to imjtate Nature as near as was possible.

Art therefore takes Vegetables of all sorts, Wood, Shrubs, Chips, Loppings,
Leaves, etc. all green and fresh (whose moisture here is instead of Rain:) if
it be Wood, young Shrubs, or Loppings, which are made use of, They may be burnt
in the open Air, or in a Chimney, and so without flaming out, be reduced to
Ashes, lest that which we seek for, should return by the motion into Air, or
its own Country. If they be Herbs full of Juice, they may be burnt to Ashes in
a fired and lighted furnace (Fire here is instead of the Sun Beams, which
reverberates the Acid of Vegetables into Alcaly) which, afterward are agitated
with a quick flame in a reverberating Furnace, fit for this purpose, till they
begin to threaten fusion; a sure Argument that the Acid is shut up in the
Alcaly, and then they are called Alcalizate or Potashes; Artificial Alcaly.
out of these Ashes, by means of Common Water Salt, is elicited by Lixivation;
then the Water is exhaled, till the Siccity remains, which is called, Fixed
Artificial Sal Alcaly: This Salt, having almost lost its form, remains for the
greatest part a Vacuum; and therefore being impatient of inanition, it again
desires to be saturated with the Acid into Salt, that it may fulfill the course
of Nature; as I have showed before out of Cosmopolita. And as Nature does
incessantly and daily infuse an Occult Vital Acid out of the Air into the
Alcaly made by her, both of which do afterward (the heat of the Sun concocting
them) gradually rise up into Corn and Fruit; so also, Art, Alcaly with Oil is
made Soap.
in imitation of Nature, does impregnate her prepared Alcaly, lest it should
wax barren, with an Occult Acid; an for Example, Oil, Fatness, etc. and by a
continual heat does by little and little digest them, till it assurge into Soap
of a Salt taste; or else it mixes it with things more fixed, either White Sand,
or Powder of Flints; which mixture, being agitated in a stronger Fire ( viz. of
Fusion) rises up to Glass, Alcaly with Flint is made Glass.
which must needs be of a Salt taste, because it is made of the Acid of Flint
and Fixed Alcaly; yea, Alcaly saturated with so much Acid, as to make it
sufficient for it self, is turned into Salt; and if the Alcaly be not saturated
with Acid enough to dissolve or slack the Flint, then the Alcaly overcomes the
Acid, and the Glass attracts Humidity from the Air, by means of the empty and
thirsty Alcaly, and so chinks and is broken. Hence Zoar says, That Glass may be
made out of any Herb, viz. when it is Alcalized, as my Hippocrates shows, Chap.
4th. and 5th.

These things being understood; we are again furnished with Arguments against
Those who deny, Fixed Acid.
That there is a Fixed Acid in Nature; and as, when the Alcaly exceeds the
Acid, the Glass chinks, and contracts flaws, so becoming useless; so also (as I
have showed above out of Hippocrates) those persons in whose Brains Water
exceeds the Fire, do become so stupid and dull, that by reason of their
darkning humidity, they can perceive no Fixed Acid in Nature.

Now Glass is destroyed by the same Fixed Alcaly of which it is compounded and
made; Destruction of Glass.
a Position contrary to Those who deny, That there is no Alcaly like to Nitre;
then which, nothing can be spoken more absurd.

But it is no wonder, If slight Doctors produce light Argumenrs. Therefore let
more parts of Alcaly than of Glass be melted together into one lump, Glass made
Liquor.
which, being exposed to the Air, is wholly resolved into Liquor; for out of
what Glass is made, into That, and by That, it must needs again be resolved; as
Aristotle rightly Teaches. Pour Mineral Acid drop by drop on this Liquor, until
the hissing noise cease, and the Alcaly be saturated into a Salt taste or
sapor, and the powder of Flints sinks to the bottom. Such Endimions, who think
themselves never secure, sometimes think that this powder, taken by the Mouth,
does generate Milk; and sometimes they imagine it, though taken the same way,
to be a very pernicious thing.

Our Ancestors tell us the way of making this powder, viz. That Red hot Glass
should be quenched in the Ashes of Bean Stalks; which speech, though it be not
improper, yet it is laughed at by the enslaved and mancipated rout; because
they do not first teach how to make a Lie for the quenching or extinction of
Glass: as if Rhasis had not expressly taught us, That the Sayings and Writings
of Philosophers are always to be understood according to the possibility of
Nature, and not according to the simple sound of the Words; for to take notice
of every minute thing, to such as are Skilful in an Art, would be too long and
tedious. Now the Word Quench, does necessarily presuppose Liquor, as clearly
appears out of Rhasis: but my Answer is this, That the Sayings of Philosophers
are hardly understood by those, who like vain persons, seek for praise in
Critical Glosses, having been never informed in the Operations of Nature, but
have spent their time in collecting Receipts here and there, and Those not well
understood: And this may be the cause, why it is not given to Plebeians and
Vulgarists, to distinguish Things; as will more clearly appear hereafter.

After that Art in imitation of Nature, has extracted Alcaly out of
Vegetables, it presently judges, Flint is made Alcaly.
that Alcaly must also necessarily lie hid in the Mineral Family; especially
since Nature is alike in all things: wherefore It begins to burn and calcine
Flints, with a naked Fire, until part of the Aliment be wasted (as it did in
the Family of Vegetables;) but not being able, by simple Water, to extract
Alcaly out of them, when they are calcined, because the Fixed Acid perished not
in the calcination, but again apprehended or caught hold of its Sister, viz.
Fixed Alcaly; and so both of them were concreted into a rocky substance:
therefore she begins to mingle Lime with three parts of the Alcaly of
Vegetables, that so the Acid of the Flint, Alcaly of Calcined Flint.
with two parts of Alcaly, might assume a Neutral Nature, and by the help of
the third part of Vegetable Alcaly, one part of the Alcaly of Flint might be
elicited; for like has an easy ingress into like, as Hippocrates teaches, de
locis in homine; and so, that most powerful Alcaly for making of Soap, Alcaly
for Soap.
has been extracted out of the Family of Minerals, as is more largly declared
in my Hippocrates Chymicus, Chap. 3. and 4.

Moreover, the word Alcaly, Alcaly what (...) is.
is not new or lately vain gloriously introduced by Me; but it was invented
heretofore by Philosophers and Mysterious Sages, for the distinction not only
of Things, but of Salts, working in a way contrary to Acids. For Alphidius, an
Ancient Philosopher, in his Book Entitled, Aurora Consurgens; Chap 12. of
Mineral Things, says, As Sal Alcaly is extracted from unslaked Lime, or
Potashes, or from Calcined Tartar it self, by means of a convenient moisture,
untll nothing remains of sharpness; so also our Salt, etc. The same thing is
affirmed by Senior, a grave Philosopher and Studier of this Ancient Science, De
tribuslunae imaginibus. These things, with what I have before alleged out of
the ingenious Sendivogius, may suffice to prove, That Salt of Tartar, of
unslaked Lime, and of Potashes, and such as are of the like Nature, are
rightly called Alcalys by the skilful; and are indeed such (and not merely
Salts, as some sottish Doctors do insipidly affirm:) For as the Natural Alcaly
of Sendivogius attracts to its self, out of the Air, a Spirit Occultly Acid to
our senses (let it suffice to have hinted this once for all) is impregnated by
it, and they both assurge into Crops of Corn and Fruit; so also these
Artificial Alcalys, being empty, are impregnated with all sorts of Acids, as
the Artificer pleases; and when they are saturated, they take their
determination from the Acid, according to the property and nature of the innate
Calid, as I shall anon show mechanically: So that it is not sufficient to
dream, that Alcaly of Tartar is purely Salt, but it becomes us to lay down the
clear and demonstrable grounds of this Doctrine, otherwise it will obtain no
credit in the School of Truth, but will be proscribed and hissed out, as a
wicked and illusive thing.

Let me now produce a Clause out of Botanicks, concerning the Herb Kaly; for
they call the Salt of this Herb Alcaly, and commend it for Vitrification;
neither did I ever read that Sea Salt, or Pit-salt, were ever used for making
of Glass or Soap; because they have been found by experience to be saturated
and impregnated with Acid, and not empty; so that, They can imbibe nothing, but
their own proper Acid; yea, they difficultly let go or part with their own
Acid: and unless the Alcaly did absume in it self the Fixed Acid part of the
Flint, Glass could never be made; which is proved by the supernatant fatness,
which is no longer Alcaly, Fell Vitri.
but called Fell vitri, which is unfit for Vitrification; for This being
saturated with Fixed Acid, from the Flint; by reason of its Saltness,
represents the nature and appearance of Trencher Salt, and therefore is only
good to be given to Horses and Cattle to sharpen their Stomachs to their
Fodder, where Salt is very dear. And so, the Salts, which absorb the Acid, are
called Alcalys by the Ancient Philosophers (and such they are) to distinguish
them from that common Trenchet Salt which we eat: In like manner, I shall also
call them Alcalys, having Authority, Reason, and Experience on my side (let
Momus's bark never so much; wherefore in a Flint, constant in the Fire, and
fixed there dwells Alcaly and Acid, a Lesson, which the Dean and their Fellows
never yet Learned; but I shall demonstratively show that the Acid in the Flint
is made Glass, and again, that out of the Alcaly of the same Flint is made
Soap; and both those Principles by Alcaly alone, are divided into two diverse
substances, very necessary for Humane use; and unless there were Hals and Cheo
(i. e.) melting of Salt, whence Alchymy has its name, men must necessarily
want both Soap and Glass; see the Preface to my Hippocrates Chymicus.

Wherefore the Acid of Flint, Flint and Alcaly are fermented into Glass.
which of it self is of difficult Fusion, does animate the vacuous Alcaly,
which is of easy Fusion (for unless the Alcaly were vacuous, it could not
imbibe the Acid of Flint) and both These by colliquation, turn into a dark
Mass, which by reason of Fermentation, of its own Nature casts forth, a Salt
froth, which being separated, is called by the Skilful Fell vitri. The Mass by
little and little is clarifyed into transparent Glass, so that, That which erst
was a Vegetable, is now by the Spirit, or Soul of the Flint, turned into a
Mineral, and a rocky or petrous disposition and nature (i. e.) Glass: which
consideration is of great weight, For the Soul of the Flint goes forth and
enters into the Alcaly (as the Pythagorians speak) or the Vegetable Soul goes
forth and re-assumes the Mineral Nature, and the Vegetable is animated with a
Rocky Indoles, so that for the future, no Fire or Acid Liquor can overcome or
hurt it; whence Raimund whispers to his followers, Take away its Soul, and
restore it to it agains and though the operation of which he speaks, is not
properly concerning vitrification, yet it is of no loss, value, since Nature in
every thing is alike; as I shall show in this Book, to the Prudent and Loers of
Truth: as for the profane Vulgar, which neither is, nor will be capable of the
Study of this Ancient Medicine, I matter them not; I study to please but a few,
for that which pleases the many, is not without suspicion; and it is the Advice
of Pythagoras, to follow the fewest, if walking in a right path.

So that Alcaly is as the Female, in respect of the Ac^d (the Child or Male of
the Son) and is its Sister, Alcaly a Female.
which it loves, and is reciprocally loved by it, as Cosmopolita speaks;
moreover, it is as the Moon, which is impregnated with Light and Virtue by the
Child of the Sun, whence the Moon is the Mother, as Hermes, and after him,
other Interpreters of Natures Recesses and Secrets have phrased her; for they
call their Alcaly Luna. So that the Anonymous Revealer of Natures Mysteries,
says rightly, The heat of the Female answers to the Terrestrial heat, whilst it
putrifies, cherishes and prepares the seed; but the Fire implanted in the seed,
being the Child of the Sun, disposes the Matter, and informs it, so disposed.

If then the Alcaly receives, putrefies and cherishes the Acid (the Child of
the Sun, that This again may arise into a new and clarifyed Body (as I have
showed in Glass) it must necessarily perform the Office of a Mother, and so be
vacuous; if otherwise, it must be impregnated by the Child of the Sun, as
Hermes and Experience witness. Hence Hippocrates, in his first Book of Diaet,
sighing at and lamenting the ignorance of Those, who amongst their fellows
boast themselves Wise, Men, says he, know not how to consider and infer
obscure things out of such as are manifest. Therefore to distinguish It from
the Acid of Common Salt, Alcaly of Tarar.
it is called Alcaly, not only by Philosophers, but also by Mechanical Glass
Men and Sope-boilers. If therefore Alcaly be vacuous, and Acid an imbiber, as I
have showed, How, and by what reason, can the Alcaly of Tartar be proclaimed to
be purely Salt? and how can it be approved for such? Surely so to affirm, is
merely a monstrous thing, and an old Wives Tale, full of filthy ignorance;
invented and approved only by shallow heads, but exploded and derided by the
intelligent and learned. Beware therefore, O ye lovers of Truth, of such
couzening Chapmen, the matter is far otherwise then those boasters do
vain-gloriously pretend. To Me they can do no harm, but I write this for the
sake of young and unwary beginners, that they may not give up themselves to
false Doctrines, which would lead them out of the way; but that they may know
for the future whom to avoid, I conclude therefore, with Hippocrates, That all
things in the world are constituted of Fire and Water, or of Acid and Alcaly;
of these Two Instruments, all things in the Universe are made up (as also is
the Ancient Physic of our forefathers) in which yet a Third is inseperably
included; which is therefore hinted to us, under the name of Sal Philosophorum:
Sal Philosophorum.
whence They called all bodies completely mixed of Acid and Alcaly ( viz. when
the Fire did not overcome the Water, nor on the contrary) Salt. Hence arose
that saying, In the Sun and in Salt, are all Natures Productions: yea, all the
Grace, Ornament, Delight and Contentation of Humane Life could not be expressed
in a fitter word, and therefore delightful Elegancies, which offend none, are
called Sal^s, nay, the appellation of Graces is also given to it Hence St.
Paul, Col. 4. Let your speech be always savory, seasoned with Salt, admnistring
grace, etc. And the Scripture, not without Reason, often takes Salt for an
Emblem of Wisdom, intimating thereby, that the fundamental Knowledge of the
Nature of Salt, and of its composition of the Two Instruments of Nature, is of
great Moment. If therefore determinated Common Saline Matter, viz. Alcaly,
being informed by the Acid or Child of the Sun, as well in Scripture as in
Moral Philosophy, be called Salt, and the denomination of Salt be given to it
alone, why should any defraud the highest Masculine, being innocent, and which
may be likened to the Sun, and rob it of its proper Name: Receive therefore
from me the Salt of Wisdom, and beseech the Lord to give you all, the Spirit of
discerning, for no age is too late to learn Truth and good Manners. Let Old Age
blush, which cannot amend it self, yet scorns to learn; for my part I am
willing to insinuate and to be complaisant (as Caesar was) that Men may attain
to a better Understanding. Hearken therefore attentively, and give ear to the
difference betwixt vacuous Sal Alcaly and Common Salt, which Wise Men, by
reason of its perfect mixture, have compared with the Sun.

CHAP. IV. Trenchar-Salt, or the Salt which we eat, how much it differs from
Vitrifying and Saponary Alcaly?
The Praise and Renown of Trenchar-Salt is spread over the whole world; Salt a
known thing.
so that in Apologizing for it, I undertake as it were the defense of the Sun,
against a swarm of Flies, endeavoring to eclipse its Light: Salt, because it
is so necessary an Element for Mortals, that Man's Life cannot be sustained
without it, therefore Nature exhibited it to us, brought to full perfection,
and requires not from us (as in our other Acquist) any Ustion, but only that we
dry it from its aqueous Humidity; whether it be Sea Salt or Salt from Pits.
Principles, equally poized, do concur to its mixture, which is made in Natures
Shop; so that venerable Antiquity has determined, All Natures Perfections to
be in the Sun and Salt; and it is called by Helmont, and that on good ground,
the Chief of Salts, and is the Armoniack amongst them all; yet notwithstanding
it is praised from the Country, whence it comes, as Dioscorides has it: See
Hippocrates Chymicus, Chap. 2.

But the Fame of Alcaly has not yet reached to all People, Alcaly unknown to
most.
because Essentially and Corporally it appears not in Nature, unless it be made
by Art and Ustion, as well in the Animal as Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms; yet
with this difference, that some Minerals, not equally mixed, contain more of
Alcaly than Acid; Sulphur, Gold, and Meat-Salt being excepted, which have more
of Acid, as I have showed. Hence it is, that the Ancients have Writ, that this
Virgin has three Fathers, viz. Nature, Fire, and the Philosopher: but here we
must Note, that no man by the art of Ustion, in any one of Natures Kingdoms,
Artificial Alcaly never Pure, or destitute of any Form.
can prepare any Alcaly absolutely Pure (i. e.) deprived of all mixture of the
Acid whatsoever; he that seeks to do it, will lose his labor. Whence
Cosmopolita, Burn, says he, Sulphur from incombustible Sulphur, and from its
Soul, whose Grain and Ferment, indeed Mercury has in it, as much as is
sufficient for it self; but make, that it may be sufficient for other things
too.

Enough now has been spoken for the convincing of Those that deny the
principles of this Ancient Art, viz. That Mercury has no Sulphur separable
from it: It Is altogether vain, what some Masters and Writers of Vanity have
thought (says Geber) for I have seen that It does emanate from it, etc.
Experience also confirms the same.

Common Salt is of a Salt-acid taste (i. e.) the Acid is prevalent in it,
therefore it is incorruptible (if the Salt have lost his savor, wherewith
shall it be seasoned?) Hence being moderately mixed with Meat, it conciliates a
grateful taste to them, and excites Appetite.

Sal-Alcaly is contrary to a Salt-Acid taste; hence if it be mixed, though but
moderately, with Meats, it gives them an unsavory taste, and blunts the
Appetite.

Common Salt, by reason of its Acidity, preserves Flesh and Fish a long time
from Putrfaction, and draws out and attracts from them the Volatile Alcaly,
which by a Retort is again easily separated, as Hippoc. Chymic. teaches Chap.
14.

On the contrary Sal-Alcaly does consume the Acid, and promotes Putrefaction.
Common Salt does imbibe nothing of Acid, and therefore being dried from its
Aqueous Humidity, and cast into Butter of Antimony, it disturbs it not; Sal
Alcaly being dried, and cast into the fame Butter of Antimony, is so far from
not disturbing it, that in an instant it quite destrovs it; because it drinks
up the Acid Spirits, and the Antimony falls into a white Powder.

Common Salt being mixed with the Quadruple of Bole Armonick, and distilled
with an open Fire, yields an Acid Liquor.

Sal Alcaly mixed and distilled with the like quantity of Bolus with an open
Fire, yields a bitterish Liquor, by reason of the Bolus, Insipid and Aqueous
per se, as Hippoc. Chymic. shows Chap. 10.

In this place I desire the equal Reader to take notice, That the Process
concerning the making Volatile Salt of Tartar, A false Pro^^ of Vola^ile Salt
of Tartar.
inserted into the last Edition of the Reformer, I had almost said Deformed
Auspurgh's Dispensatory, f. 247, was stolen out from my abovenamed 10th.
Chapter of Hippocrates Chymicus: And after they had stripped it of things unknown
to them (as I can show) what further? they mutilate the Text, then load it with
Calumnies, pervert Sentences, and prove manifest Falsaries. God Almighty curb
such Plagiary, Falsified, Stolen, and Deformed Labors, which darken the minds
of the Studious. In that forecited 10th. Chapter, I did Experimentally
Demonstrate, That all things did consist of Eire and Water, and that Water was
the Basis and Root, not only of Sweet and Insipid, but also of Igneous Virtues,
and of Caustic things, as of Aqua Fortis, Alcalyes, Salts, Oils, Vinegars, Hot
Waters, and of all things, in which the Acrimony of Fire does prevail. I say,
Water, and that cold, is the root of all those things; for Nature impresses the
Virtues of Her things upon a moist Element; Wherefore Moisture is the first
Subject of Nature, upon which Her first Labor is spent, as I have showed in
the Third Chapter of this Book, and hereafter will make clear by plain and
evident Examples. I say, for this end my Hippocrates Chymicus in the forecited
place, reduced many things; as also Alcaly of Tartar by Solution and
Coagulation, into Simple Elementary Water, of no Taste or Smell; but Fire, and
the Child of the Sun (for whose sake the Dance is made in that Operation)
returns to its own Country, and that for this Cause, That Man may not find out
the work that God does, Eccles. chap. 3. v. 2. See also Hippoc. Chymicus Chap.
18. These Surreptitious Doctors have not only stolen out this my Labor, Sweat,
and Travel, to advance their own Praises, but have also essayed to reproach the
Author with infinite Calumnies, and to suppress the Truth; yea, they boast that
this Simple Elementary Water is Volatile Salt of Tartar in these Rhodomontado
words:

And by this means at length, Courteous Reader, thou may be sure, That the
Virtues of Salt of Tartar have passed through the Lembick, and That, thou have,
in succinct words, received a great Secret, destinated to thy own and
neighbors Health, which use happily.

Consider, Friendly Reader, whether any thing could be more plausibly devised
by their Mightinesses? What? to rob an Author, and afterward to Defame Him?
and then to depress and detract from the clear Truth? and that they may procure
Fame to themselves amongst their Companions, with a lofty Brow to Venditate
most Simple Wat^r for Volatile Salt of Tartar, not only to the prejudice of
ones Neighbor, but to the reproach of Physic it self; which would certainly
be the Noblest of all Arts, unless it were thus treated by such ignorant Brains
which are dar more vacuous and empty than Alcaly. Lo, this is the cause why
now it is reputed the vilest and meanest of Arts by the Vulgar. What Candid
Person, Ingenious Reader, can be pleased with such Actions, or gulled with
Prescriptions stuffed with manifest Vanities, under the pretense of Physic?
Heretofore, he that taught Falsities was accounted Infamous and a Knave: Hence
Cicero speaks, Pro Roscio, A man may easily be deceived by a Knave. Their Brain
is pre-possessed with so many Absurdities, that they have lost their
Remembrance, and have forgot, That Water drawn from Alcaly of Tartar is most
Simple; neither are any of those Virtues radicated in it, contained therein,
which Raimund, Basilius, Hollandus, Helmont and others Ascribe to Volatils Salt
of Tartar. Does this Water which you have so Distilled from Alcaly of Tartar,
dissolve a Metal, or at least the Stones of Crabbs, by a true Solution? Can
only four drops of this your Distilled Water, taken by the Mouth, augment the
Vital Spirit when it is weak, with incredible Vigor? To which I add, that
Volatile Alcaly may be made, not only from Tartar, but from all Cephalic
Herbs, which contain Alcaly in their Ashes (i. e.) without Clavellation. So a
Friend of mine extracted Volatile Alcaly out of Lillye Convallye, which was
very Restorative: Yea, I my Self have prepared the same (of no less Efficacy in
dissolving) from the outward Rinds of Walnuts. But, Basilius, Hollandus,
Helmont, and others do extol Alcaly of Tartar, because it easily is conjoined
to and makes a Coalition with Fire of its own nature: Yet these ridiculous
Masters do ungratefully rail upon Helmont too, as well as other Learned Men,
falsely accusing Him, for not discovering the way of Prepararing this Salt: But
what need have your Masterships of Helmont's help? Since ye your selves are
sure that the Virtues of Salt of Tartar have passed through the Lembick, and
that you have obtained a great Secret? Why do you reproach a Man who has
faithfully showed you the right way? as I have done in my Hippoc. Chymic in
three places, and also in this Tract; clearly discovering the Preparation of
this Alcaly; which, if you do not understand, yet do not Revile, but rather
blame your own ignorance, and afterward apply Cupping-Glasses, and a sharp
Suppository, left your envious Bowels should burst asunder.

But nothing is more ridiculous than that which is whispered into the ears of
his Followers in the same Text, I am induced by this motive to reveal this to
thee, lest I should seem to be enviously affected against many Writers of our
Age. Plautus would say to such a man Aplauda es nequior, Neither is that less
Jocular or Ridiculous, which (in the above cited place) they demand, viz. that
the curious Investigations of Learned Men, for which they have taken pains,
should be openly and plainly discovered to such Masters of Vanity, who know not
how to distinguish Water from Salt? as if it were not sufficient that Quid pro
quo were often enough prescribed to poor Patients, but that they themselves
must likewise have an occasion administered to Adulterate and Defame the
Inventions of Philosophers? Do they not know that Hippocrates forbids it in
express words, and allows us to divulge only those things which are known to
Plebeians? For they do not understand the force and meaning of my words: Take
this my Reduction of Alcaly of Tartar into Water, for an Example, they
presently, among the Unskilful, Vaunt This to be Volatile Alcaly; and do
moreover commend it for a Cordial with their vain yet swelling words. By These,
and the like Fables, studious Young Men are imposed upon, under pretense of
Truth, because they are Licensed and Approved by the Lofty Magnifique Deans and
Professors of Physic: Innocent Youth is easily persuaded that Truth lies in
the bottom of such Trifles, not knowing any more than their Masters how to
discern Truth from Falsehood. But what effect such and the like things can have
in an Art, is manifest by daily Experience; so that it is grown, and not
without cause, a common Proverb, Mentiris ut Medicus: Which therefore of all
the Philosophers, would take pains to instruct such an Indocile, Quarelsome,
and Sluggish Rout? he cannot do it without doing great Wrong to himself, and
contracting an indelible stain of Infamy to his Credit. Leaveing therefore
these processes, which come not forth upon the Stage without the laughter of
Learned Men; I convert my speech to the Studies of Truth, and do affirm, That
the Ancient Scienceof Physic does not consist in compiling of Processes and
Receipts here and there surrpetitiously taken up, To know, what?
and perhaps also but ill understood (of which Personhs the Proverb speaks
true, Cum Charta cadit, tota Scientia vadit.
He that for their Knowledge looks,
Finds it not i'th'r Head, but Books.)


But in the true Understanding and Knowledge of Things by their Causes, as
Aristotle has rightly taught, l. 1. Physic. For he that knows Things by their
Causes, is not only said to have Experience, but to know and comprehend Them
perfectly. This is the Foundation of the Ancient Physic; and although, all
Receipts with their Exscribers, Subscribers, and Approvers, were utterly lost
and perished, yet this Ancient Science would remain unmovable; whose
foundation I have faithfully discovered in my Hippoc. Chymicus, by familiar and
common Words and Examples; but such putative and empty Doctors, by reason of
the blindness of their minds, cannot reach to it (I call it blindness, seeing
all Knowledge is Light, and Ignorance, Darkness) as being long since excluded
from the Knowledge of the Truth: Enough now concerning this disguised
Elementary Water. There are many such like trifles packed together in the
forenamed Dispensatory, which do not only cast a blot upon Noble Physic, but
do also redound to the Ruin of our Neighbor; Things ill got, because not
understood, will be as badly spent. But these things requiring a Volume by
themselves, I shall forbear further speaking of them at present, and return
whence I digressed, Common Salt does not wash out filth, therefore Soap cannot
be made of it. Hence it was, that Nausicca the Daughter of King Alcinous,
washed her Linen out of a Fountain in the Seashore, as Homer notes, 6. Odyss.
which Aristotle rightly refers to the perfect mixture of this Salt, for seeing
it has no vacuity in it (as Alcaly has) it can receive nho filth into it self.

Sal Alcaly is vacuous, and by consequence imbibes filth, and Soap is madeof
it; because it absorbs the Occult Acid in the Oil and Fat, which by a flow
Concoction are converted together into Soap, of a Salt taste, as my Hippoc.
Chymicus has it.

Common Salt fortifies and strengthens living Flesh, it cures the Scab, Mangy,
and other Diseases of the Skin, as the Sea-fishers can witness; yea being mixed
with Oil, it cures Scalds.

Sal Alcaly does mortify and putresy living Flesh, as Potential Cauteries do
witness; and the History also shows, that it putresyed a whole living Man in a
moment, as it is mentioned in Hippocrates Chymicus, Chap. 4.

Common Salt with Sand, passes not over into Glass, because it is saturated
with Acid.

Sal Alcaly, with Sand, it melted into Glass, because being destitute of Acid,
it receives into its Bowels the Acid of Flint, and by Fusion, becomes of a
Rocky Nature; as I showed before.

Common Salt, makes Nitre impure, Sal Alcaly, cleanses Nitre from all impurity,
as my Hippoc. Chymicus teaches, Chap. 8.

So we Read in Holy Scripture, every Sacrifice should be seasoned with Salt,
but no mention at all is made of Alcaly there.

So that it is manifest, from the Circumstances abovementioned, That Meat
Salt, or Common Salt; the Child of the Sun, and the Chiefest of all Salts,
differs very much from Inane and Vacuous Alcaly; which therefore I have set one
against another, that it may appear to the Learned and Curious, that there is
not a grain of Salt in those great Bodies of Innovators, who contend, That Sal
Alcaly is a Salsum, and so do ignorantly persuade their unskilful followers:
For there are no more Salts in the Universe, than Acid and Alcaly; Acids are
infinite, all which have one only Alcaly for their foundation, in which they
subsist, and are incorporated, as I shall Ocularly demonstrate in the 6th.
Chapter: So that all Salts, and all Things which are in the World, may, by an
easy method, be referred to Acid and Alcaly; therefore it will not be a miss,
yea pleasant and acceptable, before I proceed, to subjoyn the Preparation of
Medicinable Salts.

CHAP. V. The Preparation of Medicinable Stals.
HAving showed before, That there is nothing in the Universe, but Acid and
Alcaly, of which Two, Nature composes all her works; to which yet a Third does
also inseparably adhere, as by degrees will be manifested: I shall now proceed
to confirm my Proposition of Medicinable Salts, and to show, what they are;
because I have not found Their Nature hitherto described by any Man, and
therefore I think it worth my Labor, to transfer the True way of their
Preparaton, out of my Hippoc. Chymicus Chap. 21. to this place, which will
likewise declare their Essence, and Nature. Most Wise Nature, in the 3. Chap.
shows us the way, how het Spirit of the Air is coagulated and fixed, to wit^,
by Fire and Water (i. e.) by the Sun Beams and by Rain, for unless they both
concur, the Spirit returns to its Original; which They find to be True, who
endeavor to prepare Salts out of dry Simples, for, in drying, the greatest
part does exhale; and by how much the dryer they are left, the less quantity of
Salt is procured from them; least of all, yea nothing, from rotten Sticks and
Wood; which though with great Care you reduce into Ashes, Rotten Wood has no
Salt in its Ashe^.
yet you can elicite no Salt from them; but on the contrary, the fresher and
newer they are burnt, a greater quantity of Salt, will be extracted therefrom.
Therefore, for the Preparation of Salts, our principle Care and Study should
be, That the Herbs be fresh (see Chap. 3.) for then, in concremation the innate
Acid apprehends the Alcaly, and the Alcaly absorbs, or sucks up the Acid, and
they are both fixed according to the property of the concrete; but from that
part (which flies away with the flame, and, not being sufficiently bound in by
the Acid, goes to Soot) you may easily extract Volatile Alcaly.

Let Green Wormwood be the Example, Take This, green as it is, and burn it in a
Chimney or open Place (but Fumitory, or such like Juicy Herbs, may be cast
Green and Fresh, into a Red Hot Furnace, and the Mouth-hole be shut, that it
catch its Flame:) flaming out is to be hindered as much as we can, for it is
sufficient that it be turned into Ashes, though but black; which Ashes are
further to be Caloined in a large Earthen Pot, and low, or upon a large Iron
Plate, of a lifted up edge; Coals being kindled under, in the Wind Furnace, to
the end that the little Door may be opened or shut, as there is need: The Ashes
are always to be stirred with an Iron Spatule, till they be very white. Note
that the process made this way is and must be more Sweet and Benign, than that
mentioned, Chap. 3. in the Preparation of Alcaly; for There the Ashes are
stirred and agitated with a quick flame, which are therefore called,
Clavellated, or Potashes; but here the Fire must not touch the Ashes, but they
must be spread on a large Iron, or Earthen Plate, or Table, which must not
enter the mouth of the Furnace (see the Contents of my Hippoc. Chymicus, in the
above cited Chapter.) Lay the Ashes on a Linen Acuminated Bag, or, if there be
few of them, on Acuminated Paper, and pour Common Water on them, which, running
through them, being pregnant with Salt, is called a Lixivium, or Lie; Coagulate
this strained Lie, with a quick Ebullition, in a Frying Pan, not greased in the
Kitchen, and make it up into a Mass, which, when it begins to thicken like
Honey, you must continually move with a Spatule, and it will be dried up into a
Gray Powder, which you must presently lay in a Pot not Glazed, with a Cover,
(the little Door of the Wind Furnace being stopped) and cover them with Small
Coals, mixed with the Powder of the same Coals; leisurely heat it, unto
Brunity, not making it Red Hot, or melting it; when all is cooled, put the Salt
into a Glass Vessel, and dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of Water,
stirring it between whiles, with a Wooden Stick, till the whole be dissolved:
afterward let it rest for two or three days, when it is clear, pour it forth
from the Lees, without much stirring, and in a Leaden or Glass Vessel placed in
Sand, suffer the Water to exhale without bubbles, till a Saline Cuticle appear:
Then remove the Vessel, and the next morning gather up the Splendent Grains of
Salt, which are to be washed with clear Water, with a quick motion, and dried;
put the remaining Lie again into Sand, that the Water may exhale, as before,
unto the Cuticle. Both these Salts are to be kept together jointly in one
Vessel. It is to be observed, that Salts this way sweetly prepared, do resemble
the Crasis of their Concretes, the rest of the Lixivium being of an Urine-like
taste and stinking smell, is to be lest for washing of Glasses. This is the
easy and natural way to prepare Salts of Vegetables, which do never melt of
themselves, neither are of an ungrateful taste; for they are compounded of
their proper Acid and Alcaly by Concremation: A pound of These Ashes yields
almost four Ounces of the purest Salt, but four Pound of the Ashes of dry Herbs
will scarce afford one Ounce of Salt.

CHAP. VI. That the Seminal Virtue of all things is Acid, and that Acids lead
Alcalyes ad Lubitum, and that every Acid Liquor is a Solution of Acid-Salt in
Elementary Water.
I Have showed before that Water would be coagulated by the force of Vegetable
Sulphur, into That, of whose Determination Sulphur was: It is the property of
Sulphur to be Occultly Acid and Pinguous, as I have showed in Chap. 2. which in
Vegetables is always Volatile.

Take therefore eitheir Wood, or Meal (whose Spirit these Magnifick Ridiculous
Masters do proclaim and approve for Acid Spirit of Sal Mrmoniack) or any simple
Vegetable, whatever it be; yea, or the very grains of Kermes, and Distill
through a Report the Pinguous Acid Liquor, which is called, andis, Sulphur of
the Grains of Kermes; or any other Vegetable ^^ which their Masterships
hitherto were ignorant of) upon this Liquor pour alcaly of Tartar (which
answers to Water, the Fire being taken away, as my Hippoc. Chymic. teaches
Chap. 10.) till the Strepitus cease; strain this Compositum through Paper, and
dry it up by degrees into the consistency of Honey, and the Tartar of the
Grains of Kermes, or, as some call it, Tartar of Kermes.
The essential Salt, will concrete in it when it is cold: But if you desire to
turn it into Pure Salt, heat it in a Pot not Glazed, scarce to Brunity, only
that the exceeding Pinguousness may deflragrate; or else put it into a Retort,
and distill the Oil from the empty Cuppel: Dissolve the black Mash with Common
Water, let the Solution rest for three days, till it be clear, then pour it
out leasurely, and in a Glass Vessel placed in Sand, Exsiccate it to the
Cuticle, and the next morning you may collect a Salt of the same Virtue, that
the Acid, which you poured on the Alcaly, was off; so that the Alcaly is
brought to the will and pleasure of the Alcaly^

As the Acid Liquor distilled from the Grains, does Impregnate the Alcaly with
its Virtue, which from thence receives its determination, so that it may be
called, and is Salt of grains of Kermes; So also pour distilled Vinegar on the
same Alcaly, as much as it can imbibe (i. e.) to Saturity; which you may know
when the Strepitus cease, and the smell of Vinegar breaths out: Coagulate the
Impregnated Alcaly to Siccity, and though the Vinegar was distilled and the
Alcaly of Tartar most Pure, yet the Coagulum is very Impure, Sordid, and Black,
by reason of the Pinguousness of the Vinegar; which being separated, does
therefore catch or conceive Flame. Dissolve this black Mass in clear Water; let
as much as is dissolved, rest for three days, then separate through Paper, the
Pure from the Impure; dry the Pure again, as before, and you shall have
Regenerated Tartar; Regenerated Tartar of Wine.
Distill this out of a Retort, as we do Tartar of Wine, and it will afford an
Oil, more or less Fetid (according to the quality of the Wine, of which the
Vinegar was made;) and a bitterish Liquor, such as Common Tartar is wont to
yield. The Faces, or Caput Mortuum, unless by the vehemence of the Fire it be
turned to Glass, yo^^ must again dissolve in clear Water, and strain and
coagulate it into true Alcaly of Tartar, Alcaly of Tartar made Salt of Kermes.
as if it were left of the Common; So that the same Alcaly of Tartar being
Impregnated with Acid Sulphur from the Grains of Kermes, follows the nature
thereof, and becomes Salt of grains of Kermes; Alcaly of Tartar made Tartar of
Wine.
and the same Alcaly Impregnated with Vinegar, imitates the nature of the
Vinegar, and performs that which Tartar of Wine does; like as a Woman, who
being Married to a Man, loses her Father's Name, and takes that of her Husband:
For Nature is alike in all things, as Pythagoras, and after him, Hippocrates
have taught. But I have a greater thing in my mind; yet before I come to it, I
must repeat some Experiments out of my Hippocrates Chymicus. Distill therefore
out of a Retort, with an open Fire, Common Salt with four parts of Bole
Armonick; all of them first reduced into a fine Powder (it will succeed more
happily if they be mixed and blended together, for then they will easily fall
through the Sieve) pour the Acid Liquor which comes forth, on the Pure Alcaly
of Tartar, till the Strepitus cease and the Alcaly be Impregnated; Alcaly of
Tartar made Common Salt.
Exhale this Mixture in a Glass Vessel, with a gentle heat, or else at the Sun,
until the Film or Cuticle concrete a-top, and the next morning, when all is
cooled, you shall have splendent grains of Common Salt; So that the spirit of
Salt in the Alcaly of Tartar returns into true Common Salt.

As you have done with Common Salt, Alcaly regenerated into Nitre.
so in like manner do with Nitre, whose spirit in the Alcaly of Tartar becomes
true Nitre, conceiving Flame, and is a Remedy for the Quinzey; see Hippoc.
Chym. Chap. 21. So also an Acid Spirit is elicited from Alum, with which let
the alcaly of Tartar be so far impregnated, Alcaly regenerated into Allume.
as abovesaid, till the hissing cease; which Liquor in a soft Fire is
coagulated into Alum; so that the Acid Spirit, not only of of all Vegetables,
but of all middle sort of Minerals, re-asumes a body in the Alcaly, and becomes
the same thing, from whence the Acid Spirit was drawn forth. But the Acid of
Sulphur, becomes not Sulphur in the Alcaly, because it has lost its terreous
pinguousness by the Flame; but it is sublimated into True Sulphur, with Sand or
Flints ground to Powder, for it finds in them That to which it may associate it
self and overcome it, as Hippoc. Chymicus shows, Chap. 21.

These Experiments do evince the Truth of That, which is laid down in the 1.
Chapter, viz. That the Spirit of the World, or Child of the Sun, is Acid and
Pinguous; and that this Pinguousness or Sulphur does participate of a third,
which, as I have showed in the said first Chapter, does inseparably adhere to
Fire and Water; which I will now more clearly demonstrate in Vitriol, and in
the Anatome thereof; wherefore it is vain, ignorant, and against all Truth,
what they scrible, viz, that Acids do not prevail over Alcalys, nor draw them
hither and thither, as they please.

To convince such vain Talkers, distill the Spirit. Spirit of Vitriol.
out of dried Vitriol, the common way, which is Acid Sulphurous, which you
must rectify, or distill once more, out of a Retort, placed in an empty Cuppel;
on which pour on leisurely, so much of the Alcaly of Tartar, till the hissing
and ebullition cease, (for if you pour it in hastily, they will both grow hot,
by reason of the fiery Nature in both Subjects:) Alcaly regenerated into
Vitriol.
exhale the superfluous, Insipid, and Aqueous Humor, till you see the
appearance of a growing Cuticle. (Here you must observe, that if both the
Alcaly and the Acid were not first sufficiently diluted, before their
Conjunction, at their very first Meeting and Coalition, the White Powder of
Vitriolated Tartar will fall, and there will be no Chrystalline Grains
produced:) Then remove the Vessel from the heat, and set it in a cold place,
and in the morning you shall find Shining Grains arising and resembling the
form of Vitriol, because the Acid Spirit has drawn the Alcaly to its own
pleasure (i. e.) into the form of Vitriol. This White Vitriol, they call
Vitriolate Tartar, but I call it Regenerated Vitriol, whatsoever the ignorant
multitude do murmur to the contrary: for the Acid of Flint in the Alcaly is
regenerated into a Pellucid, Frangible, Rocky Substance, which afterward
neither Fire, nor any Acid Liquor can destroy; as I have showed in its place
concerning Flint; and shall show hereaster, concerning Coral.

The Occult Acid of Oil, in the Alcaly, is regenerated into Pinguous Salt Soap.

The Acid of Grains of Kermes in the same Alcaly, becomes the Son of Kermes (i.
e.) Salt.

The Acid of Common Salt in the same Alcaly becomes a Salt of the same Nature.

The Acid of Nitre in Alcaly, becomes True Nitre, conceiving Flame, and is a
remedy for the Quinzey. The Acid of Alum in Alcaly, becomes True Alum; The
Acid of Wine in Alcaly becomes Tartar, and all the other Acids, are regenerated
in Alcaly their Mother: Why should not then the Acid of Vitriol, regenerated in
Alcaly, Measuring the Wisdom of Nature by their own folly.
be called regenerated Vitriol? Is it because it is not blackned with Gauls, as
Vitriol of Iron is; or because it cannot be distilled as Common Vitriol may, as
some foolishly give forth; but why will you fantastically put a force upon
Nature from those Accidents which are not common to all Vitriol? Surely that
Wise Mistress does little esteem not only the contumelies of venomous Tongues,
but she does as much undervalue the old doting Fables of Wordy Doctors, who
refuse to learn. Attend therefore diligently, that you may be informed, That,
as I have showed a little before of Acids; They bring Alcalyes to their will,
so it must needs happen here: For when Natural Acid has by chance corroded
immature Iron, then they are both coagulated into Vitriol of Iron; which being
mingled with Juice of Galls, yields a black color, by reason of the Iron, and
not by reason of the Acid. And when the same Natural Acid has by chance
corroded immature Copper, then they are both coagualted into Vitriol of Copper;
which, though mixed with Juice of Galls, grows not black; yet it is, and is
also called both by the Skilful and Unskilful, Vitriol. That Natural Acid drawn
forth by Distillation, when it has corroded Iron, is coagulated again into
Vitriol of Iron, of a green color.

The same Acid when it has corroded Copper, they are both coagulated into
Vitriol of an Coeles^i^i.
Azure color.

So the same Acid, when it has corroded Alcaly of Tartar, they are both
coagulated into Vitriol of a White color, which is nothing else but
regenerated Vitriol, as my Hippocrates shows Chap. 17. Which Book I would wish
you to read over before you rail against the Works of Nature.

But why your Common Vitriolate Tartar cannot be distilled, Why Vitriolate
Tartar, made the Common way, is not Distillable?
I will now clearly demonstrate; That Natural Acidity, which has corroded
Iron, being Healthful, Grateful, and Precious, is sought after by many, but
found by few; I say, This is attempted to be extracted out of the corroded and
immature Metal, by Art, and the help of Fire in Distillation; but seeing it
cannot never be alone (as Hip. de Diaet. has taught) it easily carries off
with it is like (i. e.) the Immature and Volatile Metalline Sulphur, because
the wind carries both in its womb, and it becomes Common Spirit of Vitriol,
Austere and Corrosive, by reason of the inseparable immature Metalline Sulphur
mixed with it.

This Common and sourish Liquor of Vitriol, however rectified, yet contains in
it the Sulphurous Liquamen of the Metal, upon this ground that it can never be
alone, as in the progress will clearly appear. If this Spirit, or Liquor, be
poured on Alcaly of Tartar, untilthe noise cease, The Alcaly is impregnated,
but not with a Natural, but a Metalline Acid, the Aust erity of the immature
Metalline Sulphur, having the dominion; and so a Son is begotten, which must
needs resemble the properties of his Father (i. e.) be fixed and constant in
the Fire. Lo, here your Doctorships may see the reason why your Vitriolate
Tartar cannot be Distilled? For in that instant of Coition, when the more
powerful is embraced by the Alcaly, The third, because it is weal^, is
strangled and slain; as will appear by little and little to the Reader. This is
That, which the barren approvers, with those which went before them, were
hitherto ignorant of.

I do call (together with the company of Ancient Philosophers) This Son of
Metalline Sulphur, Alcaly made Regenerated Vitriol.
Regenerated Vitriol, because it has laid down its Iron, or Earthly Body, and
shines again, re-produced in a brighter form.

Wherefore the soul of the imperfect Metal, hid in the four Acid Spirit, forms
to it self a Fixed Body in the Alcaly of Tartar; Whence it clearly appears,
That the Spirit is the Vehicle of the Soul, and the Vinculum, binding Soul and
Body together; which in the subsequent Discourse will more evidently appear to
the Studious Lovers of the Truth.

Let us now hear Basilius Valeminus, speaking of this Twofold Spirit of
Vitriol (not to mention mine own Experience) in His Book called, Spirit of
Vitriol twofold.
Repetitio Lapidis Magnis, in these words, And that you may understand Vitriol,
says he, you must know that it has two Spirits, a White and a Red; the White
is white Sulphur, the Red is red Sulphur; He that has Ears to hear, let him
hear; And let him diligently mark and forget it not, for it is a dissicult
saying, and every word is of great weight; the White Spirit of Vitriol is Acid,
amiable, very grateful to the Stomach, like Nectar to the Bowels, and
profitable for Universal Concoction; but the Red is much more Acid, and more
weighty than the White, and therefore requires a longer time to be extracted by
Distillation. Hitherto Basilius. He that desires more, let him consult the
cited place, the words are of great weight, and for good reason cited and
transcribed here.

If therefore the composition of Vitriol be of the Natural Acid, amiable, and
of a sweet smell, like Nectar to the Inwards; in which no sensible biting is
perceived by the Tongue, but a spiritual and grateful Acidity (Let B^filius,
Acid Waters, and Experience, be all witnesses) and of Immature Sulphurous
Metal, which Two cannot possibly be severed by Distillation; for the Natural
Acidity, which is highly Volatile, ascends not without its Companion, the Acid
Sulphur of the immature Metal, because it cannot b^ alone, as I have shown out
of Hippocrates, and have also learned by experience; it remains therefore that
it must be caught by crafty hands, and that in a fit time too, when it is
asleep.

There are many private ways, which the Studiers of Natures Secrets may take to
procure this grateful and much sought for Acid, which though many, yet all
conduce to one end, as Geber rightly observes; yet This way is not to be
despised, though the ignorant do contumeliously charge it to procure vomiting,
and raise many other Symptoms. Ah unhappy Patients! what Ministers of Nature
have you got? I speak not to deaf ones, as being incapable, but to you who love
the Truth, I devote and offer this my work.

Dissolve then Vitriol of Iron (I say of Iron, which has no smell of Copper;
if This cannot be had, prepare That as Nature her self shows the way, Hippoc.
Chymic. Chap. 28. For That which is Artificial, of the Distilled Acid of
Vitriol and Iron, will not serve here; Tartar Vitriolate of great (...).
see Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 17.) The Roman is the best; Instill into this clear
Solution, the purest Alcaly of Tartar, which presently attracts and consumes
the Natural Acid; The Acid and Alcaly do not wax hot in this Conjunction, as
before in the Common Preparation of Vitriolate Tartar; because the Fire, or the
Sulphur of the Immature Metal covets the Fire, and for the greatest part is
separated from the Natural Spirit, as by degrees I shall Mechanically
demonstrate ad oculum. If this Composition seem to thee too thick, so that the
Immature Metal cannot fall down, dilute it with Water, and it will the sooner
fall. Let it not be tedious to thee, to find the Moment of Saturation, which
after the first Filtration will easily follow; or if the Alcaly do overcome the
Acid, it produces no other inconvenience, then the loss of time in digestion,
That the Immature Metal may subside (see Hippoc. Chymicus Chap. 10.) Exhale
leasurely, unto the Cuticle, the clear Liquor placed in a Bath of Dew in a
Glass Vessel (being acuminated under or in the bottom, to the end, that if
there be any of the Immature Metal, it may be separated in the heat at the
bottom) and when it is cold, you shall find Splendent Chrystals, which do
neither heat nor turn the stomach, as Common Vitriolate Tartar does; for they
have not the Sour and Corrosive Sulphurous Liquamen of the Immature Metal,
and therefore are much to be prized in Physic. Lo here the Rudiments out of
the Hippocratical and Pythagorical School, which are enough for the Ingenious;
neither is it lawful to discover All plainly; These and many other Things are
to be reserved for Our followers: Concerning the Virtues of this Vitriolate
Tartar, see Crollius, and you will act securely: I say no more, for it shows it
self to be a most powerful Hercules.

It Is true indeed, That one Ounce of this Vitriolate Tartar, requires at the
beginning about three Ounces of Alcaly, because first it mortifies the Immature
Sulphur of the Metal, and afterward draws forth the Natural Acid. An Example
of which Operation I have given Chap. 3. concerning the Lixivium of
Sope-boilers, viz. where Vegetable Alcaly does first mortify the Acid of the
Calcined Flint, which is unfit for the Lie, and does concrete it into a rocky
substance, Contraries coagulated by Contraries.
for contraries are Coagulated by contraries; and afterward the same Vegetable
Alcaly does elicite and draw forth from the Calcined Flint a most powerful
Alcaly, because like is dissolved. draw^ and joined to its like; The same
Action is also performed in this our regenenerated Vitriol (or Vitriolate
Tartar, call it as you please) yet with this difference, That the Alcaly of
Tartar is turned with the Immature Metal into its Coagulum; and afterward it
absorbs the Natural Acid; which difference is to be observed, because it is
useful. See also Hippoc. Chymicus Chap. 3. and 4. where the Example of Soap is
not without Cause propounded, nor is it to be thought useless, as heedless
people think. This our Vitriolate Tartar is not constant in the Fire, but for
the half Volatile, according to the property of the Father which begat it,
whereas on the contrary the Common Tartar remains constant in the Fire, by
reason of the Metalline Sulphur, which the Alcaly had imbibed, and therefore it
is not Volatile or Distillable, because it has not got the Metalline Soul,
which perseveres in Fire, Artificial Vitriol of Mars and Venus.
as I have above likewise showed.

If therefore Spirit of Common Vitriol be informed with the Soul of Copper or
Iron, it is no wonder if being poured on these Two perfect Metals, it dissolves
Them, and with Them, make a counterfeit show of Vitriol; for, like is easily
joined to like, fire to fire, water to water Spirit of Vitriol, being
distilled, delights in Sulphur; and in its like in Mars and Venus, it is
pleased with it, it pierces into their Bowels, it dissolveth both Metals. and
again assumes a body, and with Them, resembles Natural Vitriol. But having no
Dominion over Them, it cannot perfect the said Metals, because it has no more
than is sufficient for its own sustentation; for if you again separate the Acid
from the said Metals, by Distillation, the same Spirit of Vitriol will return
as you poured it on, neither perfecter nor better, and the remaining Caput
Mortuum is melted into the same Copper, that it was, before it was dissolved,
or into Crocus Martis, if it had dissolved the Iron without any alteration;
neither does it come forth better, or worse then other Crocus's, however
prepared, as I have showed, and shall further show; for Nature is the same in
every thing, as both Pythagoras and Hippocrates have taught.

If therefore Spirit of Vitriol make an impression on Copper, by means of
Sulphur (as I have showed) and yet can take away nothing of the Virtue of the
Copper, either by Maceration, or Solution, Coagulation and Distillation; much
less can other Acids, of what kind soever? It is both admirable and pleasant
thoroughly to search into this Matter, for it is of great concernment, as to the
Commonwealth of Medicine, so also to all Virtuosi, and to the Numerous, the
Famous, and in our times, the Flourishing Company of Apothecaries. Aerugo made.
of Plates of Copper and Grape^.
make therefore Aerugo, or Verdigrease, of thin Plates of Copper with Recent
Grapes, thin Webs of Linen or Silk being interposed, adding thereto whatsoever
pleases you, in the rude way of operation, Vinegar, ^V;rine, (of Women
doubtless, otherwise it would not bear the Name of Venus,) tAllum, and Nitre.
The Deans of the Austrian and Norimberg College, with the other Approvers, do
affirm, That this miscellany does not, in time wax sour, yea that the Acid
vapor of the ingredients cannot pass through the thin web to the body of the
Copper to corrode it, but if this can savor (I will not say of Truth) but of
Probability, let the Skilful judge: How Aerugo is made, Dioscorides Teaches
rightly, and without fraud, Five Masterless Thieves and Robbers, fighting under
the gross Banner of Ignorance, do assault a frail Female, (let modest youth
take notice, that this chaste bashful Female is clad with a thin Vail, that she
may not appear naked in the sight of Five such Soldiers) who for a long time
makes a stout resistance; but seeing Hercules himself cannot long withstand
Two, she at last is made a prey, and with one of the Robbers (i. e.) Vinegar,
as I shall show, she is turned into biting Aerugo, imitating the nature of the
Acid. This Matter is called by our Ancestos Green Aerugo, but it has not been
called by the Name of Vitriol, because it has not the properties of Vitriol;
and therefore they called it Aerugo, to intimate that the Five Robbers
altogether had not the force or power to extract the least Virtue from the
Copper, or of altering it in the least point, Copper is not destroyed by Acid
Liquors or Vapors.
but only of corroding its Corporeity; for they have no dominion over It,
neither do they return the richer from It: And though there be many that do
boast of such a thing, yet their boasting is vain; for it is established by the
Decree of the great Creator, that the more noble should not degenerate into the
less noble, or the better, into the worse, and so pass into the servile form of
a slave.

Wherefore Copper (or if you will, Venus) is now turned into Verdigrease biting
and rough, and is dissolved in Distilled Vinegar (out of which it was made) and
again is Congealed into Verdigreese, the Faeces being rejected, etc. Spirit of
Venus made.
This purged Aerago or eroded Brass, is distilled with an open Fire out of a
plated Retort, and afrerwards is rectified out of Sand. Lo here, Thou Mystes of
Nature, This is that Spirit of Venus, and asecret menstruum, as Alcahest (see
Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 29.) which the Deans and Doctors of the Austrian and
Norinberg Physic, with their Fellows, do adore for the Son of Venus, of whom
Epictetus says well, Many are word-wife, not deed-wise. The pro^city and
filthy licentiousness that Venus is accused of by the many, but vain clamours
of false witnesses, viz. that It admits of Five Lovers in one Act, has drawn
Philosophers not only to the admiration, but even to the unbelief thereof;
unless they had also known, That in the Court of Accusation, a multitude of
Witnesses is many times loathsome, and suspected by the Judges; especially
since they are not ignorant, that in Nature Love is so far from admiting Five,
that it endures not a Third; whence it is, That they rather give sentence
against the Accusers, and say, That as Venus upon Examination, notwithstanding
the false Imputations of her Accusers, is found chaste and constant to one
Male; so it may likewise happen, that any man may grow Famous from such
Accusations, as many have done, who were otherwise unknown. It Is known to be
True, That indeed Venus is Lascivious, Copper grow green from all Acids.
and that she admits every Male, (that is all, Acids as well Occult as
Manifest, as Vinegar, Oil, Suet, Sugar, Honey, etc. I say, they all wax green
with Copper) without any difference into her Embraces; so that all Males are
hot in Love (i. e.) wax green) with Her. But (witness Alcaly, the Mother of
Natural Things) She is never ravished with the delight of any of them, to a del
quium, but only with her own Brother. But that this discourse may appear more
clear, we will setch the Doctrine of it a little higher, viz. That the Acid of
every Vegetable, drawn forth either by Fermentation on Distillation, or
Expression, whether it be Occult or Manifest, if it be poured on the Alcaly of
Tartar, does inform the fame Alcaly, with the Soul of That, from whence it was
taken; and it is made a Salt of the same Acid Nature, as I have showed in the
beginning of this Chapter, by the Grains of Kermes (in which the Deans with
their Fellows deny, that there is any Acid (i. e.) any Seminal Virtue) and by
Meal (out of which They boast they can distill Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack^
see also Hippoc. Chymic. Chap 2. and the end of Chap. 17.

So also Vinegar of Wine, distilled and cast upon Alcaly of Tartar, to fatiety,
is Coagulated into Tartar, Artificial Tartar.
and (...) of the same Nature with the Wine from whence the Vinegar was taken.
This Tartar, if it be distilled out of a Retort, with Fire of Sand, or an open
Fire, there comes forth a fat Oil and bitterish Liquor; as in the Distillation
of Common Tartar.

I have also showed the same thing, Artificial Silt.
in the beginning of this Chapter, concerning Nitre, concerning Salt,
concerning Alum, and also concerning Vitriol; for all Acid Liquor joined with
Alcaly, does impregnate it with the Soul of that Body from which it was
reduced, and forms a Body to it self ad Lubitum, (i.e.) like its own proper
Nature.

Let us see now, Spirit of Venus ^reduced to an Examen.
for a Trial of the Verity and Glory of Noble Physic whether That Vinegar
Distilled from Verdigrease (which they do so solicitously endeavor to keep
from the Examen of Learned Men) be the Legitimate Son of Venus, or no?

I have showed, That Acid is the one only Spirit of the World, and the Child of
the Sun, which is not found naked upon the earth, but refusing to be alone, It
assumes Matter, wherewith it dwells, increases, regerminates, and is
multiplied, sometimes as the Artificer pleases, for his proper ends. This when
it falls on the seed of Copper (that I may so speak) it clothes it self with
the Nature of Copper in a long and laborious work; Therefore it is not
separable from Copper it self, unless by the total destruction of the Copper,
as the example of Salt of Tartar in my Hippoc. Chymic. Chap 10. does show; for
carrying in it, the least Odor of a Metalline Nature, it cannot descend to the
Nature of Vegetables, And the same Spirit falling upon the Seed of a Vine,
Clothes it self there with the indoles of the Vine, and in like manner cannot
ascend to the Nature of Minerals; as I have demonstrated out of Lully, and by
Experience: yea it is not separated from the Disposition or Indoles of the
Vine, unless, being dissolved or loosned from its Body by Nature and Art, it
return to the Element of Air, whence it came, as Hippoc. Chymic. in the
forecited 10. and 18. Chapters shows. The same is also to be understood of
Salt, of Vitriol, of Nitre, and of all the Things in the World; for this cause,
because Art cannot create Seeds; he that boasts he can do it, Cosmopolita
proves him to be a Deceiver; so that every Spirit, either Occultly or
Manifestly Acid, has but one only Soul within it, with which, it being
inseparably joined, does constitute the Form of That Body, in which it
determines to dwell; from which, wehn it is extracted, and again instilled upon
a new Alcaly; and is absorbed by it, it takes upon it the like Body, wherewith
it was clothed before, or from whence it was first extracted, but that Body
somewhat clearer; an Infallible Argument, That a Spirit either Occultly or
Manifestly Acid, is the Vehicle of the Soul, and the Bond uniting Soul and Body
together: And unless the Spirit of all Things in the Universe were Acid, it
could not invisibly carry in its Belly or Womb the Aima or Soul of the Body; as
Hermes and Experience Teach.

Let us now return to the Child new born, which the Sworn Servant of Venus have
lately begun to nominate and to commend for the Son or Spirit of Venus,
peremptorily also affirming, That, This has drawn mighty Virtues, from his
Mother or Copper; but they consider not, that the Virtues of Things, as also
the force of Purgatives, do confist in their Soul; which I have showed in the
first Chapter, to be a Child of the Sun, The Virtue of Purgatives whence?
and to be inseparably joined to the Spirit of that Thing, both which do
constitute that Eximious Virtue, which is in Copper: which Spirit ought again
to manifest it self in Alcaly, if it did flow in an Acid form. as I have
experimentally showed to the Eyc, concerning other Spirits, and concerning
Alcaly of Tartar. Let us now proceed to Experience, and to make Trial of this
Acid, and Rectifyed Spirit of Venus, saturated to Susliciency, Spirit of Venus
in Alcaly made Tartar.
with Alcaly of Tartar, as I have formerly taught conconcerning Salt, Vinegar,
and Distilled Nitre; (i. e.) Thus, Pour so much of This Spirit on the Alcaly of
Tartar, till the hissing cease (near upon equal parts) suffer the abounding, or
exceeding Phlegm to exhale, or if you will, distill it carefully to Siceity
(distill that Phlegm from an high Glass in Balneo, and there will come forth
Aqua Ardens, see Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 18.) and you shall sind regenerated
Tartar of the same Nature, Condition and Property, that That was, which was
above generated from Vinegar of Wine; for it is the very same; for if it hid
any thing of the Nitre, the Alum, or the Copper hid in it, as they ignorantly
give forth, they would all be manifested in the Alcaly of Tartar; as I have
Mechanically showed above. But it must needs be, that This Spirit can have no
other Instruments but distilled Vinegar, since it can only make a Body of
Tartar for it self: Whence this Spirit has been presently known by
Philosophers, Spirit of Venus which is as Alcahest, is known to be Vinegar.
not for the Immortal Son of Venus, or as Alcahest, but for the True Genuine
Brother of Vinegar of Wine; and that not Spurious neither, as my Revilers and
Reproachers have published to the World, but the Legitimate Son of the Vine,
which hereafter will count it an impious thing to be reviled by unskilful
Masters; Therefore in this regeneration, He was willing again to discover
himself to the Curious, and to the Lovers of Truth, for the True and Natural
Brother of Vinegar of Wine (i. e.) for Distilled Vinegar. Now that nothing may
be wanting to this Enquiry, but all doubt taken away, viz. that This Spirit,
which they dream to be the Child of Venus, has acquired no Constancy, no
Immortality, or excellent Virtues from the Copper, nor that it is, as Alcahest,
as the Deans with their Fellows do cant, you may learn by this Experiment. Take
this regenerated Tartar (to wit, from the Imaginary Spirit of Venus, and the
Alcaly of Tartar) distill It out of a Retort, as you did before, and there will
extil an Oil of a loathsome smell, together with a bitterish Water; as I have
showed a little before from regenerated Tartar, out of simply Distilled
Vinegar: Out of what has been spoken, it appears, that whatsoever is distilled
from the Alcaly of Tartar, which is impregnated with Distilled Vinegar (i. e.)
the bitterish Water, Aqua Ardens, and the Oil, taking Flame, the same thing is
distilled from Alcaly of Tartar, impregnated with fained Spirit of Venus, to
wit, bitterish Water, Aqua Adrens, and Oil taking Flame: Spirit of Venus is
Distilled Vinegar.
and so, That Spirit of Venus, since it has all the Properties and Operatious
of Vinegar, is nothing else, nor never will be, than distilled Vinegar, Witness
Aristotle and Experience. But leaving this puny, vain, and futile Society, to
please themselves in their foolish Detrectings, I convert my Speech to you, O
ye famous Lights of the World, That you may judge of the Truth herein, not that
I would trouble you, to vindicate it from the fained and rash Contumelies of
such clamorous Reproachers, since it appears out of Pliny, That when Frogs
croak more than ordinary, it is a sign of a Tempest ensuing: supposing then,
but not granting, that one drop of Acid contains only the 8200 part of the
Eximious Virtue of Copper, I say, this so small part, ought yet under the heat
of Fermentation, to extend it self, and to regenerate, if not in Vegetable
Alcaly, yet at least in Metalline, as the order of Fermentation elsewhere
shows; so that it would turn, though not much, yet a small quantity of the
Metalline Alcaly, into Copper, no otherwise, then the Virtue of Acid
Vegetables, and the mid-sort of Minerals does transmute Alcaly of Tartar into a
Salt of its own proper Nature, as I have before said and proved; but as the
Antecedent and their Premises are false and favor of gross ignorance, so is
the Consequence. Again, supposing, but not granting, That Vinegar did carry off
with it, such eximious Virtues from Copper (as they unlearnedly and without
truth affirm) yet I could never find, eithe ramongst Philosophers or
Physicians, that It was assumed within the Body, but whatsoever was got from
the Copper was always used outwardly for Chirurgical Operations. And although
mighty Virtues might be drawn forth and distilled out of Copper by Vinegar,
which I have showed to be impossible, why is not the same Eximious Virtue drawn
forth, with less labor, out of immature Copper, since it is easier to go one
Mile, than two? Why should my regenerated Vitriol, prepared from Crude Vitriol
of Mars, procure monstrous Vomitings and Suffocations, This sained, yet pr^sed,
Spirit of Venus, is (...) a counter ^^ P^^acta and Alcahist.
is if you draw forth such Eximious Virtues from mature Copper by Vinegar; to
which you subjoyn these losty, but most false words, This most praiseworthy
Spirit, is not only of great use in Physic, seeing in highly Cures and
Relieves the Epilepsy, Appolexy, Histerical and Hypochondriatal Listempers, but
is as the Liquor Alcahest, and not as other Acid Spirits, which by Solution do
suffer and are destroyed, and so turned into another. ens: See Hippoc. Chy.
mic. Chap. 29.

Now let the Reader, who loves the Truth, judge, whether any thing could have
been devised more sottish, than to affirm That the regenerated Vitriol of
Philosophers educed from an Immature Mine of Iron, is pernicious and deadly,
when we see, that every year some Myriads of Men do drink, even in great
quantity, Acid Waters, saturated with Immature Iron and Natural Spirit, and
that with great benefit and advantage; and also That the great Imaginary
Virtue, extracted with Vinegar out of Mature Copper (if there were any such) is
a Panacea. I may very aptly apply hither, That of Plautus, nothing can be more
foolishly, sottishly, or falsely spoken.

It remains that we bring That most praised Spirit of Venus, which they fay is
as Alcahest, by dissolving some Body unto an Examen.

Now Alcahest is described by Helmont to be an Eximious Liquor, Alcahest what?
Pharm. 14
ti be got by the Art or Labor of Sophia Im^g. Form. S. 8.
which does not only resolve every visible Body into its first Matter, Verb.
explic.
but is moreover Immortaland Incorruptable Arcana Paracels.
it putrifies Nature, and takes away all Diseases Potesl. Medic. S. 4. 2.
but it is not given to putative and empty Doctors, but to well Lined and rich
Understandings Arboravita in sine.
So Helmont: Now let the equal Reader Judge, whether this praised Vinegar of
these Prateing and Wordy Doctors, which is Distilled from Copper be alike in
Virtue to Alcahest? Truly, if this their foolish Assertion were profoundly
examined, and laid before the Eyes of the Readers, it would move Nauseousness
and Indignation; and therefore I shall discover their Vanity by Experience
alone.

Dissolve then at least one Dram of Red Powdered Corral, Spirit of Venus
dissolves Coral.
in This Vinegar, which they proclaim to be the praised Spirit of Venus; dry
the Solution in a Bath: In like manner dissolve another Dram of pounded
Corals, in Vinegar simply Distilled, Vinegar dissolves Coral.
which likewise Exsiccate in Balneo: Diligently gather up those Powders, and
weigh them severally in a Balance, and you shall find the dissolved and dried
Corals to be increased half a Dram, as well by the Spirit of Venus (which
They count as Alcahest) as by the Vinegar Vulgarly Distilled: So that the
Corals have imbibed as much Acid Salt from the counterfeit Spirit of Venus, as
from the Distilled Vinegar. Whence it again appears, Spirit of Venus is
Vinegar, not Alcahest.
That This shows it self to be Vinegar; because it is so indeed, and not the
Liquor Alcahest; as the lofty Doctors would impose upon rude and ignorant
people.

Again, They urge, That this praised Spirit of Venus, does dissolve Pearls
without bubbles, and leaves the cortices untouched. Truly this may seem a
wonder to Men altogether unskilful in the Art of Physic, and who never learned
the Rudiments thereof; but methinks it should seem a trivial and slight thing
to the Deans, and the rest of the Approvers. For what ordinary, or mean
Physician can be ignorant, that Vinegar simply Distilled, does perform the same
thing (though in a longer tract of time) if you cast whole Pears into It;
Spirit of Venus is (...) Vinegar.
and therefore your spirit of Venus which you account as Alcahest, will not
cease to be distilled Vinegar.

But why the skins, or pellicles of Pearls are not dissolved by either of the
Vinegars, the reason is, Their fatness and unitive glue, the feat of the Child
of the Sun, which is proper and familiar to all Crustaceous Creatures, to
Fishes, and the Membranes of Animals; The counterfeit Son of Venus, however
extolled by vain Approvers, does never touch this Glue in stones of Crabbs,
Pearls, etc. it has no access to them, it is Leprous in comparison of them,
and therefore is not admitted to the Princely-Seat unknown to Idiots.

But why Vinegar does corrode the Medulla of Pearls, of the aforesaid stones
and Corals, etc. The cause is, That Nature has put least part of Acid into
most things (as I have showed in the second Chapter) which least part, unless
it be multiplied by Art or Nature, is easily suppressed, by the more powerful;
I will give an Example in the aforesaid dissolved and dried Corals, in which
there is the least portion of Natural Acid, which being oppressed by the
counterfeit Spirit of Venus is made subject to It; hence they are increased in
weight.

Again, Dissolve these dried Corals in some water, either Distilled, or common
clear water; let the Solution rest, that the Turbid may subside (which they
improperly call Faces) which nevertheless you must separate, and drop into the
clear Solution a little of the spirit of Vitriol of Sulphur, which overcoming
the counterfeit Spirit of Venus, not by its Acidity, but the Nobleness of its
Soul, cast out the Vinegar (which they call Spirit of Venus) from its seat and
place, and does assume the possession of the Region of the Spirit of Vitriol,
and with the Corals represents the form of curdled Milk; but the Counterfeit
Spirit of Venus being now expelled by the more Noble, is diluted and sticks to
the supernatant water, and is mingled with it.

Wash both these Coagulums as much as you may, and dry them severally in brown
Paper, and you shall have Magistery of Corals, equal in weight, as well from
the counterfeit Spirit of Venus, Spirit of Venus is distilled vinegar.
as from the Vinegar simply distilled, because it is the same.

But take that water so washed from the Corals, in which, as I have said, the
counterfeit Spirit of Venus, or some simple distilled Vinegar was diluted (if
you have otherwise warily poured on the Spirit of Vitriol, for if you have
carelessly, and without judgment powered on more than the Coral will imbibe, it
will not swim atop; but I suppose the affusion was skilfully made) and instill
into it Alcaly of Tartar, till the Motion of Ebullition cease; exhale the
abounding Water in a Glass Vessel placed in Sand, and you shall find
regenerated Tartar, as I have showed above, from the Counterfeit Spirit of
Venus, or Vinegar, simply distilled, imbibed in Alcaly of Tartar, for it is the
same, by this infallible Argument, That in the Corals dissolved and dried in a
Bath, there remained only half a Dram of Acid Salt from the feigned Spirit of
Venus. That Acid Salt being separated from the Corals, by Spirit of Vitriol,
cannot be alone; wherefore it guards it self again in Elementary Water, as in
his Mothers lap, and diffuses it self in her; and becomes again Counterfeit
Spirit of Venus. And unless Elementary water did contain Occult Alcaly in its
belly, Acid Salt could not inhabit in it; because that alone it is not
sufficient for it self: as Hippocrates has taught us, De Diaeta. Simple
distilled Vinegar performs also the same thing; so that it now appears; even
to the most unskilful-in Physic, that this most celebrated Spirit of Venus,
here and every where, is nothing else, and savours of nothing else, but
Distilled Vinegar, whatsoever Bugbears its Adorers would fright us with. And
although Crollius, Beguinus, and other Writers of the Elements of Chemistry, in
express words do call it, Solvent Vinegar, from whom the process of this
Vinegar is stolen word for word, as my Hippoc. Chym. shows Chap. 29. Yet This
poison of Ignorance has infected, not only Austria, but almost all upper
Germany; witness these unskilful Approvers and their soolish Partisans with
their Rythmes. It would be no woder, if, as the Romans of old, so Magistrates
now, would eject out of their Cities and Commonwealths, such Harlotry
Collegiates, and such a Nest of Bablers, who do scrible of things unknown, even
to themselves, to their Neighbors hurt. Low Germany is yet free from this
Contagion, so is Italy and France, and for the future, I hope by this Antidote
they will be preserved.

Now, Why Vinegar distilled from Verdigrease, Vinegar from and Eruga, why more
Acid than Simple?
in a small quantity, does more powerfully dissolve Corals, than That which is
distilled the vulgar way? I have showed the reason before, viz. that it
happens, because Vinegar distilled the common way, is as yet diluted with much
Water; but the Elementary Water is evaporate from That, which is distilled from
Aerugo, by gradual Exhalation, no otherwise than in the distillation of Green
and Humid Vitriol, for then the Acid Salt being long in the Liquor, would be
very weak; but when the humid (which they call Phlegm) has by degrees exhaled
and evaporated before distillation, the Acid Salt must needs be more powerful
and strong in a lesser quantity of water; for Light by how much more
contracted, by so much the more efficacious. This distilled Spirit of Vitriol,
if it again corrode any thing, either Iron, or Copper, and be coagulated with
it, and again be re-distilled from it, the Liquor indeed returns Acid of the
same nature, but much more subtle, because that in all Coagulation, every Salt
or Saline Spirit loses of its Radical Humid (what that is, I shall show anon)
when of necessity it must lay down its Earth (the Vulgar call it its Faex) and
so the Lumen must be more contracted. But from the repeated Coagulation and
Distillation, It returns more watery; and at last returns to Elements; as I
have Mechanically showed in Alcaly of Tartar (for Example) in my Hippoc.
Chymic. Chap. 10.

After the same manner and fashion, Counterfeit Spirit of Venus, by repeated
Solution, Coagulation, and Distillation, re-passes into Elements; for as often
as it dissolves Corals, or any other thing (I began with Corals and will end
with Them) and is afterward Coagulated and Exsiccated with the same Corals, so
often it lays down its Earth or Alcaly, and as much Earth as it lays down, so
much Acid Salt the Corals do drink up, because this cannot be alone, and the
Vinegar becomes so much the more Aqueous, and by repeated labor, at last
returns to Element (i. e.) into Insipid Water; but the Earth and Acid Salt gave
weight to the Corals, which also pass out of them by repeated Distillation, and
go to their own Country, after the same manner as I have showed concerning Wine
in Hippoc. Chymic. chap. 18.

Now that Vinegar or Spirit of Vitriol, poured on Copper, Why Vinegar returns
Acid from Copper, and not from Alcaly.
and re-distilled, do return Acid; but from the Alcaly of Tartar, Insipid and
Aqueous, the reason is, because Alcaly being a Vacuum, saturated it self with
Acid Salt which dwelt in the Aqueous Liquor; whence the Acid Salt converts and
transmutes the Alcaly into its own nature. But Copper is not a Vacuum, for the
Acid, or Form of Copper does overcome its Alcaly, and therefore it does not
absorb Acid Salts; and though they act, and are busy about It, and do erode
its body; yet they can make no impression of any of their Form or Virtues, nor
can they destroy It, because Copper has obtained a constant Soul from Nature,
or to speak in Plautus's Phrase it has Acid in its breast.

Again, Why from Lead insipid?
They demand why Vinegar is re-distilled from Copper, even as it was poured on,
but from Lead Insipid? Although I am almost ashamed to handle This, or the like
Childish Question, yet being moved with commiseration toward those unskilful
and sluggish Doctors, hoping that this my present answer may be for their
future amendment, I shall willingly repeat my former answer; I told you that
Copper has a prevailing Acid, whence it is that it resists not only Vinegar,
and the Counterfeit Spirit of Venus, but also all Acid Minerals; but Lead has
obtained but a very little particle of It by Nature, and therefore it imbibes
every Acid, in hopes of Perfection (that I may so speak) as I have showed in
Alcalyes. This is the cause why Lead is similitudinarily called by
Philosophers, The first matter of Metals, or the Alcaly of Metals, in respect
of other Metals, which are more or less richer in Acid. Gold is most Acid, and
therefore most perfect, as I have showed in the 2. Chapter. See how easily I
have extricated my self out of these great Difficulties!

Some of Ours may wonder why I spend time in a matter so plain, for Basilius
Valentinus an Age ago has taught us how to prepare this Vinegar out of Aerugo,
in juventure, and he called it not by the name of Spirit of Venus, Spirit of
Venus is Vinegar.
but Vinegar (for he knew well (so do not the Deans and their Fellows) that it
was established by the decree of the Supreme Creator, That the more excellent
Nature, should not degenerate into the worser) which is proved by the remaining
Faex or Caput Mortuum left in the Retort, after the distillation of this
Vinegar, which, with Borax, by an easy Fusion returns into Copper; an evident
Argument That Copper lost none of its Substance, or excellent Virtue (as they
say:) See more in my Hppocrates Chymicus, chap. 29.

For conclusion of this Chapter, I repeat, That whatsoever the World has, is
begot, preserved, and multiplied by the Acid Spirit, either Occult or Manifest,
to which it owes its All; And That the Soul dwells in the Acid, and is
inseparably bound to it; and that the Body, or Alcaly, is informed according to
the property of the Acid Spirit. If therefore Nature be alike in every thing,
and Art does imitate Nature, as Pythagoras, Hippocrates, and Experience teach,
it must needs follow, That when the Acid Spirit of Vinegar, distilled from
Verdigrease, has corroded Corals, and has been absorbed by Them, and
coagulated with them, then the Corals will be endued with the properties and
conditions of Vinegar; not that the innate Acid, or Form of Corals does perish,
but only is suppressed by a more powerful Acid, as I have showed before in the
Magistery. If therefore your celebrated Spirit of Venus, lawfully and duly (as
they say) exhibited (though they never yet showed the way) helps
Hippochondriacal, Epileptical, and Hysterical Distempers, etc. the Magistery of
Corals (which with a proud and swollen breast, they call Our Soluble Magistery)
made with Spirit of Venus, must needs perform much greater things? if
otherwise, the Spirit must animate the Body, to whom it is joined; as I have
hitherto clearly and experimentally shown, and shall hereafter show.

But as their Spirit of Venus lawfully and duly administered, is the best to
season a Vinegar Vessel, so also it has, and will always retain the nature of
Wine-Vinegar, till it become like Alcahest.

But our Master Deans, with the rest of their Colledg-Company, out of the
treasure of their Liberality, have lately discovered to us a great Secret,
which had lain hid to this very day; Vinegar cleanses.
viz. That their Counterfeit Spirit of Venus helps the Toothache: neither could
we learn it out of Dioscorides his History of Vinegar, unless it had been
discovered to the World in a Dream, or by hidden Revelation: But as Vinegar
does dissolve Corals, so it scours off, and takes away the hardened Mucus or
Filth about the Teeth, that the Gums may be again united to the Teeth; for
sound and sharp-pointed Gums admit not Pain, but when they are forced to recede
by Filth, and the Teeth are never so little denudated or bared, presently upon
the solution of a continuum, the Blood sours, putrefies, and is coagulated
there into an hard Faex (which some, but improperly, call Tartar) which Faex,
when it is abraded or taken off with Vinegar, or Spirit of Salt, or else with
an Instrument of Iron, presently the Teeth find relief.

And thus you have, O ye sincere lovers of Truth, the entire Tragoedy, the Rise
and Overthrow of this Celebrated Spirit of Venus, which, with all its Eximious
Virtues, cannot cure the slothfulness of these Approvers and Subscribers; so
that it happens to them, as to those men's Children, who hire other men's Farms;
for They seeing their Fathers (they themselves being yet but Children)
gathering in the fruits, and commanding the laborers, do presently conclude
the soil is theirs, and so are very Jocund: but when they grow up, and
understand that there was nothing Theirs, but the labor of Tilling the Ground,
then their Mirth is turned into Sorrow. Even such are these men, and as we read
in Sendivogius, whatsoever the Alchymist would have out of Sulphur, it ended in
a snuff, the same happens to these Deans with the other Approvers; Whatsoever
Eximious Virtues they would have from Copper, it is still naught but Vinegar.

CHAP. VII. That no Matter can be so destroyed, but It will remain under some
Form or other.
I Showed in the foregoing Chapter, that Acids do draw Alcalyes to their own
properties, and that Both are changed into Salts. But those which are not fully
Alcalyes, when a noble Acid supervenes upon them, their internal Acid is indeed
abated, but not so wasted or destroyed, that any other new thing can be
Regenerated out of it.

I will now proceed to prove by the following Argument, and that Mechanically,
That all Alcalyes do, after a sort, retain of the Form, with which the Mixta
were saturated, before they were reduced by Fire, into Alcaly; of which see
Hippoc. Chymic. Dissolve half an ounce of Sublimate Mercury, in fifty ounces of
Common Water, distilled, or at least a dram of Sublimate in twelve ounces of
Water. Into a part of this clear Solution, instill by drops, but with a quick
infusion, fixed Alcaly of Tartar in the form of Liquor, or (as they call it)
Oil of Tartar per deliquium; which in a moment separates and absorbs the
Acidity, for the greatest part, from the Mercury, and the Mercury falls into
the bottom of the Vessel, in the form of Powder obscurely Red. This Operation
is called by Apothecaries, and their Operators, and by all Lovers of Physic,
Precipitation; which name I shall also retain and use.

Out of the Faeces of distilled Vinegar, burnt into Ashes, Alcaly of Tartar is
elicited by water, and though It be produced out of the same Vine with Wine,
yet it Precipitates Mercury, dissolved as before, sparkling and splendent.

But when the same Alcaly is calcined to Redness with a moist fire, then the
same Mercury falls like pounded Cinnabar.

To the Tartar being burnt, if you superadd the Calx, and extract the Alcaly
with Simple Water, the Mercury is Precipitated Rutilant. Calx of it self, does
not Precipitate Mercury so dissolved, since it is Salt from Acid and Alcaly;
and they who against Experience do deny the saltness of Calx, are to be
reckoned in the number of Fools. But if the Liquor of Mercury afore-spoken of,
into which a piece of Calx has been injected, be suffered to rest for some
hours, so long until the Acid, which contains the dissolved Mercury, can
suppress That in the Calx, then indeed Mercury is forced to fall by little and
little, and to stick round about the Calx, like Minium; a delightful spectacle
to Curious Eyes.

Alcaly extracted from the Herb Kaly, being incinerated, does Precipitate
Mercury much more obscure than the former.

The Lixivium, which Sope-Masters call Magistra, which consists of Calx and
artificial Alcaly, yields Mercury darkly Yellow.

Out of Spain there is brought an Alcaly (whether Simple, or Compound, is
uncertain?) yet it Precipitates Mercury of a Tauney color: These Examples
concerning Fixed Alcalyes (for Soap, and Glass) which do admit Reverberation in
Ashes neither do easily perish from an acute Flame, may suffice; I will add
certain Alcalyes in Physic, which do not bear sharp reverberation in Ashes,
unless they be mixed with the former; And These are made of the Herbs called
Cephalickes, as of Rosemary, Lavender, Rue, etc. all Hot, and of a Grateful
Smell. I say, all these are indeed Alcalyes, but not fusible in Ashes, for they
easily fly away, and are therefore Medicinal. All these, be they never so many,
do cast Mercury so dissolved into a Reddish shining Powder.

So also Celandine affords Alcaly, or Precipitates Mercury most red, so that
John Isack Holland does not unskilfully, but excellently and learnedly speak,
He that knows not Salts, will never perform any thing in Art.

All the foresaid Alcalyes, as well those burnt by a sharp Flame for Soap and
Nitre, as the Medicinal ones, from Cephalic Herbs, do Precipitate Mercury so
dissolved (as I have said) of a different color, a manifest Argument, that
their Form is not totally consumed by the Fire, but that they preserve some
properties of their Simples, from whence they were extracted; as Geber says,
Salt retains the property of that thing, from whence it had its Original: To
which the Experience, which I have shown, bears witness.

Heretosore I was of opinion, that the difference of Colors in Sublimate
Mercury, dissolved as before, and Precipitated by Alcalyes, did proceed from
the Fire, acting more or less upon the Alcaly, but at length, by frequent
Experience, I have found my mistake; for day to day, and night to night shows
Knowledge we are not all born Masters, nor can we all be Lullies; but Age,
frequent Use, and Experience do manifest the Truth. I have observed that
Hippocrates, and Galen also, being better informed, did Conrect, their Errors;
so that it is no shame for me, a slow witted Person, to amend the mistakes
committed in my youth especially, seeing had not Forerunners, from whom I might
excerp any thing, as they have, who seek for Glory in gathering together
Receipts; niether had I any other guide, save the fountain of all Virtue: so
that I have bolted out the Truth (by immense Meditation and Labor, and not a
little Expense) from the fountain of Nature, by my own Industry: Wherefore to
demonstrate the constancy of Forms, be it known to you, That I can find no
better nor shorter way, than that which I have showed by the alterations of
Mercury, upon the affusion of Alcalyes. For when I endeavor to declare the
Forms, with the same labor, the Precipitation of Mercury does voluntarily
offer and discover it self; which yet running, being dissolved in Aqua Fortis,
upon the affusion of Alcaly of Tartar, is precipitated into a color obscurely
Yellow.

All the aforesaid Precipitated Powders of Mercury, are of a Caustic and
Corrosive Property, because the Mercury assumes the nature of that thing with
which it is first mixed; and the Caustickness is not wasted off by any
Artifice, but by fire alone, as Hippocrates Chymicus shows.

In like manner, Mercury dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and evaporated to Siccity,
the Fire being increased, that the bottom of the Vessel may be Red-hot, is made
a most Red sparkling Powder, and is called in Physic, the Precipitate of
Vigoe, because Johana de Vigoe, a Chyrurgeen of great Fame, was the Inventor of
it; on which Red and sparkling Powder, The Precipitate of Vigo.
if you pour Alcaly of Tartar, and leave it for an hour, in a warm place, the
whole Powder will become obscurely Yellow, because the Alcaly has in part
absorbed the Caustic Acid left by the Aqua Fortis.

The Virtue of this red and sparkling Precipitate, is strongly, and almost
without any biting Pain, to absume and cat up the thicker Sordes of Ulcers,
Callous, proud Flesh, Imposthumations in the Fundament, and other like
Excrescencies. Yea, it cures all Sordid, Putrid, Mattery, Callous Shingles,
sometimes alone, sometime mixed in Plasters, or Unguents, as necessity
requires.

The same Johannes de Vigoe, made a Plainster of Quick-Mercury with many other
Anodine Ingredients, to mitigate the Pains of the Joints, arising from an
inveterate Lues Venera, with happy success; which to this day retains the
Author's Name, and is called, Vigo's Emplaister of Froggs with Mercury.

So that Johannes de Vigo has delivered to us, Two Medicaments made of Common
Quick-Mercury, one Escarotick and Deterging, the other Anodine and Aswaging
Pains. He, and with him the whole Senate of Chyrurgeons, intimating thereby,
That Anodines are wholly contrary to Escaroticks, yet nevertheless, out of
Ambition, Ignorance, or both, They pervert the Text and Meaning of this worthy
Man, proving themselves Falsaries in the Law against Him (whose Defense I now
take upon me) and they do moreover deride him for Teaching, that the Mercury is
to be quenched with Oil of Bays according to Art, and with Spittle; but as out
of gross Ignorance, leavened with Insincerity of mind, they have mutilated and
defamed my Hippocrates Chymicus; so also they have suborned a Sense quite
contrary to the intention of the Author; The Anodine Plaster of Vigo deformed
into a Caustic.
for He boiles this lovely Couply, live Mercury dissolved in Aqua Fortis with
Vipers Grease and Oil, till the Aqueous moisture he spent; affirming and giving
out, that in boiling, this Caustic is dulcified and made sweet, which is
contrary both to Expeence and the manifest Truth.

Now if you desire to have it sweet, it is enough to extinguish it with Oil and
Spittle, according to the Anthor's Meaning; or else take sweet Mercury, as it s
sold in Apothecaries shops, for neither of them are touched by Alcalyes,
because they have nothing of acuteness in them, as I shall anon Mechanically
show.

I showed a little before, That Quicksilver, or Live Mercury (call it as you
please) dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and precipitated with Alcaly of Tartar, does
fall in an obscurely Yellow color, the Alcaly for the most part absorbing from
it the Acid Caustic impressed on it by the Aqua Fortis. But in This Plaster,
the Mercury dissolved in Aqua Fortis, is seethed with Axungia of Vipers, to the
consumption of the Aqueous Humid, and the Mass becomes of a Gray color; upon
which Mass if you pour Alcaly of Tartar, in the space of half an hour, you
shall see the Alcaly penetrating the Fat, to consume the Acid Corrosive left by
the Aqua Fortis; and so the Mercury to be obscurely Yellow, after the same
manner, as it happens in Mercury, and simply dissolved in Aqua Fortis
Precipitated according to Vigo's mind. And therefore Mercury so dissolved, and
boiled with Axungia, becomes not sweet at all, as the foolish Doctors falsely
say, but it remains corrosive, even by their own confession; for they affirm,
That Mercury dissolved in Aqua Fortis, by boiling in Axungia, becomes sweet;
yet afterward they confess, that Imposthumations, Putrid Flesh, and the like,
are consumed by it; which two Assertions are diametrically contrary one to
another: This is that which made Hippocrates to break forth into a smiling
laughter, and to say, They know not what they do. From their Fruits therefore,
and Works, you shall know them (i. e.) the Works of Fire prove true Fire, and
Mercury consuming Impostumes is true Precipitate, because it performs the
Operations of Mercury Precipitate, as I have showed by their own Confession,
and also by the affusion of Alcaly; for they are both obscurely Yellow, as well
the Red Precipitate of Vigo, as This boiled with Grease or Axungia.

Truly the condition of Mortals is to be lamented, whilst Physic, which is
the Noblest and Famouselst of all Sciences, in our days, is suffered to be
directed by Stupid Ignorants, and for this reason it is justly proclaimed the
meanest of all Arts.

Do not our Ancestors, those shining Lights of Learning, teach us, That
Terrestrial Mercury is as the Celestial? And those things which are in the
Superior, are also in the Inferior World? And to what Planet Mercury is joined
(i. e.) to what Virtue it is united, it takes upon it the nature of the same,
since it is pregnant with the seeds of all things.

Johannes de Vigo did consider Terrestrial Mercury, as Caustic, Precipitate
Mercury, Causlick,
whence by the advice of his Predecessors, he joined It with an Earthly Planet,
whose Virtue was Fiery and Caustic; it embraced the nature of This, and became
Caustic, according to the Doctrine of the Ancients, and is called the
Precipitate Mercury of Vigo.

The same Vigo wanted a Terrestrial Anodine of Mercury, whence also, following
the fame Doctrine of the Ancients, he joined it with Anodine things, viz.
Greases, or Suets, Cyles, Froggs, whose nature it assumed, and became Anodine.

So that Mercury takes the form of That, by which it is dissolved, and it is
mingled with it, as I have showed clearly enough, concerning the Alcalyes of
Vegetables He that has Ears to hear, let him hear.

Hence it appears, That the Inventor of the Precipitate, and also of the
Anodyne Plainster (whether it were Vigo, or any one else, it is not my part to
enquire in this place) was not only a Man of Experience, but an Understander
also of the Causes of Things, and consequently a Wise Man; So that it is a
piece of frivolous and absurd Ignorance, and Fanatic Dotage, to go about to
reform actions of knowing Persons: Out of my pity to such Undertakers, I shall
do them the best service to bury this their insipid Discourse, in perpetual
silence, lest they should be exposed to the laughter and derision of FreshWater
Apothecaries, yea of the Vulgar it self: I wish they would learn hereafter,
what they know not, before they babble forth their Scurrilities against the
Truth, and the Ancient Hippocratical Doctrine of Physic. At this game I
confess you are superior to me, for you know how to paint and set forth the
fooleries of men, so neatly, that in this art I must needs lay down the
Bucklers. But that your disease may not be Chronical, pray have a care how you
often vomit out such things?

Moreover Mercury Precipitate, now made Caustic by the Aqua Fortis, for
consuming Putrid Flesh, as all Skilful Chyrurgeens acknowledge, may be mixed,
as Exigency requires, with any Ointment. To what purpose then is this Anodine
composition with Precipitate? especially in Countries where Vipers grease is
sold dearer than Gold? whence this Grease is not only mixed with the
Precipitate against the intent of the Inventor, but moreover is odious and
troublesome to Apothecaries (especially since Hog's Grease will do as well with
precipitate) as also unprofitable to the Sick.

You have now heard, O ye Truth-respecting hearers, on what ground this
Plaster of Froggs, with Mercury, has been reformed. It is your part, to judge
whether that ingenious Person, John de Vigo, deserves to be contumeliously
Reproached for this? And, whether That barren, insipid, and truthless Doctrine
be to be suffered, which Rails against both the order of Nature, and also the
wise institutions of our Ancestors? by which, hopeful Youth in tender years
being seasoned, the Poison of Ignorance and Unskilfulness grows up with them,
and so the wound becomes Incurable. But these things, were not of so great
moment, if the Health of Man were not endangered thereby; for they prescribe to
the Sick, Simple water for Cordial, Vinegar for an Epileptick Remedy, Causticks
for Anodines; Poison of Copper for a wholesome Medicine. Sick and weak Persons
can hope for no Cure from such men, but only a foolish profusion of their
money, and at length the loss of their lives to boot: Let them then avaunt, and
be packing to the farthest Garamantes, with their Spirit of Venus, and their
Gounterfeit receipts; Let them not trouble the Civil World; Let them there weep,
like Women, since here they have not acquitted themselves like Men.

Order now requires, Sublimate Mercury.
that I should show what Mercury Sublimated is? since I have laid That down, as
an Instrument in the examen of of Alcalyes? How It is Prepared, Hippoc. Chym.
shows chap. 29. Where observe, that Vitriol Rubefied, or Calcined to Redness,
is not added, to increase the weight of the Mercury (as these magnifick Masters
with their Partisans, do suppose) for then it would not be calcined to the
highest Red, but to Whiteness only, as is done in the distillation of Vitriol,
whose Caput Mortuum, left after distillation of the Spirit, is most fit for
this purpose; and therefore-we need not its Spirit to add weight to the
Mercury) but it is added, that the Sulphurous Nitre might apprehend the
Sulphur of the immature Metal, lying hid in the Rubefied Vitriol; as I have
showed before; and so by their joynt-forces they may dissolve the Mercury. This
is the reason why Rubefied Vitriol is required. But the quantity is Quadruple
in respect of the Salts, because These are of easy fusion in the Fire, from
the which by Rubefied Vitriol, they are preserved: see more in Hippoc, Chymic,
in the forecited chapter.

The same Mercury once sublimated, needs not again be re-sublimated with new
Powders, as the unskilful Approvers think, because it does not put off or
depose the Acid Spirits once absorbed, so as to stand in need to reassume the
same from new Powders: and suppose that it were sublimated an hundred times
with new Powder, yet it would never become purer, as they falsely affirm; the
reason is, because this way the External Sulphur is not separated, neither does
Suscipere magis velminus, although ( Legitimately, as they fay) a thousand, yea
an hundred thousand times it be resublimated; And the word Legitimately in this
place, does discover their gross ignorance, and stands for no other use, but to
be nausceous to the understandings of Wife-Men; but it receives as much as is
enough for its saturation, as they know well, who have sometimes dissolved
Mercury in Aqua Fortis; which if it be not sufficiently Powerful, the Gram of
Mercury remains untouched and quick, because it could not imbibe That which was
not; and on the other side, the water could not dissolve it, because it wanted
Acid Salt. Truly this word (Legitimate) with this (purer Mercury) and the rest
of their false Receipts may well enough be discarded and abandoned even by the
Puniest Apothecaries, The Revivisication of Sublimate or Precipitate Mereury.
But when sublimate Mercury is freed from the Acid Spirits by Vegetable Alcaly,
and is fetched back quite from the Retort, then indeed it may be mixed with new
Powders, and again sublimated; which way the Deans with their fellows are yet
ignorant of: yet nevertheless it would not become more pure and splendant,
because in its first sublimation it neglected all that, which was not of its
own nature in the Faeces and Caput Mortuum: but it would come over and return
in less quantity, because it would return to Elements by frequent sublimation
and revivification, as I have showed above concerning Alcaly of Tartar,
concerning Spirit of Vitriol, and concerning Vinegar: see Hippoc. Chym. chap.
10.

This foresaid mixture of Mercury with Rubefied Vitriol, Nitre, and Salt, if
you sublime it, not by little and little, but in great haste, and more than is
fit, the Mercury will concrete, in the top of the Caput Mortuum, into lucid and
great Chrystals, like Nitre, and not inferior to a Diamond in luster, which
these Babblers vaunt for a great Secret, and affirm it to be The purest
Mercury. For whom the speech of Mercury in Sendivogius may well be applied,
That it is natural for him to laugh at fools; which Disease, as Cardan says,
they may easily Cure without a Cudgel, by eating Hens brains, the Testicles of
Doves and Tortoises, and by drinking a little White Wind Vinegar every day: If
Cardan had had any knowledge of this child of Venus (newly born to these
Obstreperous Doctors) perhaps he would have preferred it before Vinegar, since
duly exhibited, it cures Epileptick and Melancholy persons, witness the
Physical Doctors of the Austrian and Norimberg College. In the interim let
their humors be purged with black Hellebore, would all Anticyra had enough of
it; Let them drink Capon-broth, and smell to the flowers of Nymphaea, which,
with their grateful smell do mightily cheer nhe spirits of the Heart; and
engrave Aristotle in a Topaze, walking Tempe. Hitherto Cardan, to which I add,
that unless these overwise Doctors, with their fellows had approved and owned
this child of Venus; the simplest man alive would never have believed there was
ever any such thing. But so, I communicate to you, this great Artifice gratis.

To conclude therefore, I affirm, that neither Mercury sublimated, or
precipitated, ill handled with Vipersgrease, and mortified in Aqua Fortis, and
also mixed with Alcalyes, and Revivificated with a naked fire out of a Retort,
and by consequence, weak and frail, as Alcalyes, nor no other Matter, can be so
destroyed, but it will still show something of its Form.

CHAP. VIII. That Acid does both Destroy and Perfect, and that the Fire, the
Sun, and Acid have the same Virtues and Powers.
I Have showed in the beginning, Chap. 2d. both by Authority and Experience,
That Nature ^^th endued Seeds with the least part of Acidity, because of
themselves they receive Increase, and are multiplied; as appears manifestly in
a grain of Corn, the quantity of whose natural Acid, is computed to be the
8200. part, in respect of its Body, as the Sages of Natures Mysteries teach us:
But if it be macerated with any mollifying Humor, with the addition of a
convenient Heat, the innace spark of its Acid, is excited, which does so
distend and enlarge it self, that it seems evidently to be moved out of its
place, and by this Expansive Motion it does compress and overcome its Sister,
whom it loves, (i. e.) as well the Alcaly of its own body, as That which it
drew from the Water, and turns It into its own Nature) that is, into Acid: I
call this motion, as both the Vulgar and Philosophers do, Fermentation; so out
of Barley, which according to Hippocrates, is of a cold nature, there is made
not only a temperate, but an inebriating Drink, called Ale, or Beer; out of
which, by the Art of Distillation, there is elicited Aqua Ardens (which, before
Fermentation, was not in the Barley) nothing inferior to Spirit of Wine, yea
though it be inflamable, as Hippoc. Chymic. shows chap. 18. but the innate Acid
is multiplied, either of its own accord, or by Art, viz. by the addition of its
like Acid, which by reason of its similitude is easily admitted (like being
pleased with like) and which, by a common name we call Ferment; but if we would
excite that small portion of Acid, innate in the Grain, by an Acid, not of the
same nature but having a mineral Soul; as for Example, by the Acid of Vitriol,
Nitre, Salt, or the like, then the more generous and Potent would surpass the
weaker, and would choke it, which not enduring the yoke of Tyranny, would be
quite destroyed and converted into nothing.

So a Pearl possesses, in respect of its body, the 8200. part of innate most
precious Acid, upon which, if there supervene a more powerful Acid, taken from
another family, vsz. from Vinegar distilled from Aerugo (which they
ridiculously call a Secret Menstruum) and does exercise Tyranny over it, The
Rector in the Pearl is suppressed, and that clear and precious light, the Child
of the Sun, is slain, which would willingly have relieved the Vital Lumen of
the Sick, unless it had been unjustly subjugated by the Vinegar from
Verdigrease, that is, the false Spirit of Venus. Pearl therefore, so dissolved,
can do no good, unless the weak Stomach of the Patient can subdue and conquer
that Acid Salt (as I have before showed in magistery of Corals) left there by
the Vinegar. For as Vinegar distilled from Verdigrease, does rule over, and
subdue the vital light of Pearls, it is so in Diseases, viz. The Vital light is
suppressed by the more Potent Morbous Acid (as Hippocrates says, De veteri
Medicina) which if it be imbibed, as the Acid by the Alcaly, or if it be
diluted and separated from the affected place, the Vital light soon recovers:
see Hippoc. Chymic. chap. 21. Hence arose that Famous saying, which is no less
true in Philosophy, than in Divinity; The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom; which is as much as to say, Do thou not destroy Acids by Acids, against
the command of the most High, but sweetly and lovingly cherish them, so shall
thou be Wise, as says our Lord himself; a grain of Corn falling upon loose and
spongy earth (not upon that which is hard bound, which depresses even the
innate light (and therefore must be plowed and turned up) is there dissolved
and loses its exterior shape, yet its innate light suffers not, but in its own
time produces fruits like it self; neither is it dissipated, because the Suns
Child does extend it self in spongy earth, and embraces its Sister Alcaly,
which it loves, which being impregnated, attracts Nourishment from That, of
which both of them do consist, and so both of them together produce fruits like
themselves. This natural Operation and Process is the fear of the Lord and the
beginning of Wisdom.

But when a grain of Corn is cast into Fire (i. e.) into a more powerful Acid,
not agreeable to its own Nature, but taken from another family, or into
Sulphurous earth, or into Counterfeit Spirit of Venus; then is there committed
a sin of Disobedience against the command of God; and the Grain, as well in
Matter as Form, is corrupted, dissipated, and made unprofitable both for
Generation and Fermentation; as I have before showed in Pearl dissolved in
Vinegar: so the fear of God, is not regarded, and instead of the beginning of
Wisdom, there grows up the beginning of Folly; where we may observe, Fire is
the inflam^tion of the Acid Ferment.
that as the Acid innate in the Grain, does act by Fermentation, and multiply
it self, either in virtue or number; so also Fire, which is Acid, inflamed,
does act as ferment; and never gives over, till it finds something on which it
might act, after the manner of ferment, or might make it like, or equal to it
self.

So that whatsoever is dissolved in an Acid, out of its own family, or more
powerful than its innate Acid, presently its weak Acid is suppressed, and being
dissolved, it must needs take upon it the nature of the Dissolvent; for the
Acid in dissolving, is coagulated and imbibed by the innate Alcaly of the
Thing, and the weight of the same Thing is increased by the dissolvent Acid; as
I have showed above concerning the counterfeit Child of Venus, acting upon
Corals; and in my Hippoc. Chymicus, concerning Sublimate Mercury. I say, they
all increase in weight from the External Acid, which to the utmost of its power
does suppress and kill the Internal; and that not only in the Via humida, as I
have showed, but in the Sicca, fiery, and burning way. An Example whereof may
be seen in the following Experiment.

Lead, to the weight of 100 Drachms, Preparation of Minium.
being burnt in a reverberatory flame of dry Wood into Powder, which is very
Red (for the weak Acid of the Lead is suppressed by the imperious Acid kindled
Flame) and it loses the name of Lead, and the Figure too, and again puts on a
fiery Color, and is called from its shining Redness, by means of the mastering
Acid, Minjum. Weigh this in a balance, and you shall find the Minium increased
ren drachms from the kindled Flame; for as in the moist way, Corals dissolved
in salse Spirit of Venus, and coagulated, do receive an augmentation; so also
Lead, in the dry and fi^ry way, is increased and augmented from the Acid in the
flame; Hippic. Chymic. chap. 26. For there is the same reason in both, which,
the Deans with their Fellows cannot comprehend; and that makes them cry out,
That the increase of ten drachms in the Minium, does not proceed from the Acid
out of the kindled flame, but from the Air. What do your Doctorships say? From
the Air! whether will ye go? strait to Anticyra, I advise you, with the company
going before you for your Cure. For Philosophers say, that Air is Natures
Sieve, through which Virtues and Influences are transmitted, and that it is
impatient of a Vacuum, no ways condensable of it self, but an immortal and most
subtle Fume, kindled from the heavenly Fire, etc. I have showed before, that in
It, the Sun's Child does inhabit, which, assumes not a Body, unless with his
beloved Sister; The authority and experience both of the Old, and also the
Modern true Philosophers bear witness hereunto: So that the Air being most
subtle and incondensible of it self, can add no weight to the Minium.

The Air it self, is neither light nor heavy, neither is it compressed of its
own accord, but by some force, in the barrel of a Gun, from which it again
breaks out by force: we see the same thing in that Glassy Organ, which is
called a Weather-glass, the Air indeed is compressed in it, by Cold, but is
again rarefied and dilated by Heat. If therefore the Air, in a cold season, did
add weight to the Minium, it would make it lighter in an hot: But Minium weighs
alike in all Seasons; so that it is not the Air that gives weight to the Minium.

But supposing, though not granting, that the Child of the Sun, dwelling in the
Air, did assume a body in the Minium; yet this would not be, but in some years
space; as I have showed in the Matrix of Nitre and Mines of Vitriol. But
Minium, newly drawn out from the Furnace and as yet hot, weighs as much as it
will do some years after; so that the Child of the Sun, neither has any
Tabernacle in the Minium, nor gives any weight to it.

The Air being impatient of a Vacuum, as I have showed by the authority of
Philosophers, is always filled with an Aqueous Humor, which in the cold
presently concretes to Water. Take a familiar household example, when we drink
cold things in the hot Summertime, out of a Glass, as soon as the Glass is
filled with the cold Liquor, presently it is troubled, because the Aqueous
Vapor, dispersed through the Air, is condensed by the Cold, and sticks there,
in so great quantity, that sometimes drops do fall down: Here they wonderfully
lift up their Crests, and cry aloud rejoycingly, Now you are catched; This is
that Aqueous Vapor, which is attracted by the Minium out of the Air, and adds
the weight to it; but soft and fair, Your Aqueous Vapor does concrete in Cold,
and again rarefy in hot Weather, which your ridiculous and childish Experiment
proves, viz. The Caput Mortuum of Vitriol ( i. e. the Faex of Vitriol; out of
which the Spirits by one single distillation, have been drawn) being exposed to
the Air, is again saturated with Spirit of Vitriol; which, if it be distilled,
does again yiold Spirit.

Lo, O Curious and Truth-loving Reader, This is their Proof (that as the Caput
Mortuum of Vitriol is again satiated with Spirit in the Air; so also Minium
drawn from the Furnace, is saturated out of the Air with weight.) which is both
Childish and Ridiculous; and, as I have showed all the rest to be false, and
ill understood, so I shall likewise demonstrate This to be most false, and
least of all understood by the whole College of Guessers.

For if Vitriol have once undergone the tyranny of a quick Fire, the Child of
the Sun acts no more upon it, than it does on an Egg boiled, for the hatching
of the Chick: Now burnt Vitriol does attract from the Air by reason of its
dryness, because it is without moisture, not the Acid Spirit of Vitriol, but an
Aqueous Vapor; which, when the Vitriol grows hot, either by the Sun, or by
Fire, again flies into Air, as it is the property of all Water. For if that
Caput Mortuum could again reassume the nature of Vitriol in the Air, that
Famous Distiller of Spirit of Vitriol at Amsterdam, who furnishes not only near
the third part of Europe, but also all Ships, and both the Indies therewith,
yearly expending many thousands of pounds upon it; if it being once Distilled
and Exposed to the Air, would again become Vitriol, he would have luck in a
Bag, as we say: but as it is false, that the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol returns
to Vitriol, so it is also an untruth, that the Aqueous Vapor adds weight to the
Mium; which I prove by this Experiment.

Take at least an Ounce of Minium, such as is commonly sold, and in a Glazed
Earthen Vessel, large and low, put it for a Night in a Bakers hot Oven, or else
expose it to the Noonday Sun; whose heat as it does exiccate not only the
Humid Minium, but also dries up Marshes, Lakes, and Rivers; so in like manner
it would expel the Humidity of the Air, if there were any in the Minium: but
the same weight of Minium which was put in, is also drawn forth from the Oven,
or heat of the Sun; so that That which gives weight to the Minium, is not the
Child of the Sun, nor the Air, nor Water; therefore, against the absurd
prateing of the Deans and Approvers, it must needs be the Acidity in the
kindled Flame, which, as the false Spirit of Venus exercising tyranny over the
Debile Acid in the Medulla of Pearls, or in Coral, adds weight to Them, so also
the Acid kindled in the Flame, which by its tyrannical power and force does
keep down and suppress the Debile Acid in the Lead, is fixed into Alcaly, rules
over it, and gives weight to it; Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 26.

We may learn from hence, that if the Reader (whosoever he be, enquiring after
the truth, in those infinite doubts, which in long Art do daily occur) should
have recourse to these Denns and their Associates, what profit could he get
thereby? Surely none, which plainly appears, by that counterfeit and lamentable
piece of Science, which they had forth to the whole World; for they call Simple
Water Volatile Salt of Tartar, and moreover judge it an incomparable Cordial.
Besides, with what pompous and swelling Words, do they shamelesly adorn it? and
commend it to their poor Neighbors, and to the Sick? as I have showed above in
the Chapter of the Difference of Salts, in their own Words there quoted: They
say also, That Vinegar Distilled is the Son of Venus, that Acid is not in
Grains of Kermes, that Gold is not Fixed and Constant in the Fire; that
Mercury corroded with Caustic Water is made sweet by boiling with Vipers
Grease; that Minium acquires weight from the Air; and infinite other
absurdities, which I shall anon discover. Fie for shame, defile not Youth, with
these fooleries and falsities: Dispute not de Lana Caprina, and after the
dispute ended, you silence your Opponents in a matter of no value, and gain
nothing but an empty puff of breath: And then in your silence, Truth, as the
Philosopher says, though unsought for, will come to light, if she may. But,
leaving these Jejune Interpreters of Physic, who proceed to the Practick Part,
as the Ass to his fodder, not knowing to what he lays his Lips; I shall go on
to prove, that there is Acid in Fire, by This, no less Noble, than profitable
and pleasant Example.

I showed before, That the Salts of Vegetables do preserve their forms
untouched from Common Fire, and that they illude the violence thereof, either
more or less: And if such a power be in Vegetables, must not the Mineral family
attain a degree thereof, more or less perfect? To make this out, Let Flint be
the Example, An Enquiry how Flint dissers from Corrals.
which is most constant in the Fire, and Corals (the Red are always to be
chosen) less constant: A Flint (the White is to be chosen) is corroded by no
Acid Liquor, no not by Aqua Fortis it self; because it has obtained a
Temperament equal to its Nature (i. e.) it has got so much Acid, as in a just
Balance can satisfy and saturate its Alcaly; for if never so little Alcaly
did superabound, the External Acid would find an easy ingress; so that a Flint
can be dissolved by no Acid, no not by the false Son of Venus, in regard of the
equal and perfect mixture of the Acid and Alcaly.

But Corals, not being enriched by Nature, with so much Acid, as can saturate
their own proper Alcaly, are therefore less Constant; whence it come to pass,
that if you pour any manifest Acid on Them, presently it corrodes them; and
such a quanty of the Acid is imbibed by them, till it be brought to an
Aequilibrium with the Alcaly, and thereupon the dissolved Corals be increased
in weight, as I have showed before in Magistery prepared the common way.

A Flint burnt in the Fire, as it receives not Acid and Humid Liquors, so it is
neither increased nor lessened in its weight from the Acid Flame of the Fire,
because Acid, which may avolate, does not superabound in it; nor is the Alcaly
thirsty, which might imbibe the Acid Salt of the Corals, or Aqua Fortis, it is
only the Nutritive Glue which dies; which in Pearls and Crabs Eyes (as I have
showed) is like to thin Pellicles or Coverings, which are not dissolved by the
false Spirit of Venus, because they are Pinguous. But Corals duly burnt, (in
the Flame either of Coals or Wood) do increase in weight, because there is an
overplus of the thirsty Alcaly in them, which could not be saturated by their
proper Acid: hence it is, that they easily admit the External, either humid or
kindled in Flame, and so far, by means of the received Acid, they increase in
weight; as I have showed before in Magistery.

Flint burnt in Fire, till it chop and gape, becomes Caustic, and turns living
or dead Flesh into rottenness.

But Corals in like manner burnt or calcined in the Fire, till they chop, do
not affect either living Flesh or dead, because they become a Powder almost
insipid.

Flint burnt, until the Glue (i. e.) the Aliment dies, is called Calx or Lime,
Burnt Flint is called Lime.
which, being yet fresh, grows hot with Water poured on it, and its Acid Acts
upon its powerful and proper Alcaly; and they are both turned into a stony or
petrous substance, which coagulates with it, whatsoever it lays hold off.

Corals duly burnt for six days and nights, Remember that They grow in the
bottom of the Sea.
till the Aliment die in a flame of Wood, or Coals, do increase in weight; they
grow not hot upon the affusion of Water, because they have not so much Acid, as
will suffice for a mutual Action or Combat, neither is it coagulated into a
stony substance.

Out of Flint, Calcined with Vegetable Alcaly, is extracted a Lixivium, which
boiled with Suet or Fat, becomes Soap.

If Alcaly of Vegetables be added to Calcined Corals, The Alcaly extracts from
them the Acid drawn from the Flame, and the Corals fall into a White Insipid
Powder. Pour Distilled Vinegar on Calcined Flint, and the Vinegar dissolves its
Alcaly with bubbles and hissing.

But if you pour the same Vinegar on these Calcined Corals, they are wholly
dissolved, without either bubbles or noise, because being saturated for six
days and nights by the Acid Flame, they are no longer Thirsty: on which
Solution, pour True Spirit of Vitriol, which (as I have showed before) does
keep down the weaker Acid of the Distilled Vinegar, and associates to its self
the Alcaly of Corals; but the Fire, or Life of the Corals is united with the
Vinegar, and so the whole Composition is Red. This Redness is the Life of
Corals, according to Paracelsus, which you may learn to separate by the
Midwifry of your helping Hand, and you shall have a Cordial not to be despised;
of which Plato forbids me to speak any more in this place: See Hippoc. Chymic.
Chap. 27.

As the Life, or the Acid of Flints, is White, or Dark Color, or Green,
intended according to the innate humid, as Vitrification shows; so of Red
Corals it is sparkling, which difference of Colors and Virtues proceeds from
their first Seed, which Art cannot effect; if any one pretend to it, he is a
Liar. But to bring the Seeds to Maturity, that they may produce the Fruits,
this is a privilege granted to Philosophers, not to Idiots.

So that our Calcined Corals become not a Calx, Corals calcined become not a
Calx.
because they have not the properties of Calx, as the ridiculous and putid
Flock of vain Doctors do ignorantly affirm; for Corals are as murh esteemed by
the Indians, as Indian Pearls are by us: Wherefore Corals and their Bodies (as
all other Jewels, which take their forms from the Limpid Fountains of the
Heaven and the Sun) are made of the purest Drops, The Virtues of the Tincture
of Corals.
impregnated with Celestial Influences; hence it is, that they contain many
and excellent Virtues in them, which, if any one desire to draw forth, he must
approach nearer, and open the locked doors, otherwise than by begging Receipts
(and Those ill understood) as it were from door to door, or by prescribing quid
pro quo to the Sick, or by a petulant blemishing of the Truth, by raging and
unheard off Maledicence. But the Ignorant Vulgar has this sottish property,
that what it does not understand at first reading, That it contemns and loads
with foetid Calumnies; And yet herein it judges it self not Ignorant, but very
Wise; but by this very thing they manifest their folly to the truly Wise, when
to their own followers they would-seem to be Wise; for it is a wretched thing,
in endeavoring to procure a Name to ones self, to be exposed, as a Ridicle, to
all understanding Persons.

The Martigenous Hornets provoke and challenge the Eagle. Take notice, Brethren
of the woeful Combat.

Having hitherto proved that Acid does both destroy and also perfect, Iron what?
it is a Subject agreeable to this Chapter, to treat of the Destruction of
Iron: That Iron differs from all other Metals, it appears by its terreous
Principles, whence the Acid thereof, wanting its Sister Alcaly, dwells in an
earthly most inconstant matter; wherefore it vanishes of its own accord, or its
innate Acid is easily oppressed by an external Acid superveneing: and so the
whole substance of Iron is turned to rust. Hippocrates took notice of this
Volatile Acid of Iron, hence he teaches in his Tract De Diata, that when it is
quenched in Water, it acquires Strength; because the Light Alcaly in the Water,
is a True Comforter of the Light Acid in the Iron: and Cutlers do strengthen It
with the Alcaly of Animals, which is also Volatile, as Hippocrates Chymic.
shows, Chap. 19. For this cause Aristotle the 4. Meteorol. not without Reason,
makes a difference betwixt Iron and all other Metals. Gold, says he, Silver,
Brass, Tyn, Lead, Quicksilver, belong to Water; but Iron to the earth: and
Galen says, 4. de Facult, Simplic. Medicament. That Iron is a terreous and
crass Body, etc.

So that the Acid degenerating or dying of its own accord, Rust is natural
Crocus Martis.
or being separated by the stronger, there remains only the terreous principle
(as Hippoc. Chymic. shows of Alcaly of Tartar Chap. 10.) which by the Ancients
and by Practicers of Physic, as Dioscorides witnesses, is called Rust.

This Rubigo is also prepared by Art, out of the dust or fileings of Iron, when
the sharpest Vinegar is poured on it, and it is dried in the Sun, and again
afterward dipped in Vinegar and dried; then it must be washed with common
water and dried; and so kept powdered and small.

And as Vinegar, so also all sorts of Acids, Gold rurns Iron into Crocus or
Rubige.
do turn Iron into Rubigo; yea Gold it self does occultly and presently turn
that Acid into Rust, as I have showed Chap. 2.

Hence we see the Cause why Gold cannot be conglutinated with Iron, unless it
first assumes a Cupreous Nature, as Hippoc. Chymic. boldly shows, Chap. 28.
concerning the Golden Nail; for the Truth offends none, A Golden Nail.
but those that hate it.

The Lord Anbert, a Noble man of France, in his Natural and Moral History of
the American Islands, proves by Eye Witnesses, that the Unicorn is not a
four-footed Animal, The Unicorn.
but a Fish, that has an Horn growing in his Forehead; yet he grievously
offended, not the Lovers of Truth, but those only who made a Monopoly of those
Horns: so I never read that Moralists, or Politicians did envy the Truth,
though Hoarse Grass-hoppers chirp against it, and the Cuckows subscribe and
approve their Note. He that is afraid of the Truth, is not perfect; for an
Adept, or one completely Wise, should fear nothing. For which Cause, I was
always willing, that my Hippoc. Chymic. Hippoc: Chymic. a Truth-speaking Book.
should speak the Truth out and not conceal it, not fearing, any thing nor
respecting either the friendship or hatred of any Sect; but that it should give
things their proper Names, not being solicitous either to offend or please: in
imitation of Thucydides, who perceiving the Writings of Herodotus to be in
great esteem, I had rather, says he, displease by speaking the truth, than
please by relating Fables; because by displeasing I gain, but by pleasing I
hurt. But I return whence I digressed. This most ancient Rust of Iron, The
invention of Crocus Martis.
that it might be more pleasant to the Eye, the Curious began to burn it in an
acute Flame, into a small Powder, and from its fair redness, they call it
Crocus Martis.

But use, age, and experience, being our daily Instructors, they observed, That
This is a long and tedious way of turning Iron into Rust by the aspersion of
Viner gar; therefore they burnt the dust or Filings of Iron in an acute Flame,
the acidity whereof being set on fire, they found they could make more of this
light and rare red Powder in a day, than they could do with Vinegar in a month;
so that they rejected the long and tedious, and took to the quicker way of
operation: This Powder they called Crocus Martis from its redness.

So that Filings or Scobs of Iron, or its Natural or Artificial Rust, either
with Vinegar eroded, and afterward reverberated in the Flame, Crocus Martis
curiously prepared, does open and astringe.
or else without Vinegar by Flame simply, or with Vinegar from Aerugo, or False
Spirit of Venus, being converted into a red Powder or Liquor (for it is all
one) and taken by the Mouth, have a strengthening Virtue, so that They are good
for the Stomach and for a Loose Liver, for Dysentericks and Lientericks, and
all moist or praehumid Diseases; for Women's Flux, for the Gonorrhaea, or
incontinency of Urine, and all solutive Distempers. And the same Iron performs
also contrary operations, for it opens great praehumid Livers and their
Obstructions, it promotes Women's Terms (so that it has restored some Girls (I
say not all) who were discolored by paleness, to their Health and Beauty;) and
therefore both Philosophers and Phisicians do unanimously teach, that Iron of
it self does both open and bind: Experience also shows as much, which is, and
ought to be accounted the Best School-mistriss to us all.

It wants not therefore the suspicion of fraud or ignorance, when men shall
passionately, yet weakly affirm, That Iron, from its single preparation, is
either astringent or aperitive: They should live and die in their ignorance for
me, unless sick persons were in danger to be ruined thereby: Learn therefore,
not from Me, who have always undervalued vain applause, but from the Giver of
all good, for frequent experience, and the company of dexterous Philosophers,
and true Practicioners are more to be believed than either an handful of
Calumniators, or a multitude of such, who are ignorant of the Instruments of
Physic.

Now they who commend Iron in all Diseases, What Diseases Crocus Mart is is not
good for
and do prescribe it in every Dropsy, in the Schirrhus of the Liver, in an
inveterate Jaundice, especially joined with a Eeavor, in Hypochondriack
Melancholy, or in Diseases of the Stomach. They do it not, without the extreme
Peril of the Patient; It Is true, Iron is very good for great Livers, loosned
with moisture, and tumid, but when they are hardened to a Schirrhus, it is so
far from dissolving it, that it rather confirms it, and by consuming its Acid
producer, drives it to a Lapideous hardness; so that Iron either. For what it
is?
Filed or any other way turned to Rubigo, has been always commended by sure
Evperiments, for great and swollen Livers, but never for dissolving a Schirrhus.
So Ferreous and Acid Waters are good to attenuate the Spleen, and to open all
Obstructions of the lower part of the Belly, arising from Morbous Acid, as yet
fluid; as Hippoc. Chymic. shows by clear Experiments, Chap. 16. viz. by
consuming the Acid humor, by corroborating the Fibra's, and by contracting
Them when loose; that so the inbred heat might arise more strong in the
corroborated member, and may digest, that which remains: so that they who
commend Iron in the dry and acid Diseases of the Liver or Milt, and do there
either fraudulently or ignorantly call it Aperitive, cannot escape the brand
either of Ignorants or Impostors. For Iron administered against the aforesaid
Indications, as I have shown, then indeed it wants not a deletery Virtue, as
Avicen teaches well; for it excites the gripings of the Intestines, dryness and
roughness of the tongue, siccity of the Body, costiveness of the Belly, and
pains of the Head; because it does consume not only the manifest Ferment of the
Stomach, but also the occult Acid of the other Bowels, and sucks up the Vital
Seed; but the quantity of it being small, viz. the 8200 part of its Body, it is
no wonder if upon the taking of Crocus Martis (though it should be Aperitive,
as they ignorantly babble) the Disease become more vehement, to the destruction
of the Patient. And in that Case they blame the Apothecary-behind his back, as
if he had mistook the Box, and so detract from his honesty without Cause.

But if they will not hearken to an old faithful Admonition, and to my
Experience, but pertinaciously resist good Counsel, it may chance to come to
pass, that at last daily Experience and the Death of their Patients, will in
spite of their teeth enform them of the Truth.

Otherwise the World would be filled with far fetched, ill understood, false
and dubious Receipts; and the diligent Observations of our Ancestors would be
lightly esteemed: and so a new, unskilful; ambiguous, costly, speculative,
infinite, and groundless way of Physic, would take place; which under the
disguise of false Words and deep Learning, would be entertained by Idiots; who
not knowing the Virtues of Things, hotly contend amongst themselves, and rail
one at an other, not only about Aperitive or Astringent Iron, but about many
other things; some of which I have spoken of, as much as the nature of the
Argument and the good of my Neighbors require: So also by uncertain
Conclusions and vain Opinions they revile the Wits of the Studious, and to the
hurt of their Neighbor, and the infamy of the Art, they approve and subscribe
to Lying Fables: And not at all studying the Truth, they boast themselves to be
great Doctors; who yet never will attain to Science, because they follow the
herd, that went before, and think they have already attained it, as Seneca
rightly speaks; but to return to the matter.

Dioscorides handles Iron two manner of ways, either preparing Ferrugo out of
it, or extinguishing It in Water or Wine: yet to both the Preparations, he
ascribes an Astringent Virtue; he does not call the one Astringent and the
other Aperitive. For when Iron opens, it comes from the specific Acid,
degenerating in the body, which Nature could not receive into nourishment, and
therefore, by reason of its Acid taste, it rushes to the Iron; so the Bowels
being strengthened by degrees, Nature expels That together with the detained
excrements by stool. Hence Helmont says, that Iron does open by a specific and
appropriate Virtue, but it binds by a second quality: so that neither of the
Virtues of the Iron, do proceed from the absence or presence of its Mercury
(which they boast, but without Truth, that they can extract from it) but from
the attraction of the specific Acid in the Morbous Bodies, as Hippoc. Chymic.
shows, Chap. 16. and 28. Thither I refer the Reader, that I may not clog him
with the repetition of things there spoken.

But we may grant, that they can as well extract Mercury from Iron, as Eximious
Virtues from Copper: These Vanities are, and always were, nausceous to Me, as
well as to the World and the Sick; for they have no foundation in Nature: so
that they, and their Masters, are to be banished from the society of good Men;
whilst on the other side, I deal with the Doctrine of Truth and the most
Ancient Science, which the Ancients found to be agreeable to the Nature of Man,
and thought worthy to be ascribed to God, as the School of Truth yet thinks, as
Hippocrates has it, De Veterum Medicina; for He there teaches, that as there
is a manifold Acid in the Macrocosme, so also in Man's Body. And in his Book de
Art, every Acid has its proper Ventricle, which yet the vocal and wordy
College is ignorant of, and therefore he adds, as they know who study these
things; but seeing it is easier to steal blind Receipts and to approve them, to
suppress Truth and to load It with Calumnies, then to learn the knowledge of
the Ventricles of Man's Body, it is no wonder, that They are ignorant of the
Instruments of Physic, who have no regard to the Ventricles; For if, says the
Old Man, they do not know the Constitution from the beginning, and that which
is predominant in the body, they cannot prescribe that which is good for a Sick
Man. Lo here the Cause, why Crocus Martis being Aperitive in the hands of
superficial and ignorant Doctors, becomes Astrictive, and Vice Versa; because
they are ignorant of their proper Instruments: and in the method of Curing,
know not how to apply Active things to Passive, because they have not the
knowledge of Ventricles, or Sapors: neither did they ever learn Them out of
Hippocrates, of which my Hippoc. Chymic. does discover very many.

This is the reason, why, as I said before, they come to Practice, as the Ass
to his fodder, not knowing to what he extends his Lips, but only as far as his
exterior senses, without understanding, by seeing and tasting, do draw him to
his meat. But why do I insist on the decrees of Philosophers, deduced and drawn
down from Nature it self, since I have to do with such Persons, who never so
much as dreamt of the Verity and Excellency of the Art of Physic. Therefore
they are to be instructed by Examples, taken out of the Shop of Wise Nature.

Observe then, That in the Stomach and Milt of a sound Animal, there dwells a
Vital Acid proper to the Milt, but when That Acid does degenerate into an
unusual taste, or sapor, all the neighboring parts are also contaminated; and
presently the pores are contracted, and the Body, which was transpirable in
health, now ceases from action; hence the Milt swells from the motion of the
Ferment, which will not obey purging Medicines, as experience shows: Now Iron
taken at mouth, is good for that Ferment and prae-acid Taste, by which the Milt
is lessened or dried (call it which you will) but not by reason of the
Aperitive force of the Iron, but that Acidity there detained, does in a special
manner love the Iron, as a thirsty Man does Beer. Let Silver dissolved in Aqua
Fortis be an Example.

Aqua Fortis, has the smell and property of Sulphur of Iron, because it is
made of Sulphurous Nitre, Vitriol or Alum; whence by reason of the likeness
between them, it loves Copper and Iron, as I have above Mechanically showed:
Now as in the Stomachs of Animals, the hungry Acid desires to be satisfied with
its like, and That like (i. e.) food, it dissolves and is delighted with it;
it is just so in the Matrocosme: For Example, The Acidity of Aqua Eortis, is as
an empty Stomach, which desires to be satisfied; Silver being given it for
food, it dissolves it, and is pleased with it; but when you cast in a Physical
Drug (as I may so call it) into this Solution, I mean Copper, with which, for
the similitude between them, it is more delighted than with the Silver;
presently it deserts the Silver, and again dissolves the Copper, and the whole
Solution becomes green.

It must needs be so also in the Body of Man, since Nature is in every thing
alike, as Pythagoras, and since Him, Hippocrates have taught us.

Again, If you put Iron into Aqua Fortis (which here is as the Stomach or
Ventricle) impregnated or loaded with Copper, in regard Copper is of harder
Solution and Concoction than Iron, the Water presently leaves the Copper and
dissolves the Iron.

And although Aqua Fortis has already deposed Silver and Copper, yet its
Acidity and Property has still dominion over them, until they are freed by a
melting Fire; which is to be observed by Our Friends, for it is else where of
great use.

But it is objected by such, as are ignorant of this Common and Ancient Order
and Consent of Nature, and who out of their small Skill, go about to overthrow
the Hippocratical Verity, That I put my Sickle into another Man's Corn and
Harvest; as if it were a shame for me to know, That which all men should or
ought to know in an Art; or, as if. They were the only famous Philosophers, who
compile together Surreptitious and ill understood Receipts, without the
knowledge of the Causes of Things. And as Silver and Copper were troublesome to
the Stomach of Aqua Fortis (that I may so speak) which is better, when it is
cured with Iron: so also this Morbous Foreign Ferment, or Humor (call it which
you please) being consumed by the Iron, The Ventricle of the Milt and the
neighbor parts become botter affected. Take therefore at mouth Stomoma (i. e.)
Steel, or its Crocus, either Astringent or Aperitive, with which that Acid
Ferment has a greater agreement than with the Milt; and therefore it hastily
rushes in, pervading its Pores from the Ventricle of the Milt to the whole
Stomach, Horat'us his Sterilis Rubigo.
that it may associate it self with the assumed Iron, which by that Acid
Foreign Ferment is dissolved into a Black or Green Fax, according to the
property of the Acid; as the Excrements of the Belly do testify: and if this
Acid be not totally consumed by the Iron, at one turn, it is repeated so often,
till the Milt show some signs of its Exiccation; so the Anima of one ens (i.
e.) the Ferment of the Disease, enters into the Iron, and the Anima of another
goes out, because the Acid, or Anima of the Iron, which constitutes the Iron,
goes forth, (Hence Crocus Martis is called by Horatius, Sterilis Rubigo) that
the Acidity of the Disease might again enter in, according to the Doctrine of
the Pythagoreans. For Nature acts in the Microcosme by the same Instruments as
in the Macrocosme: For the Ancients have taught us, That it is every where
alike.

Here Idiots and Destroyers of Hippocratical Medicine, will object, That I
place a Disease in the Ventricle of the Milt, and yet give Iron by the Mouth?
How then can the Morbous Acid come or reach from the Milt to the Iron? as they
have also written concerning burnt Hartshorn: Which Objection is not worth the
answering, for one Fool may raise more Questions than an hundred Wise Men can
answer; but sithence these sluggish Doctors never understood This out of
Hippocrates his Sixth Book de Morbis Popularibus; out of pity to them I will
show them the place; for he there says, that the whole Body as long as Life is
in it, is perspirable and penetrable; see Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 16.

But when the Milt or Liver is gone to a Schirrhus, then indeed the Steel, by
consuming the Faber or Operant, would more harden the Bowels, though the
Aperitive Crocus Martis of all these Subscribers be never so much taken by the
Mouth. He that desires to know more of Iron, let him read Hippocrates Chymicus
in the forecited Chapter.

So that the Acid, which Iron consumes in the Body of Man, differs very much
from the false Spirit of Venus, and from all other Acids in general, because it
is a specific; and to be found in no other place: for if Iron be not wholly
dissolved by It in the Body, the Excrements of the Belly are not tinged into a
Black or Green Color; and then indeed Iron does Astringe, though the Aperitive
Crocus of these Innovators be administered, as Hippoc. Chymic. in the forecited
Chap. does experimentally show: so that Acid is also a Specific, which burnt
Hartshorn drinks up, in some Feavors; which the sluggish Approvers do judge
must needs pass through the intestines to the place affected, and to the seat
of the Feavor; if otherwise it ought to consume the Acid there generated and
detained: They understand not what Hippocrates teaches in the forecited place,
that the whole Body in Living Persons is permeable, and that a Spirit Acid,
more Acid, or most Acid, is the Cause of Diseases, etc. and that it is
fermentable, and so flows as well through the Pores adextra by diaphoresis or
gentle sweat (as appears in the Crisis) as it goes and rushes to the Intestines
unto the Hartshorn, as I have showed concerning Steel; provided it find a
convenient and specific Acid in the Body. Truly this is a rural clownish
Doctrine, and worthy the Approvers; for if Mediciues must needs pass out of the
Stomach to the Seat of the Disease, through the Pores, then the Sweat and Urine
would wax Red from the Crocus Martis, especially their Aperitive Crocus. Bezoar
in Swoonings, does not pass through the Membranes of the Stomach to the Heart,
nor does it return from thence, for consuming the Lypothymick Acid: Neither
does Ostiocolla travel to the broken Bone, that it may prohibit or absorb the
Specific Acid there; neither does the Stone of a Crab go to the Wound; nor
does a grain of Opium taken at Mouth, for the Headache, pass up or ascend to
the Head. They are ignorant, that the Subtle Argute Judge, and equal Weigher
of all things (which distinctly knows the Seminal Virtue, not only of
Medicines, but also of all other things besides; and accordingly does either
embrace, segregate, or neglect It:) dwells in the Stomach, as I shall show by
Experience, Authority, and Reason, in the following Chap. wherefore this
indecent kind of ignorance is to be hissed out of the School of Hippocrates and
out of Common Life too, To instruct Block heads, as Lucian says, is a greater
and nobler Secret, than the very Philosophers Stone; for it were to transsorm
the understanding, and to make Dolts and Stupid Persons, Teachable.

CHAP. IX. That Acid and Alcaly in Animals is the innate Calid and Radical
Humid.
HAving discovered the Properties and Essences of Things, the Rise, Progress,
and Death of Seeds, both Theoretically and Practically, by the two Instruments
of Nature, viz. Acid and Alcaly: Now the Nature of my Argument requires, that I
discourse some things concerning the Nature of Animals, very necessary for this
work, and that I make them plain by clear Examples.

Now, as from the beginning, I have chosen the Ancients for my Guids, so for
the future, I shall respect them, as my Deities; and shall not stir an hairs
breadth from the Truth, for fear or favor of any Man: but amongst the Ancients
I choose chiefly in all things to follow Hippocrates, He being to Discourse of
Animals, chooses Man as the Noblest of all, saying in his Book of Diet, The Soul
of Man is increased in Man, but in no other, and likewise the Soul of other
great Animals, etc. The Divine meaning whereof, he gives us in the foresaid
Book of Diet, in a Learned and Profound Interpretation; where also he proposes
the Universal Generation of all Things, and the Nature of Seeds; which my
Hippoc. Chymic. explains according to his meaning: All Things, says he, in the
same place, both Animals and Man himself, consists of two Principles, differing
indeed in Faculty, but agreeing in Use, viz. Fire and Water: Both these
together are sufficient both for all other Things and for themselves mutally;
but either of them apart is sufficient neither for it self, nor for any other;
Fire adorns, Water nourishes.
and a little after in the same Book, Omitting; other Animals, I shall speak of
Man, a Soul creeps into Man, having the mixture or temper ament of Fire and
Water; Fire adorns all things which are in the Body, and can move all things,
but Water nourishes all, and through all; because for a need it abounds with
Alcaly: as I have showed before by evident Examples, by which a solid substance
is concocted by inspissation; against the opinion of these gain sayers: but the
Fire, of which the Old Man speaks in this place, is not culinary Fire, as he
shows in the same Book: Man, says he, Threshes, Washes, and Grindes Bread-Corn,
and after it is baked in the Fire, he uses it, but with a strong Fire in its
Body; it is not made up, but with a soft and gentle one; so that it is a soft
Fire, which adorns and moves all things, which in the 2 Chap. of this Book, and
here and there besides, throughout the whole Book, I have showed by many
Examples to be Acid; and hereafter shall likewise further show.

So that Fire and Water, or Acid and Alcaly (call them which you will) is that
Balsam, which is given to Bodies for Salt, That they putrefie not; and in very
deed it is Salt, as Hippocrates Chymicus shows from the 12 to the 16 Chapter;
and it will more fully appear in the progress. This is that innate Calid, which
old Hippoc. says, does abound in things that grow, Aph. 14. S. 1. because it is
fermentable and expirable; and, from aliment taken in like it self, it does
incessantly re^erminate; therefore reason persuades that it very much must want
Aliment: by which Aphorism he intended to show, that unless the innate Calid
(i. e.) Fire and Water in Animals, especially growing ones, being very
Volatile, were restored by its like, the strength of the Body would soon decay.
Hence that saying, Vbifames, laborandum non est, etc. Now that which is its
like, is not that External Body of Flesh or Bread, which we touch, since Man
lives not only by Visible Bread, but by the innate Calid of the Aliments; which
as soon as ever it is embraced by the Stomach, even before it be heated there,
presently the strength of the Body is repaired.

This innate Calid is also in Lettice, so that the Acid of the Stomach after it
is consumed by the Aliment, and is passed into Radical Humid or Moisture,
immediately the Stomach Contracts it self, and the whole Body Languishes for
want of It. Hence arises Hunger and Appetite of Food, so that an hungry Man,
though he be weakened by long Fasting or by Labor, yet upon the taking of Food
or Drink, yea of one Cup of Wine only, he finds himself immediately refreshed;
and that, before the Food begins to be chylified; because the deficient Acid is
restored by That which was in the Meat, Drink, Bread or Wine, though
imperceptibly, as to our outward Senses. Whence Hippoc. says, Aliment is that,
which is turned into Spiritual Vapors; by such as these the Vital Spirits,
which are the Authors of the Active, are nourished. For as I showed before,
That as every Acid Spirit carries the Anima inseparably in its belly, and gets
dominion over that body, into which it is infused; immediately forming it
according to its own nature, as I gave examples, chap. 6. in Spirit of Salt;
which being poured into Alcaly of Tartar, presently forms to it self a Saline
Body, agreeable to its own Nature, and becomes Salt; and Spirit of Vinegar, or
Distilled Vinegar, in the same Alcaly of Tartar, forms to it self a Body,
adaequate to its proper nature, and becomes Tartar of Wine: The like may be
said of Vitriol, and other Acids: So also the Acid of the Stomach of a Man,
when it lays hold on Bread, or any nourishing thing, over which it may have
dominion, it does turn and transmute it into Chyle, and afterward into humane
flesh: and the Acid of a Dogs Stomach converts the same Bread into Dogs Flesh,
as we are daily taught also by other Living Creatures; because Nature works by
the same Instruments in them all: as I have showed in the beginning of this
Chapter out of Hippocrates, in these following words: The soul of Man is
increased in no other, but in Man, etc. and from the same things of which it
consists; and though Bread be fermented and Acid, as most Aliments are, either
more or less; yet the Acid in the Stomach of a Man, though of it self weak,
has yet a vitality joined with it; whence it can obtain dominion over the
same: As Vinegar gets dominion over and suppresseth the Acid innate in a Pearl;
and Aqua Fortis subdues the Acid in Silver, so also the Vital Aeidity of the
Stomach subjugates the Acid Ferment of the Bread and other Aliments, and bears
such rule over them, as to convert and change them into its own nature: For
example, When a man eats a Capon, the Acid of his Stomach overcomes the radical
moisture of the Capon, and being predominant over it, transforms it into its
own nature; on the contrary, if a Capon, or a Fish, could, or did eat a Man,
his Vital Acid in the Stomach, overpowers and kills the radical moisture left
after death in man's flesh; which then becomes the flesh of a Capon.

Now that there is a Radical or Vital Moisture remaining in a Dead Carcass,
appears by the Worms, which will infallibly breed there; and likewise by the
growing of the nails and hair: And this not only Paracelsus, but many other
curious Enquirers into Natural Things, have observed. And unless there were a
Radical Moisture remaining in Flesh, and in all Aliments, fit and sufficient
nourishment could not be suppeditated to the Living; especially to those, who
are growing and increasing: witness Flesh and Fish salted and dried in the
smoke, which have less Radical Moisture than when they were fresh or new; for
much of it is eaten up by the Salt (as Hippoc. Chymic. shows chap. 14.) and
therefore they nourish less than if they were fresh. Wherefore Acid or Soft
Fire, is to be found as well in the Vegetable and Mineral, as in the Animal
Family; and it is That, which adorns every thing which is in the World; even as
Water is That, which nourishes it, as Hippocrates rightly speaks. I say, by
the presence of this Fire and Water, both which do constitute the Radical
Moisture (as I shall show) immediately before Chylification, is the Acid of the
Stomach enlightened and refreshed; in regard it is more or less in all Aliments
(as also in other things) as experience shows. There is more radical humidity
in one new-laid Egg, than in an whole Pot full of Coleworts; more in one Cup of
Wine, than in an whole Bucket of Water. Wherefore Acidity, being deficient in
the Stomach (as Hippoc. Chymic. in the places forecited plainly shows) is
restored by the Radical Moisture of Aliments; but chiefly and most of all, by
that Gelestial Food dwelling in the Air; for This is the Seed of Life, without
which neither Man, nor other Animals, or any Vegetable can attain to Generation
or Life; for that Spiritual Food or Attraction of the External Air, which by
often breathing we suck in, does so much conduce to the Life of Animals, that
it has caused not only Philosophers, but also Plebeians to admire at it:
Neither has Nature Artificially placed her Bellows in the neighborhood of the
Heart, only to cool it, as the Vulgar think, etc. but also that by their
frequent Ventilation they might suck in the Ethereal Aura, by whose afflatus
and in-breathing, the aforesaid Acid is repaired, and does uncessantly
regerminate. For, as the Ingenious Cosmopolita shows before in the Third
Chapter, as the Rain receives That Virtue of Life, and by the Sun Beams joins
it with the Alcaly of the Earth; so also the same Virtue of Life is attracted
into the Microcosme by Inspiration, and is fixed by the Solar Beams of the
Heart into the Alcaly, or Radical Moisture of Animals; as I shall by and by
Experimentally show:

This is the True Ancient Learning and Doctrine of Hippocrates, concerning the
Soft Fire Adorhing Bodies, which will always hold in despite of Rabious
Maledicence, as He testifies in his Book de Carnibus, as well as Cosmcpolita;
saying to the same sense, I will also deliver my Opion, That which we call
Calid seems to me to be immortal, and to understand all Things; to Adorn, See,
Hear, and Perceive all Things, both present and future; the greatest part
whereof in the general Perturbation of all Things, retired into the supreme
Appartiment; which the Ancients seem to me to have called Ether: The other
part, obtaining the lowest place, is called Earth, Cold and Dry, undergoing
many mutations, wherein there is yet much Calidity: What can be spoken more
clearly for the Radical Moisture of Things? For That which Cosmopolita shows in
the Macrocosme (see Chap. 3.) the same things according to Hippocrates, are to
be understood in the Microcosme; For Man's Body, unless it were required by that
Immortal Calid, both by Aliments, and also by Inspiration, being Cold and Dry,
would undergo many changes, and at length would crumble to nothing before our
Eyes, even as the flame of a Candle, when the Wax or Tallow is spent, or when
it is blown out by the Wind; yet it does not wholly perish, as it is Vulgarly
thought, and as it seems; but being destitute of its Pabulum, is plucked from
it, and so is scattered abroad and vanishes into Air, which is the Abyss and
Universal Receptacle of the Lights and Spiritual Natures of the Material World;
as Raymund has it, and as the Text of Hippocrates in his Book de Carnibus does
a little before explain. Wherefore the chief Fuel and Food of Life, is
supplied out of the Air to all the three Kingdoms: Hence the Ancients said,
Jovis omnia plena; and Cosmopolita affirms, that the hidden Food of Life is in
the Air, which as I have showed, assumes a Body to it self, in an agreeable and
consentaneous root and subject.

Wherefore Innate Calid and Radical Humid differ much one from another, That is
wholly Solar and Occultly Acid and Oily, but This is more Corporeous, Constnat,
and Saline; That is of a Superior Order, This, of an Inferior; in which is that
Country, where Man takes a Wife to himself, as Cosmopolita speaks in his Tract
de Sulphur; and it is the Hell, whether Plato is said to have hurried
Preserpina; and Cores, her Mother, imploring Jupiters aid for her Redemption,
was answered, That she might return, if she had tasted nothing in Hell (i. e.)
unless that Celestial Spirit, the Child of the Sun, had not been absorbed by
the Alcaly, but as yet had dwelt free in the Air, then she might have easily
returned; but she had tasted Grains of a Pomegranate in Elisium (i. e.) in
Pleasure; for which Reason she could not return, till six Months were expired
(i. e.) till the Pomegranates were consumed; and then Proserpina returns to her
Mother, as the Light of a Candle does to its Source or Country, as I said
before. So that They are deceived, who confound Innate Calid and Radical Humid
in all the Three Families; for they differ no less amongst themselves, than
Aqua Caustica does from Mercury, in which it takes a Body, as appears by the
falsified or counterfeit Emplaister, unjustly ascribed to John de Vige. For in
mixed Bodies, the Radical Morstar^ is the Seat and Food of the Celestial Fire,
and its Bond uniting it to the Elementary Body: but that Igneous Virtue, is the
Form and Soul of mixed Bodies: more clearly thus, The Spirit being either
occultly or manifestly Acid, is the Seat and Band which ties the Soul to the
Body. Let us then do as Nature does, whom Art ought to imitate as her Guide in
all Things; or otherwise we shall never become Complete Servants to Nature.

Let Elementary Water be an Example, which being impregnated with the Child of
the Sun, that is, with Celestial heat, falls upon the Radical Moisture or
Alcaly of a Vine, and is imbibed by it, and so becomes the same thing with it,
as I have showed in the Second and Third Chapter.

I shall also give an Example in the Counterfeit Spirit of Venus, which from
the beginning was Simple Water, which being impregnated with Celestial
Calidity, fell upon the Radical Humid of the Vine; This in undergoing many
Mutations, by Reason of the aforesaid Calid, having a power in it self from
Nature to multiply it self, is brought to Maturity, and becomes a Grape, whose
Aqueous Juice, being pregnant with Celestial Calid and Radical Humid (These Two
beginning Action and Passion one with another) it comes to pass, that from
their Mutual Action and Re-action, it conceives Heat (see Hippoc. Chymic. Chap.
18.) whence it is said to be Fermented, and it becomes Wine, in which the
heavenly Calid overcomes the Radical Humid; and if This at length gain
strength, it becomes Vinegar: with this Vinegar and Lees of Wine, now soured,
Copper is eroded; which so eroded (as Dioscorides rightly teaches) becomes
Aerugo; from which by Distillation, Vinegar, is again drawn forth; which
unskilful Persons by a false Name call Spirit of Venus, as I have exactly
showed in its place. This Vinegar is nothing else but Water impregnated with
Acid Salt from the Principle of the Vine, and it is the Seed and Radical, Humid
of its innate Celestial Fire: now specificated by the Vine (for being pure, it
does not expose it self to be handled by the impure hands of Ignorants, or of
the Vulgar) and it is called by a common name Vinegar: And as the Heavenly
Calid had from its first beginning its Seat in the Alcaly of the Water, and
afterward was multiplied in the Vine: Hence also it has retained the Name of
its Original, which it keeps also inviolate in Copper, to the shame of the
Norimberg and Vienna Doctors and their Colleagues. So that Vinegar shall again
be an Example to us of the Celestial Calid I say, let This be satiated with
Alcaly of Tartar, till the Ebullition and Strepitus cease; in that Ebullition
The Spirit binds and unites the Heavenly Fire with the Terr estrial Body (i.
e.) with Alcaly: Alcaly in this place represents the Radical Humid, in which
the Heavenly Calid is bound; and after the Alcaly (i. e.) the Matrix has
received a due Proportion, it casts forth and ejects the rest, to use
Cosmopolita's words.

If you would have Proserpina return to her Mother, then distill this Tartar,
and there will come forth an Oil and Water which is bitterish by reason of the
Oil, the Oil is that Pinguous, by which it was made Vinegar: again imbibe this
Oil and Water in Alcaly, and distill it, as before, and instead of the Oil there
comes forth insipld elementary Water; and so Water in the beginning is
impregnated with Coelestical Calid, and afterward it is changed by Fermentation
into Grapes, then into Wine, then into Vinegar; at length it is made Salt in its
Mother Alcaly, which is turned into Oil, and at last (as I have said of the
Light of a Candle, and of Proserpina) it returns to its Mother (i. e.) to
Ether, as Hippocrates spoke a little before. So that the root of the thing,
returns into Elementary Water, viz. into that which it was, before it was
foecundated with the Indoles of a Vine, by the Child of the Sun: So also the
Capu Mortuum which is left, is nothing else but the Alcaly of Tartar, in which
the same Spirit inhabites, which I have showed in Vinegar, but in a way more
constant; therefore I shall call it in this place Radical Hun^d, which also by
repeated Distillations returns into empty Earth and simple Elementary Water, as
Hippoc. Chymio. teaches Chap. 10. Thus the saying of Hermes and others is
fulfilled, That nothing in the World dies, etc.

The absurd Collegiates (as appears by one of their Society) do venditate and
boast this Simple Elementary Water, to be a Cordial in desperate Diseases, as I
have said above, Chap. 4. but with what advantage to Physic, let honest Men
judge. Wherefore that Igneous and Oily Virtue is the matter of Humid and Calid
in mixed Bodies, dispensed into these Inferiora, by Superior Natures, without
which the Earth would again be vacuous and inane; but the Aqueous Humor is the
immediate Keeper and Cabinet of that Igneous Spirit incarcerated in the Seed,
which abides there so long, till by adventitious heat it be promoted to
Generation in a fit Matrix. And as I have showed in Alcaly with Acid, so also
the Radical Humid in every mixed Body, is the Shop and Hearth of Vulcan, into
which that immortal Fire flows, and wherein it is kept; which is the first
Mover of all the faculties of the Individuum: and because it is the Child, and
as it were Vicar, of the Sun, I conclude with Raimund, and by the authority of
Hippocrates de Carnibus, that it acts all things in every lesser world, which
the Sun does in the greater.

These things being premised, The Seat of Radical Moisture.
let us now see where the Seat of this Radical Moisture in Man is? which
without intermission does catch and absorb the Child of the Sun, or Proserpina.
From the situation and effectual Virtue of the Sun, we may infer, that it
supplies the place of an Heart to the Universe; for Life flows down into all
parts from the Sun, in regard Light is the Vehicle of Life; yea it is the
Fountain and next Cause, which inspires Life into Things, excepting only the
Soul of Man, which is a Beam of super-coelestial uncreated Light. Uncreated
Light.
Now as the Sun in the Macrocosme supplies the place of an Heart, and inspires
Life into Things; so also the Heart in the Microcosme must supply the place of
the Sun; if these Things are True, as they are most True and Veracious, which
Hermes has left us, In his Tabula, viz. That Superior Bodies are as inferior
ones, and Vice Versa: Therefore the Vital Spirit, or Celestial Calid attracted
by the Lungs, and as it were sifted through a Sieve, passed directly to the
Heart, where Proserpina is embraced and detained by the Radical Humid, and
there acquires a Body as I above observed out of Hippocrates de Carnibus: and I
have noted the same thing also concerning Caustic Water with Mercury, and
concerning Vinegar with Alcaly of Tartar: And as Phlegm, or Elementary Water,
which is the Root of Aqua Fortis and Vinegar, is not coagulated with Mercury,
neither with Alcaly, but exhales from heat, and returns into Elementary Water,
as I have showed; so also the Phlegm and Elementary Aqueous Vapor, which we
inspire and suck in with the C^lestial Calid the Child of the Sun must needs
again by Expiration return to Water, as every Plebeian knows and is forced to
confess: But the Saline Nature of Aqua Fortis is fixed with Mercury, as the
Saline Nature of Vinegar into Alcaly with Corals; so also Proserpina, or the
Child of the Sun, by Inspiration attracted by the Lungs to the Radical Humid,
which has its Seat in the Heart, is detained there, and is wrought and fixed
by the Radii and heat of the Heart (after its manner) into Alcaly, or Radical
Moisture: which thereupon by the same Heat and Pulse, or Protrusion is diffused
through the whole, and inspires Life, Actions, and Faculties into Things and
Members (for Hippocrates has said in his forecited Book de Carnibus; That It
Understands, Sees, Adorns, Hears, and Perceives all Things: See also the end of
the foregoing Chapter.) And as It performs several Actions, so it has
obtained several Names; for in the Eyes it sees, in the Tongue it Tastes, in
the Fingers it Touches, etc. And as I have showed that Acid and Alcaly do
constitute Ferments, so also Radical Humid and innate Calid, as well in a Grain
of Corn, as in Man's Body, do perform Vital Actions, and therefore may not
unfitly be called, Vital Ferment.
The Vital Ferment; for it flows and is diffused from thence into all the
Members of the Body: And as that Vital Spirit or Child of the Sun, is
multiplicative (that I may so speak) of it self in the Stomach or Ventricle of
a Grain of Corn (which is the 8200 part of its Body, as the deep Sages of
Natures Mysteries have observed) and from the super-abounding stock of its
Wealth, may wax sour, and be made Ardent and inflameable Water: So also This in
Man's Stomach does regerminate, is multiplied, it sours after the manner of
Ferment, and like Aqua Ardens does illuminate the whole humane Body with vivid
Heat and Color; and because it has the Operations of Fire, Why it is called
Ignis Mollis?
therefore it is called by Hippocrates, a soft Fare; having its Seat in the
Stomach. For as the Sun, the heart of the World, does uncessantly send this
Spirit to the Ether, which contains all Things which the World has in it
self; lest the Frame of the World should fail: so also the Heart does
unintermittently send this Spirit to the Ether of the Microcosme (i. e.) to
the Stomach, which contains in its Cavity or Venture all Things which the
Microcosme has; and therefore Natures Myxtae have given it the Name of
Multiventrous Spirit of Mercury. Now because It flows all the days of our Life,
and vanishes by reason of the volatility and frailty proper to the Nature of
Animals, especially growing ones, as Hippoc. Chymic. demonstrates, Chap 12. It
is therefore necessary that It should be repaired by Congruous Food (for we are
nourished by the same Things of which we consist) which does acquire in the
Stomach a beginning of volatileness from the foresaid Spirit of the Animal
himself; a Species whereof that Spirit was from the beginning (so Meat in the
Stomach conceives Ferment from within, as Raymond in his Theory.) Hence of
necessity, Bread and Water in the Stomach of a Man, become Humane Aliment; and
the same Bread and Water in the Stomach of a Dog, become Canine Aliment, etc.
because the Vital Acid of Animals, and the Acid Occult in Aliments, are by
Digestion and Concoction turned into Radical Humid: All these have fetched and
deduced their Original from the Child of the Sun: But the specific Acid Virtue
in the Aliments is overcome by the Vital Acid dwelling in the Stomach of
Animals; as the Acid seated in a Pearl, is subdued and brought under by
Vinegar; but Aliment does not fall down from a sound Stomach, till it has
attained the end of Ferment (as I have showed by many Examples in the 6 Chap.
For Nature is alike is all Things) ( Hippocrates, the Authority of the
Ancients, and Experience, proving the same (hi(i. e.)) till it has attained
the Foundation of Vitality and Volatility; for since the Radical Humid of all
Animals is Volatile, as it is also the very Shop of Vulcan; it is requisite,
that whatsoever is labored and wrought out there, should be also frail and
volatile. Hence the Flesh of all Animals, Blood, Urine, Sweat, Stones, Sand,
Gravel, Schirrhus's, Tophus's. etc. and whatsoever and Animal can generate, do
not resist, but are destroyed from their former State and annihilated by Fire,
or else are reduced into an insipid Calx, as Bones, or into a mordicant Calx,
as the shells of Eggs, of Oisters, and the like. etc. But that all These before
spoken of, were Occultly Salt, before they were burnt, we may be convinced, not
only by the Reason aforesaid, and by the Authority of Hippocrates, but moreover
also, by our School Mistress, frequent Experience: For which, that I may not
cloy you with Repetitions, see Hippoc. Chymic. from Chap. 12. to the 16. For
whatsoever is distilled from an Animal, by the help of Fire, there goes forth
from it a Liquor, pinguous Oil, and flying Alcaly, but the Acid, which bound up
the Alcaly in this tyrannical Operation, returns with Proserpina to her Mother,
which you may again fetch from thence by Art and subtle Hands, as I shall show
anon: But the Caput Mortuum, even from the hardest Bones, is left vacuous and
empty, except Blood; which whilst it is by degrees reduced to a Coal by a
gentile Fire in a Retort; then out of it by Common Water is elicited a portion
of Salt; but the greatest part is turned into Fugitive Alcaly, not very much
stinking: a plain argument, that in the Blood there is a greater part of Occult
Acid (binding in the Alcaly, that with a Light Fire it may not fly away) than
in the Bones or other parts, Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 12.

But that it is Salt ( viz. a Composition of Alcaly and Acid) the Solution of
Sublimate Mercury does prove; Salt of Blood
for being cast into It it does not precipitate It as Alcaly, as above Chap. 7.
But the part, which is distilled from the Retort, is fugitive Alcaly, Alcaly of
Blood.
and precipitates Mercury of a White Color, and in to a small spongy Powder.
Add fixed Alcaly to Urine, a little coagulated to the consistence of Honey, that
the Alcaly may imbibe the Acid Salt which Man eats, Distill it through a
Limbeck, and it will emit a flying Alcaly, having the stinking smell of the
Urine from the Ferment of Putrefaction. Ferment of Putrefaction what?
Urine does not acquire this putrefactive Ferment in Artificial Putrefactions,
as those Deans with their wild Colleagues do imagine, but in that very moment
when the Serum passes through the Reins, as through a Syringe; but for want of
a Name, I call it Ferment of Putrefaction, to distinguish it from other
Ferments; for Alcaly of Sweat does not stink, as that of Urine does: neither
does That of Bones nor Horns, but has a fresh smell, which these vainglorious
Artists, hitherto were ignorant of, though my Hippoc. Chymic. has taught them
it; yet they never understood it: for That Book as it sets forth the difference
of fixed Alcalyes and the constancy of Forms by the Precipitation of Sublimate
Mercury dissolved; so it distinguishes the Permanency of the Forms of Volatile
Alcalyes by the Ferments acquired in their Native Places; because the same Form
walks pari passu to the Fire with them even unto the very Eliments, viz. The
Form of the same thing, from which they were taken, as Geber and Experience do
witness, as I have above clearly showed. By this we see the reason, why Alcaly
and Viperine Radical Humid, or the Alcaly of other Animals, passing through
Actual Fire, as I have said, does retain the Form of the Animal, whence it was
taken, undestroyed; but as the Alcaly or Mother, or first Matter of Metals
(which I have before demonstrated) is variously agitated by the unskilful
multitude in Acids and Causticks, and Calx's of Things, not agreeable to its
Nature, with which they oppress and destroy its internal Form, and the spark of
Acid Metaline Light, so that it cannot be increased or multiplied (as I have
showed in a Grain of Corn) so also I find the first Faeminine matter of Alcaly
of Vipers to be miserably tossed and debased by unskilful Sciolists, sometimes
with Calx, sometimes with most Acid Spirit of Salt (see Hippoc. Chymic. Chap.
3. and 11.) Things contrary to its Nature; so that the spark of Light or
Internal Form of the Viper, which ought by a gentle Fermentation to be
increased and multiplied, by these Violators of Nature is almost wholly
destroyed and annihilated, in like sort as the light of a Pearl remains
oppressed and slain by Their Celebrated Spirit of Venus. And as a skilful
Artist, taking Nature for his Guide, can multiply the form in Mother of Metals,
so also the same Artist, by the same Guide, can multiply the Form in the Mother
or Alcaly of Vipers. I have showed, how wise Nature, by her working, does
perfect Radical Humid for the Family of Vegetables, on which Antiquity has
superstructed Artificial Humid with good success. I have also showed out of
Hippocrates de Carnibus, the method and way that Nature uses in the
preparation of Radical Humid in the Animal Family; in imitation of which, I
have made the Artificial, not departing an hairs breadth from the Natural
Operation.

Hence it will appear to all in general, and every individual Man in
particular, both present and to come, against the opinion of Calumniators, That
This Invention of mine, may be truly and without fraud called Radical humid by
Art, as well as Salt of Vipers; The Viperine Salt of the Author is Radical
Humid by Art.
for it consists of the Alcaly of Vipers (which, as I have above evinced by
Experience and the Authority of Geber, to act the Woman, as in Minerals and
Vegetables, so also in this Animal Classis it is wholly of a feminine nature,
and has in it an Occult Viperine form) and of the Child of the Sun; or
celestial Calid, not as yet corrupted; which since it cannot be alone, is
received into and detained in the Alcaly of Water, until it be fermented into
Salt (i. e.) into the degree of the perfection of its Nature: Thus you have my
mind. For an Example of this Salt, my Hippoc. Chymic. chap. 10. holds forth the
way, whereby with Alcaly of Tartar, Vitriolate Tartar may be made out of a
Crude Minera of Vitriol of Mars; and it shows also, That Nature is in all
things alike, and truly it discovers a great thing. But these barren and
unfruitful pretenders to Physic, by reason of the caecity of their minds, are
not capable of the evident truth; yea They scarce know the things which are
before their eyes; for in Acid Fountains they see not the Child of the Sun
diluted by providen Nature in Water, which never falls; and by flowing by an
immature Vein of Iron, it licks and affects it with a sweet Acidity, and aftr
it has flowed down a little it waxes yellow, as Hippocrates Chymi^us shows,
chap. 16. An evident argument that the Celestial Spirith flaggs in its action,
when seed fails, no otherwise then as Proserpina, having enjoyed her pleasure,
returns to her Mother; yet notwithstanding it suffers not it self to be taken
by polluted hands, but to intelligent persons, it manifests it self even
whilst dormant and asleep: Wherefore there are many ways conducing to this
end which are very craggy and obscure to Detractors: But what ingenious Man
would not try the same with crude Natural Vitriol of Mars? Unless perhaps he be
afraid of the frequent solution, long digestion, and judicious coagulation.

Behold here, all ye Candid Assertors of Physical Light, how the first
Faeminine matter of Alcaly of Vipers, by a Triumphant and Solemn Marriage with
the Child of the Sun, is exalted into the Nature of Salt; whose Marriage is
celebrated in the House of Nature, to use Cosmopolita's words; against which,
for these twenty years (whilst I have made my abode in this Country) Dogs have
barked, Ravens have crooked, and unheard of clamors have been made; which I
despising, do yet live to triumph over and contemn my Adversaries; but if I
had died, some would have accounted those things as Prodigies and Omens of my
Death. Oh how much paper have these Grammatical Masters spent about this
matter? what slanders, what infamatory Libels, how many Calumnies and filthy
Reproaches, have these uncivil Decl aimers against the Works of Nature, vomited
forth into their own laps? As for my Self, I have chosen Truth for my faithful
Defendress, which though it may be oppressed and exercised with great weight
and burden amongst Men, yet it is impossible that it should be wholly
extinguished, in regard it is powerful, inexpugnable, and triumphant above all
things in the World, as my Preface to Hippoc. Chymicus proves out of the Holy
Scripturs. Therefore I entertain with delight, the contempts of Pheb^ians, for
I can scarce find filth or dirt enough to stop the Mouths of such evil
Speakers. I know, that it is the part of a fool to contend with unskilful
persons about things which they understand not, or to think to get any credit,
by teaching them; but on the contrary, a Wise Man will silently consider the
times, places, and customs of the Ruling Men with whom he is conversant; and
besides, he will confide in just actions, and then cheerfully expect an equal
event; for hereby accrews great glory and emolument: Let Helwigdidrick be a
late Example (I speak not reproachingly, for we should say nothing but good of
the dead or of the absent) what stone did not he turn heretofore, together with
his Associates, against the Experimental Truth? which was a stranger and
unknown to Them all? what did they not infuse into the Vulgar aganst my
conversation? (as if that were at all to the purpose) but I derided all the
actions of these dancing Camels (to speak proverbially) as knowing, that it is
the common refuge of vain and wild heads, when they want reasons to oppugn the
Truth, to catch at any opportunity to blemish ones manners, as my Answer
published in the year 1656 under the Title of Echo may witness. These furious
Deans, Echo to vindicate Chyrosophus,
with their foul-mouthed Colleagues, and their antecedent herd, do commit the
same evil at this day; but the best is, they are All Judges contaminated with
filthy ignorance, and are unjust witnesses, yea falsaries in the Law; as I have
hitherto clearly proved. All whose Writings, as well past as present, though by
foolish diligence compacted into a great Volume, yet they are not sufficient to
bear down Tachenius, who is supported by the Truth. But these Idlers do but
waste their golden and irreparable time in these employments, in thus
exercising their lying Genius's, and in fruitless blotting of Paper; Their
labor both formerly and hereafter shall be in vain, for if a generous Horse
regards not the Barkings of following Curs, I shall as little esteem my present
or future Opposers, either single or altogether; you know my meaning, for I
live and conside in just actions; but enough of This: To return, In Vitriol
there is an Acid most grateful to, pleasant, and desired by humane nature, as
Paracelsus and Experience say: This Acid, because it cannot be alone,
associates it self with the immature Metal, and with It grows into a Saline
Body; free or separate It, and it will be worth your labor; for there lurks in
It an Arcanum for the Epilepsy, of which the ingenious Crollius speaks:
Paracilsus attributes many Virtues to the volatileness of Spirit of Vitriol,
Pasilius V^l^^^. his White Spirit of Vi^^iol what?
in curing the Ep lepsy; but I could never see any of Them: neither did ever
any man affirm to me, that he could cure a confirmed Ep^lepsy, only by Vulgar
and simply prepared Spirit of Vitriol. Thus far He. Therefore, for the reasons
hinted before, it cannot be elicited by Distillation, as all Candid Operators
witness; for this cause, the Searchers into the Secrets of Nature have tried
another way, which I should willingly have declared in this place, but that I
have experience, That it is a foolish thing to expose ones self to Ignorants and
to the Vulgar, for what they praise is blameworthy, what they think is vain,
what they speak is false, what they disapprove is good, what they allow evil,
and what they extol infamous; as I have hitherto proved by clear Examples.
Neither does an Arcanum lie hid in the said Volatility only for the Epilepsie,
but also for the Suffocation of the Matrix, for the Palpitation of the Heart,
and for the Corroboration of the Spirits, Brain, Heart, and of the whole
Individuum; since it is the Child of the Sun, and the Twinbrother of our Vital
Spirit. But of This I have said enough. I return now to the Vacuous Alcaly of
Vipers, which is ill treated by the company of Vulgar pretended Chemists.

As we do not give a Scorpion, or a Piece of Wood, to those that are hungry,
and ask for Bread; neither do we give Oil mixed with Gaul to such as are
thirsty; but we exhibit to them similary and consentaneous Aliments, of the
same family of which the hungry person consists, as Hippocrates teaches: So
also the Alcaly of Vipers, being vacuous, hungry, and thirsty, must be
satisfied with That of which it consists, not with Calx or Spirit of Salt, as
unskilful Writers give out; for I have showed in the 3. Chapter of this Tract,
That Nature does so, and she is every where alike. And if the Alumnus and
Scholar of Truth in his Operations shall imitate Her, he can never go out of
the way, as by and by will appear by a clearer Example: But here I would have
all Readers to take Notice, that as all Remedies, proceeding from Animals are
weaker for Man's use, than Those that come from Minerals; so we are here to
understand, that Alcaly of Vipers possesses a specific Form, and is
impregnated with Natural Acid supervening, and under a convenient heat of
Digestion, it is ripened into one excellent Body: The same Alcaly indeed may
arise more efficacious, by reason of its Masculine adjunct, yet it cannot
ascend beyond the boundary before alleged out of Raymund; so that the Remedies
taken from the Mineral Family, are found to be much more perfect in the
Epilepsie, Asthma, Stone, and most Coagulated Diseases ( Hippoc. Chymic. Chap.
14.) in as much as their Radical Humid is found by Experience to be more
constant.

Now Those in general are called Coagulated Diseases, Coagulated Diseases.
who from Immature Acid, flow from the Stomach to the other Shops of Digestion,
and are Coagulated there, or if in these very Shops, through the degenerating
of the Occasional Cause, the Acid become more powerful, then it suppresses the
Innate, and presently the Pores are contracted, and it undergoes Coagulation
with the Alcaly of the place, according to the property of the Member; as I
have above showed out of Hippocrates. And as in the Macrocosme there dwells an
Occult Food of Life in the Air, which because it contains all things which the
World has, is therefore called a Multiventrous Spirit; we must also understand
the same in the Microcosme: So that in the Air of Man's Stomach, there inhabits
a Multiventrous Spirit, which contains in it whatsoever a Man can do, or has;
as I have showed out of Hippocrates in his Book de Carnibus. If therefore any
of This Spirit, dwelling in the Stomach, shall suck in a more Acid Air of a
strange and foreign taste or smell, not agreeing to its own Nature, which it
cannot thoroughly change into Mature or Salt, and it falls into another Shop of
Digestion, where Concoction, and Alteration proceed more sweetly than in the
Stomach, then presently the more powerful suppresses the weaker, and they are
both Coagulated into a foreign Indoles; whence the indwelling Spirit rages, and
as it were disdains, the Member waxes hot, and does not Concoct its proper
Aliment, from whence a Disease is manifestly produced; after the same manner,
as when Vinegar suppresses the indwelling Rector of a Pearl, and does so weaken
It, that it loses the form and shape of Pearl; as I have elsewhere clearly
shown.

Wherefore the vivid and manifest Acid, if by mistake it fall from the Stomach,
and pass to the Economy of the Bowels, immediately, as foreign and more
powerful, it subdues the feeble Operator of the place, and takes the Province
to it self; causing either Colic pains, or making the Belly either loose or
costive, or working such like disorders in the Intestines; which I think
better, to avoid Prolixity, to omit in this place, for they require a distinct
Tract by themselves. I have only endeavored to deduce necessary Arguments in
this matter, from thence to discover the folly of Those, who have learned to do
nothing else but to defame and revile the Truth, which is unknown to them.
Viral Aura.
Now this vivid and manifest Acid (of which I now speak) must not be understood
to be a certain Fluid Liquor, which as the vulgar speaks, descends as a swist
Torrent, but it is also a vital thing, called by Hippocrates, Aura Levis; by
Virgil, Igneus Vigor; by Horatius, Divina Aura; of it self wanting a Body, but
not enduring to be alone (as Hippocrates says, de Diaeta) it incorporates it
self with Meats and Drinks, and informs Them into the Vital Aliment of the
Body, which takes in that Food. Hence again, Hippocrates in his first Book de
Diaeta, The Soul of Man is excreased in Man, and in no other, and the like of
other great Animals. A^^a the Cause of Diseases.
Now this Aura by Irradiation alone persects its work, but a foreign Aura mixed
with it, as Water with Water, Fire with Fire, is alone sufficient to be the
cause of Diseases, as our Master teaches de veteram Medicina, because it can
easily alter the inbred Operator (for every Male has its Ventricle) which
being altered, presently the Digestion of the place is disturbed, A way of
Cryptography.
and the very Aliment, otherwise Vivid, is p^^verted into a Mucous Ind^les,
according tothe property of the^ diseased and affected Member; just as the
Occult Sulphurous Odor of Orpiment does die and denigrate Sal Saturni, though
far distant from it, after this manner, Write with Saccharum Saturni dissolved
in Water, that Writing will not be seen upon the Paper; place that written
paper in the Frontispiece of any Book, then have ready an Humid Sulphurous
Odor, which is made of unslaked Lime and Orpiment, both first severally
pounded, and afterward mixed together; pour Water on this Powder, and make a
Lixivium, with which you moisten another Paper, and place it at the end of the
same Book; shut the Book, and the next morning you shall find the Writing to
appear obscurely black, because the Sulphurous Odor of the Orpiment, being
excited by the Alcaly of the Lime, has pierced through the whole body of the
Book unto its own subject. Art imitates Nature and this Art.
In like sort (says Hippocrates, de Diaeta; The nature of Man does operate,
with which all Arts and all Artifices do communicate. For if the Operator and
Causes of that glewish matter called Synovia in the joint of the Foot (for
Example) were so disposed to receive the vitiated Aura of the Stomach, as Sal
Saturni is to entertain the Aura inquinated by the Odor of the Sulphur of
Orpiment, then indeed the Aura of the Stomach, being tinged with a foreign
Odor, would also inquinate the Synovia in the joint of the Toe; and this is
done only by Odor, that I may so speak, from whence arises pain in the joint
of the Foot, which from the place is called Podagra, or the Foot-gout; and
immediately the Aliment, otherwise vivid, is perverted into a Mucous Indoles,
etc. as I said but now.

This kind, after the manner of the Ancients, Hippocrates in general called
Divine, and has enjoined every one to take notice of and observe, That if
there be any Divine Thing in Diseases, we should have special regard to that,
if ever we would be good and admirable Physicians.

Now that Divinum of Hippocrates is the Occult, The Divi^um of Hippocrates.
Arduous, Obscure, Hidden, Cryptical and Admirable Ferment in all the
Ventricles, both of the great and lesser World; which cannot be seen with the
eyes, neither can it be perceived by any outward sense, but only it is known by
its effect, and that not without much labor, and no little expense of time;
but I have showed it to be the Child of the Sun, Chap. 2. For whatsoever does
escape the sight of the bodily eye, the eye of the Understanding does, and can
reach it; as in His book of Preccpts. The Vie^^^ Professors gross and
Contumelious Opinion of the foundation of Ancient Physic.


This arduous and obscure Ferment has so crazed the Brains of the Deans, and
their Collegiats, though they think they were solid, strong, and well grounded
in Art, That they do altogether dislike that Divinum. as a certain piacular
thing, (which my Hippoc. Chymic. celebrates both in Diseases and Remedies) and
they are also ignorant how to distinguish new things from old, latter from
former; which the fourth in order of the Vienna Professors, a scurrilous and
dicacious prater, does confess, viz. that he is amazed to find that it should
be treated of by learned men, as being manifestly false and foolish; but he
Dreams waking, as the Proverb is.

But our Galen (even when he was old, deriding such men's madness) together with
many other famous Men, had It in great esteem, and (with Hippocrates) consesses
in his 2. Book of the Differences of Feavors, Chap. 27. That It is placed in a
certain secret affection, and that it does inhere in the very parts, saying of
intermittent Feavors, It ceases not to bring abcut the Circuitus of their Fits,
as long as the Disposition, in the generating part, is preserved: whence it
appears, that in that place he fetches the Cures of Feavors a little higher
than he does in his Books of Method and in his First Book of Art to Glaxcoe;
affirming, That the correction of this Disposition, is the principle scope of
the Cure; and in the same book, Where heat overcomes the matter, it is called
increment. He means nothing else, but what my Hippoc. Chym. has more clearly
explained (for the sake of the studious, viz. Ferment, either occult, or
manifest, which speaking to Plebeiasn, he calls heat, and Alcaly matter; for if
heat do overcome, it must needs have dominion over the Matter or Alcaly, as I
have abundantly proved by all examples both in the great and lesser world; and
then (says Galen) Heat is increased not only in Feavors, but also in all other
Diseases and Matters, as I have before showed in Barley, a seed of the
Macrocosme; and now shall likewise show even ad oculum in Paronychia (i. e.)
(and imposthumation under the root of the Nails) a seed of the Microcosm. Now
Paronychia, the Mistress or Queen of almost all Diseases, is an Igneous Tumor;
so called from the most Acute pain accompanying it; the like whereof is hardly
to be found amongst Men; it arises in the root of the Nails (i. e.) in their
Ventricle, when the Occult Ferment is by mistake There made manifest and
soured; in that very moment the vivid Aliment is perverted, the neighboring
parts are disturbed, and sometimes the Bones themselves are eroded.

But this Disposition is corrected by a more powerful Acid descending from a
perfecter Family, which can subdue the inflamed Ferment of the Microcosme: For
before the Tumor be opened, it must be anointed over, and the whole Nail too,
with Acid of Sulphur, as it is gathered Ex Campana, which by reason of its
thickness they call Oil, when this Unction causes pricking and itching a
little in the part affected, in that very moment you may observe the corruptive
Disposition to be corrected, because the more powerful Anima gets dominion over
the weaker, no otherwise than as counterfeit Spirit of Venus subjugates the
Occult Acid in a Pearl. Do but wash your Finger with this warm Water, and it is
enough. I would have discovered many more of these things, for the benefit of
my Neighbors, as also a pleasant, safe and delightsome Remedy for the Lues
Venerca it self, unless I had been every where prevented by the deep Wisdom of
the Vienna Professors.

I know Learned Men, not a few, have by long use and experience taken notice of
things, that do eradicate certain Dispositions; but by reason of the multitude
of Ignorants in this woeful age, which, with one mouth would rail against them
(I am almost ashamed to speak it) they are afraid to publish Them, because they
exceed the understanding of Gregarious and Talkative Medicks.

So the Vulgar Country People by proper Antidotes (i. e.) such as specifically
destroy some Dispositions, or do restrain, absorb, or overcome the Acid and
Ferment of the place) do sometimes Cure not only Feavors, but many other
Diseases, without Purgation premised; whereby Old Women do sometimes disgrace,
even the most able Physicians, and do counterfeit their Art; so Hippocrates
teaches in his Book de Affectionibus, If Patients seem to have no need of
Pharmaca, give them Medicaments in Drink, by which the Feavor may be either
changed or may abate.

My Hippocrates Chymicus, with Galen and Hippocrates, give many Examples of
this Correction (as the former calls it) of Transmutation (as the latter) of
Dispositions; which being Cryptical, Abstruse, and Magnetical Works of Nature,
and besides are the Foundations of the Physic of our Predecessors, The Deans
and their Colleagues have indeed read them, as appears, but being above their
reach, and above Priscians Grammar Rules, they could not understand Them, as
appears by their reproachful canting; for therefore they asperse them, as not
having learned to consider obscure things from manifest, as Hippocrates
pleasantly derides them, L. 1. de Diaeta. But if this Spiritual Operation be to
be derided, Wonderful are thy works O Lord etc. Psa. 91.
then surely, whole Nature, and the profound Science of True Physic will be
also counted ridiculous. For whatsoever Nature works in the greater or lesser
world, she always begins and ends it in a Spiritual manner; for the Creator
has given her no other Instruments to work withal: Out of a small Seed of Hemp
or Flax, there arises a Plant, which having first undergone many vexatious
Alterations, at length is made a Sail, by the help whereof, and by the blowing
of the Winds, Men are carried up and down the World. This Action, from the
beginning to the end, proceeds Spiritually, like Cryptography, as Hippocrates
Chymicus shows in the forecited place. And also Man's Nature it self, of Bread
only and simple Water, does not only frame for it self the Body, which we
touch, but also the Optic Spirit of incomprehensible Tenuity. Bread and Water
are made Spirits.
None but the Norimberg and Austrian Collegiates and their fellows, would ever
have called this Operation of Nature inept, Circum-foraneous, and
Mountebank-like. So in the very Science of Physic, neither Rhubarb, Senna, nor
Agarick, etc. (their innate Spirit being taken away) can any longer disturb
Man's Body; neither, in their full strength, if they could be given to a Carcass
of a Man (the Spirit being gone) would they purge It. So that whatsoever is in
Medicine, besides the Clamours of the Deans and their Colleagues, like
Cryptography, it proceeds Spiritually; for we must needs confess, that all
things do consist of insensible Principles, as Lucretius says, Lib. 2. Moreover
one weight or parcel or Galls, and a fourth part of that weight of Vitriol
(though neither of them black) yet being joined together with an Aqueos Liquor,
Ink produced of Occult things.
by reason of the innate Spirit, do wax black, because the Alcaly of the Galls
does suck up the Aoid Spirit of the V^triol, and the immature Iron is diluted
into Ink, which is in use amongst Kings, Learned and Unlearned, yea Plebeians
themselves: Yet all these, when they handle this Cryptick and hidden Color,
brought thus to light, are accused by these lofty Deans and their Owllight
Companions, as Circumforaneous and Juglers.

Truly they use their Tongues ill, but their Ink worse. But to make an end, I
conclude with Lucretius, That both Learned and Unlearned must needs confess,
That whatsoever the World has, is produced of Cryptical and hidden things;
Only these talkative Praters, to evidence to the whole World that they are vain
and empty Bodies, without Spirit, do laugh at these Works of Nature, together
with their Instruments. They are a company of light, ungrateful, and ludicrous
Birds, which I leave to be fed upon by such hungry Stomachs as desire them; and
so I return whence I digressed. The Aura of the Stomach, being endued with a
foreign odor, can creep to the joints of the Foot (as the Aura of Common
Sulphur can reach Sal Saturni, though far distant from it, as I have
experimentally showed) and there it can so trouble the inhabiting Spirit, that
the Aliment of the place waxes sour, and pain arises, which from the place is
called Podagrick. But of what Species this Acidity is, so tinged by the strange
or foreign Aura, Man's understanding cannot comprehend: Whence Hippocrates in
Fraeceptionum libello, By reason diverse attributes, sometimes Diseases stay a
longer while. So that for the particulur Cure, That which is contary to these
pains lies hid in the specific Alcaly, which thirsts after such an Acid; as I
have showed concerning Iron for the Spleen, and concerning Ostio Colla, and.
(see Hippocrates Chymic. Chap 28.) But for an external Remedy I have sometimes
seen the most vehement pain to have been mitigated by warm Water of Frogs
Spawn, Water of Frogs Spawn, rich in Alcaly, takes away Gowty inflammations.
which is rich of Volatile Alcaly, as Hippoc. Chymic. has it, Chap. 19.
Tonzelius also, in his Exegesis has the same, only adding Alum. This Aura, if
it creeps to the Reins, and there suppresses the presiding Spirit, whatsoever
it lays hold on, The Original of the Stone.
it coagulates with the Alcaly of Urine, into the shape of a Stone: the same
also happens in the Bladder, in the Liver, in the Vena Porta, in the Lungs, in
the Vesicle of the Gaul, and in all the Shops of Digestion, in which there is
found a fluid Nature. For the way, see Hippoc. Chimic. Chap. 14. Stones are
preternaturally generated after the same manner, not only in Men, but also in
certain Animals, and their parts; and the same Acid which had coagulated them
(the order being changed) does again dissolve them, as Dame Nature shows in
Stones of Crabs; which yet are not Morbous to the Crabs, but arise from their
very first Constitutions. I also keep by me Stones taken out of the Kidneys of
Cappons, and out of the Gauls of Oxen. There are some, which can show some
taken from Their Bladders and Reins.

So also there is preternaturally bred a stone found in the Gaul of an Histrix
or Hedghog, The Stone of an Histrix.
which such Fablers, who are ignorant of the nature and causes of things, do
mightily commend; especially Those, who would be accounted by Old Wives and the
ignorant Vulgar Canonical Physicians: Whereas the Learned know, That
Hypocratical Medicine is but One, which needs be distinguished but into
Internal and External; whereas these Men, out of their ignorance have parted it
into diverse Sects, as my Hippoc. Chymic. has it in the Preface. I return to
the stone growing in the Hedghogs Gaul, to which they ascribe many imaginary
Virtues; And out of mere simplicity which is not to be endured in Physic) do
affirm, that it is of singular Virtue above the stones of all other Animals;
grounding their opinion, on this weak argument, because it is bitter to the
taste, not considering that it contracted the bitter taste from the Gaul, part
of which has undergone coagulation with Acid and Alcaly, after the same
manner, as the stone of the Kidneys, is many times red from the Blood, and That
of the Bladder is white, by reason of the Mucilage mixed with it, which the
Bladder does exsude. For whatsoever the coagulating Acid and Alcaly, do lay
hold of in hasty coagulation, being thrust forth from the Vital Regiment, and
does not much receede from the nature of them both, they take It into their
society; just as Lime moistened with Water, again becomes a stony or petrous
coagulum with things mixed with it, as daily experience shows. Hence it is,
That Hippocrates de Diaeta laments, That Men are ignorant how to know, or
collect obscure things from manifest. But why, I pray, Stone in the Gall of an
Ox.
is not the stone found in the Gaul of an Ox, of the same Virtue with that in
an Histrix or Hedghog? since in other cases, nothing comes from an Ox, which
is not good for Man's use? The reaon is plain, because it is more common. The
Deans and their Colleagues do commend the Hedghogs stone, by this just, as
wise, as powerful, reason; If it were not of great virtue, Noble Men would not
buy it at so great a rate. Fie upon it! do your mighty Masterships so expose
your selves to the laughter of the Vulgar? What, are Great and Noble Men the
proper Arbitrators and Judges of Physic in our days? And if they were, yet it
is no new thing to approve Distilled Vinegar for the Son of Venus, and
Elementary Water for Cordial, and out of mere Ignorance to commend and dedicate
It to them for a great Treasure in Physic, and to swear that they are good for
our Neighbors Health; whereas they do but appear so, but are really for his
destruction. But the multitude of Followers procures no patronage to lies,
though unhappy Mortals are apt to obey and follow gowned sloth and ignorance.

But how came Great Persons to know that the Virtues of this Stone were so
excellent, seeing they cannot be learned, but by the knowledge of their Causes,
and by manifold Experiences; witness Hippocrates de Lege. But Noble Men, or
very few of them, study either, and therefore they must needs by a kind of
adoption suck in this their knowledge from such vain Fablers, to whom they
subscribe, and who make great but empty vaunts of their Skill in Physic; for
they know not how to distinguish Vinegar from Salt, as I have proved, as clear
as the Sun.

Away therefore with these trifles, which redound so much to the detriment of
the Noble Art of Physic, and the misery and damage of ones Neighbor. Such
Medicasters are so full of vanities (witness the reformed and vulgarly
applauded Auspurgh Dispensatory) that the Name of a Physician is now become the
reproach of the Pople, and the jeer of Comoedians; and unless this sordid
unskilfulness and miserable ignorance be laid aside, I am afraid the day is at
hand, that Physicians must turn Country Plow-men. To which doughty principle
and design the supplanting of the Ancient Physic of Hippocrates, and the
defaming of the memorable Doctrine of our Predecessors (God so permitting) will
not a little contribute. But to return, at length they pour Water on the Stone,
leaving it there so long till it grow bitter; which is done in a short space of
time, especially ^f the Stone be new and fresh; for if it has been washed
oftentimes before, then it must be steeped a longer time in the Water. This
Ablution they afterward prescribe to the Sick, Zaculus Ideg.
whose taste is bitter and its virtue heating.

Here Zacutus jestingly and smilingly says, In intense Fevers it is not good
to be given, for it mightily heats, inslames, and provokes thirst, although it
be mixed with cold Cordials, and at last it provikes Sweat (after great trouble
straits, and with much ado) and removes obstructions by rea'son of its
bitterness. The meaning is, that Later anguiin herba, for highly to heat, to
inflame, and to provoke thirst, are accidents proper in Malignant (so called)
Feavors which properties if they proceed from the Ablution of the Stone, being
drunk, as Zacutus testifies, then certainly it is far from taking them away, as
our Mr. Deans and their Collegiates do promise.

But let us hear Dioscorides, who ascribes the same Virtues to the Gaul of
Animals, which our great Doctors do to the Ablution of their Stone. The Gaul,
says he, is bitter, sharp and heating; and therefore the Ablution of the Stone
is bitter from the Gaul, because it has the same Virtues with the Gaul, if we
believe Dioscorides. But we will prescribe this Ablution to great Men, in
Malign and Perilous Diseases, say our Mr. Deans and their Fellows. Why I
pray? because it costs dear, ergo, etc. Oh sottish Society! The shame and
detriment of Great Men, That it is bitter from the Gaul, the hasty ablution
shows, as I said before; and therefore if this Stone be Aperitive simply for
its bitterness, it must of necessity be granted, That one drop taken from the
Gaul of the meanest Fish, is of more avail for opening of Obstructions, than
ten Ablutions of this Stone, because the Gauls of all are sharp and hea^ing,
witness Dioscorides: see also Hippoc. Chymic. Chap. 14.

But it is a mad thing to imagine, that this Stone is bred thus in the Gaul, and
that it contracted not its bitter taste therefrom. Soap is boiled and made out
of Alcaly and Oil, and becomes a Body of a Salt taste and white, because no
foreign thing enters into it: To which, if you add, in boiling, Juice of Beet,
it acquires a Green Color; and if Gaul were likewise added to that Juice, the
Soap must needs be bitter.

So the Stones of the Kidneys are of a Red Color, by reason of the Blood which
transudes or soaks thither by little and little out of the Veins, by reason of
the Morbous Acid, and entering into the Coagulum tinges and dies the Stones.
The Stone of the Bladder is White, by reason of the Slime found in the Bladder;
and shall not the Stone bred in the Gaul of an Hedghog or Histrix, acquire a
bitter taste from the Gaul? And shall it not also draw from it, its heating
faculties? Why I pray? does it draw the Cause of the Disease or no? Let us see
therefore how this happens.

It Is clear that the Loadstone draws Iron to it, Load stone.
only by Odor, as the distance, through which it draws it, proves; The Radical
Humid, or Natural Acid of the Iron, being very frall, exhales of its own
accord, as Hippoc. Chymic. shows Chap. 19. out of Hippocrates. For unless the
Acid of Iron were of this sort, it could not be killed by the Stomach of
Animals; and by consequence the filings of it, taken by the mouth would do no
good. The Loadstone is the Mother of Iron, which perceives the smell of her
Son; because she loves him; but not being sufficiently satisfied with the smell
of It, for that cause it attracts and allures Iron to it; as I have showed
concerning Aloalyes and the Mother of things.

But Rubigoe, Rubigo Sterili^.
or Crocus Martis, though that be also the Son of the Magnete, yet it is
neglected by it, because its Soul or Acid, is departed from it; and therefore
his Mother does not perceive his smell and odor: Hence it is called by
Horatius, Sterilis Rubigo. And by how much the younger and newer the Lodestone
is, by so much the more strongly and vigorously it draws; but the Ablution of
it does not do so: Now as the Ablution of the Magnete does not attract Iron, so
neither does the Ablution of the Histrixe's Stone draw the Cause of the
Disease? no not although it were the Mother of a certain Morbifick Cause,
hitherto un-named.

Whatsoever, attracts any thing from afar off, as the Magnete does Iron, it
attracts it for loves sake, and it always attracts its like; and as Vegetable
Alcaly draws Alcaly of Lime for making Soap (for this is a true attraction and
of a thing like it self) so we have seen that Gold is attracted (yea plainly is
dissolved and dies, I say dies, because the Cadaver stunk) by the Mother
Alcaly, and this is the Magnete of Albertus Magnus drawing Gold to it (which
words a certain foolish Doctor taking in a literal sense, turned into a jeer)
for so says Bernardus in the fourth part of his Book, The Fountain is to it as
the Mother; she draws the King and not the King her: This was Paracelsus's
meaning, when he said, that the Magnete (extinguished in Oil of Mars, that is,
Oil of Mars what?
Gold dissolved in the strongest Metaline Alcaly, its like, then to acquire a
ten times greater Virtue) is increased ten times in his force. For unless there
were a consent of things, and a mutual natural Love amongst them, Nature could
not subsist; or if it should be interrupted a while; the frame of Nature in a
short space of time would be wholly ruined; for the Son only would be left in
a small quantity, neither would he increase, or be multiplied; so that there is
no discord or disagreement in Nature, as some have taught, but whatsoever is
done is done in love; for Nature of her own Genius, does chiefly cover and
desire to be in the bottom of the Elementated Body, in which she operates, by
strengthening its Natural heat and Prolifick Virtues, because it is pervious to
all Bodies, as Great Raymund witnesses; which Doctrine and Attraction of
Natural Love, I shall demonstrate by the following Experiment in a Mettaline
Example (since our present discourse is of Metals) that it may appear, Nature
to be alike in every thing.

Take an Ounce of Silver dissolved by Aqua Fortis; coagulate this Solution into
a Saline Powder, and cast this Powder upon Lead melted in the Fire, but not
very hot nor quite cold, and in the eighth part of an hour, The Acid Salt of
the Aqua Fortis deserts the Silver and corrodes the whole quantity of the Lead,
as much as it had lost of the Silver (i. e.) an Ounce, because it performs the
Office of Metaline Alcaly in Artificials; it draws and is saturated with the
Silver, which by a probatory Cupple returns again to Light Many Learned Men
have admired this Experiment, for they have drawn out an Ounce of Silver from
the Lead, and have found the Powder of the same form and weight, as they cast
it on; whence they doubted in their opinion, whether it were the same Powder of
Silver, which they cast on; from which they could gain much, if the way how the
Powder might be refunded into the Body could be found out. But as the Loadstone
draws Iron, so also Saturn (the Alcaly in Artificials) draws Luna; and when the
thirsty Salt of the Aqua Fortis, wanting Aqueous Humidity, cannot be alone, it
attracts so much Lead, as it had lost of Silver. These and the like Operations
and Attractions, which I have explained by illustrious Examples, both in my
Hippoc. Chymic. and in this Book, have been perhaps erst exploded, because the
Metampsychosis of the Pythagoreans has not been understood. Metampsychosis.


On this foundation, the Stone also of the hairy Serpent, newly found out, is
attractive; Kircher describes it, in his Book entitled, The Magnetic Kingdom
of Nature, I have plenty of this Stone by me, and to apply it to the bitings of
mad Dogs, to which it sticks strongly for about eighteen hours; and I applied
it to another Girl, hurt by a mad Dog, for seven days and nights, and yet the
Ablution of this Stone had not done the feat, whatsoever these upstart Doctors
do babble. And as the Magnete of all the Things and Metals in the World draws
nothing but Iron, and is delighted with its Spirit, (neglecting the Rubigo) and
the Stone of the hairy Serpent, rejoices to attract the Odor of the Poison,
infused by the venomous bitings, but it does not attract Arsnick, Wolfs-bane,
nor any other Poison; so also Jasper draws an Exotic Spirit, which makes an
Impetus in Man's Blood. I have known sometimes Eyes troubled with a Suffusion of
Blood, Jasper.
to have been cured the next morning, upon a Jasper Stone being bound to the
neck at night. But as the Ablution of the Magnete does not draw Iron, nor the
Ablution of the Serpents-stone, Poison, nor That of Jasper, the Spirit making
the assault, from the Blood; so neither does the Ablution of the Hedghogs or
Histrixes-stone draw out any Malignity from Humane Bodies; so teaches Galen in
his First Book of Natural Faculties, Chap. 14. Whatsoever things says he, do
draw forth the Poison of Serpents, or Weapons; These do show forth the same
Virtue, that the Lodestone has, but the Ablution of the Magnete shows no such
Faculty, and why then should the Ablution of the Porcupine or Hedghogs-stone?
so that these are mere Dreams and Old Wives Fables, imposed upon Great Men. It
were better for such dreamers, and for the Art of Physic too, if they did
philosophize with the Spade, as Lucian jeeringly speaks of one who was about to
dig the ground.

I have said, That the Magnetic perceives Iron at a distance from it, and
attracts it by its odor only, provided it be taken out of its Native Oil, for
otherwise where it grows, it attracts nothing, because there, in its Native
Place, there is no want of the Odor of Iron.

The Island Elbe is fruitful of Lead-stones, yet it was never seen nor heard
off, that it did incommode Ships passing by, nor injure the Needle of the
Compass, be-because the Mother Magnete is there saturated with Spirit of Iron;
so also the Stone of the hairy Serpent, being saturated with the Odor of the
Poison which it drew from the biting of the Mad Dog, Serpen's-stone.
receives not beyond its measure, it neglects the rest, and spontaneously falls
from the Wound; so that this Stone, according to Galens sense, has an
Attractive Faculty with the Magnete, but no such Faculty is found in the
Hogs-stone, and therefore, says Galen, it has no Magnetic Virtue: so that it
is clear, that whatsoever is devised against the dangerous Diseases of Great
Men from the Ablution of this Stone, has no existence, but in the Brains of
the Inventors, but sinks down into a mere Nullity, and a dark Chymera of
ignorance.

But when it is given in Powder, then without doubt, like other Stones, it
would attract any Acid agreeable to its Nature; as Crabs Eyes draws forth that
other Acid which putrefies the Wound: A Sponge-stone, the Acid which Coagulates
the Struma: The Stones of Perchce, the Acid of Urine in the Strangury;
Bezoar-stones, the Lypothymick Acid, ar^^ng about the heart; The Stone Ostio
Colla, That Acid which hinders the Conglutination of the Bone, etc. All these
aforesaid do imbibe the Specific Morbous Acid.

So also the Hedghog or Histrixes S^ones, taken by the Mouth, would imbibe its
Specific Acid, which was yet never described or taken notice of by any of
these Approvers.

But what that Specific Acid is, which I have spoken of, The Cause of Diseases
Acid.
and which is the Cause of Diseases, it cannot be explained in words, as my
Doctor says, De Veteri Medicinae; who after he had demonstrated that the Cause
of Diseases was Acid, yea and most Acid; he goes on in these words, There is
none of them can be seen or known by our Bodily Eyes, and therefore they are
called by Me Obscure; not that they always remain so, and exceed our
understandings, but because they are not found out, but with much labor and in
a long time; for those things which are above and beyond the sight of our
Bodily Eyes, The same may be reached and fetched in by the Mental Eyes ( viz.
of us Chemists.)

Hitherto Hippocrates, his meaning is, that we must gradually ascend from known
things to unknown, as my Hippocrates Chymicus shows, which does proceed as it
were by steps, from Artificials to the Fabric of Humane Nature; for as I have
showed, that the Acid of Iron, though it be scarce perceived by the sense, and
is found no where but in Iron, being of a singular kind, yet the Loadstone
perceives It and attracts it even at a long distance; so also there are many,
yea infinite Acids in Man's Body, some of which are made by the degeneration of
the Morbous Cause, which are not perceived, nor attracted, by other then their
own proper Magnetes; as the Morbous Acid in the Spleen is attracted by no other
thing but the Rubigo of Iron; the Morbous Acid generating The Struma, is
perceived and drawn forth by no other (that I know of) but a Sponge-stone. They
may be called Magnetes, because they scent and attract the foresaid Spirits,
as the Magnete does Iron; and unless the aforesaid Acid Spirits were in
readiness, and were smelt or scented by their Magnetes, they would not be
attracted nor absorbed by Them: So Gold is inodorous to our senses, yet it is
smelt even afar off, by its own Magnete or Mother, for she draws the King, says
Bernhard, and not the King her Upon which occasion of Occult Odors, a
convenient opportunity is offered to me to speak of the manifest Odors of
things, The Odor of Things.
for, as I have showed, that the former come from Acid; so I shall also
experientally show, that these latter also proceed from Acid or Celestial
Calid: Odors are quiet and at rest till they be rouzed up or stirred; and they
are stirred, as soon as a proper and consontaneous Humid acts upon the Odorous
thing; for then its Odor is presently spread far and near, more or less
stinking or sweet, according to the Seminal Virtue of the innate Calid: which
Paradox, before I proceed, I shall make plain, by clear Examples, taken out of
the Shop of Nature.

Lime is inodorous of its self, but when it is dissolved in simple Water, for
the building of Walls, the Acid acts upon the Alcaly, and on the contrary. This
Action and Commotion diffuses and scatters a smell not agreeable to Man's
Nature; and therefore before a Man can dwell safely in an House, newly built, a
year time had need pass over, in which time the Action of the Humid upon the
Acid will be at an end.

Barley also of it self is almost of no smell, but when its Meal is boiled and
fermented for Beer; that is when the constituting parts do begin to act one
upon another, then they afford an inebriating smell; which though it be not
noisome, yet it so disturbs the Spirits, that it prejudices the Memory. A Grape
has little smell, but the Juice expressed under the Action of Fermentation,
yields a smell afar off; so does Bread under the Action of Fermentation (i. e.)
when the Humid acts upon the Galid, or the Acid on the Alcaly.

Acid Fountains themselves, yet bubbling forth in their Native Soil, do expire
a most grateful Odor, because the Agent it self is a Celestial Acid, friendly
to Man's Nature.

So Vinegar, when it corrodes any thing, as Coral, for Example, smells more
strongly than when it was at rest.

Amber is pinguous and of a most sluggish smell, Amber
you can scarce tell that it gives forth any smell at all, because its Calid or
Acid is the least part in respect of the Radical Humid or Alcaly; but when it
is stirred up and excited by Solution, with a just proportion of Odors and
convenient Fat, v. g. Zibeth (the purer and sincerer it is, Zibeth.
the more acute and ungrateful is its smell) then the torpid (...) of, the
Amber, being excited by the Zibeth, begins to act upon the Humid, and upon that
Action there arises a most sweet smell; as for Example, Pound ten Grains of
Amber, and three Grains of Zibeth in a Mortar, and the Amber presently melts;
upon which, for increasing the Acid, instill a drop or two of Juice of Lemmons,
and by this means you will have an unguent of an admirable suavity, which
rubbed upon the Skin yields an incredible Odor.

So Musk, Musk.
by how much the purer and simpler it is, it smells strong indeed, but it is a
bad scent, or at least not a very good one; but when it is dissolved with some
drops of Ardent Spirit of Rosos, which I have proved to be Acid, it is to be
admired what a feagant smell it will afford. Three Grains of this Musk so
dissolved, being added to the aforesaid Solution of Amber, and Zibeth, you will
hardly find a more odoriferous thing; but I have shown, that the harsh smell of
Lime, Beer, etc. is noxious to many Men, so also this sweet smell is an enemy
to many both Men and Women: Those that are troubled with Uterine Distempers, or
Diseases of the Lungs, cannot endure it; which Diseases, according to
Hippoocrates proceed from Acidity; De Veteri Medicina.
for when the smell, though sweet qu reaches from the Nose to the Womb,
presently the Dormant Morbous Acid, which is in the Womb, is excited by means
of the Ferment, for like has an easy ingress into like, as Fire to Fire; as
we see in a Candle newly blown out, whose pinguous fume easily takes flame
again, which is nothing but kindled fume; for also Diseases of the Womb are
more easily excited and (...) by Odors which are fermentable: Uterine Disease.
which fermentation in the Womb, may again be allayed and overcome by those
Odors which are stronger, and prevail over those which are excited, as the
greater flame overcomes and extinguishes the less, and the less Light is put
out by the greaten; as I have before clearly demonstrated in Acid Minerals,
which overcome Those of Vegetables, and These again do suppress Those of
Animals: So also Womb, diseases being excited by suaveolent, Odors, begin to
ferment and to boil up with great violence; and These again are suppressed and
killed by graveolent things, In Physical Practice, it is observed, that the
Matrix, of its own Nature, at the smell of sweet things, is turned upwards or
downwards, if the same sweet Odor be applied below; if then it be elevated
upwards, and its capacity be blown up, and distended by flatulent vapors
excited in it, then the Diaphragma is straightened; which being compressed by much
wind, hinders Respiration and Speech, so that the Patient is at Deaths door;
for a Cure in this case all sweet smelling things are carried out of the
Chamber (lest their smell should arrive at the Nostrils of the Sick Woman) and
they are applied to the Vulva of the Matrix, that by the sweetness of the Odor
it may return down again; (which arises from hence, that the Womb is delighted
with and greedily turns it self to sweet smelling things:) and Odors are
applied to the Nose, which by their vehemence may overpower, or wholly kill
the, sweet Odor attracted, (as I have a while ago showed of Acid Liquors) as
Assa Foetida, Castoreum, Oppoponax, Sagapenum, Oleum Petrae, Oleum Tartarl
Distillatam, and the like; or else such things as being drawn in and smelt to
by the Nose, can mortify the inward sweet Acid of the Ferment by its contrary,
Volatile Alcalyes.
and these are Volatile Alcalyes absorbing the suave-acid Odors of the Womb: As
for Example, the smoke of things burned, taken from the Animal Family, for they
being burned, do breath forth nothing but Volatile Alcaly, which is destructive
to and a consumer of Acids. But Women (led rather by superstition than reason)
choose Partridge Feathers, and Goats Horns (perhaps, because taken from
Salacious Creatures) Hairs, Leather of Old Shoes, or Urine of a stinking
Chamber Pot, all expiring Volatile Alcalyes (which I have showed to be contrary
to and destructive of Acid Fermentation) the least part of which Odors being
attracted by the Nostrils, presently the Sick Woman revives, and begins to be
better, because the Uterine Ferment is restrained by its contrary; for
Fermentable Odor, as it is easily mixed and makes Ebullition with its like; so
by its unlike, it ceases from the Ebullition. This is the meaning of that of
Hippocrates, De Diaeta; when he says, out of Pythagoras his School, He that
believes not one Soul to be mixed with another, is besides himself.

The smell of a Rose is acceptable to some, but pernicious to many; hence a
Rose is said by Pliny to be of an Angust Odor, Lib. 21. Chap. 41. I knew an
honest Citizen of this place, who, as often as he scented a Rose, though afar
off, his Breast was not only griped and straightened, but he was troubled with a
Coryza many days after.

Syrup of Roses solutive, inconsiderately taken by the Mouth, Syrup of Roses.
how often has it caused Deliquia's, or Swoonings? especially in such Women
whose Noses are quickscented; yea, it has caused their Bowels to tremble
inwardly, as Practicioners have observed.

There are some who cannot digest the Herb Selenum, some that cannot concoct
Spices, but resist their concoction by continual belchings: All which things my
Wise Master observing, advises those who practice Physic, Aph. 28. Sect. 5. In
this manner, The smell of Aromatical things draws the Muliebria, and it would
often be good for other things too, unless it occasioned the heaviness of the
Head; where we must observe out of Columella, Lib. 12. chap. 20. That he takes
Odors, and Aromata for the same things. Hence Lucret^us speaks of himself, I
perceive diverse Odors of Things, yet I could never see them coming to the
Nostrils, Lib. 1. chap. 60. Our Acute Galen comprehending all these things in
his Book, De Victus Ratione, thus concludes, Odours do both good and hurt;
which Sentence of Galen, I have a little before showed to be exactly True in
Uterine Diseases, as the Female Sex can testify. For Fermentable Odor, which
all Aromaticks do expire, and which is multiplied by Fermentation, hurts many;
and on the contrary, Alcalizate Odor, and That which is excited from the burnt
parts of Animals, because it is destructive of the Ferments, profits and does
good to many; as we see by daily experience and use; so that every smell is to
be distinguished and reduced to its proper Classis. This was Hippocrates his
meaning de Virginum Morbis, It Is not possible (says he) to know the Nature of
Diseases (if they are knowable by Art) unless a Man knew Nature in
indivisibility, from which in the beginning they were distinguished.

All these things being considered, it appears, why Venerable Antiquity has
prescribed to us for a weak and languid Stomach, that compound Inodorous
Medicine, called Syrup of Wormwood, Syrup of Wormwood.
that it might be of use to every individual? This, because it is made up of
simples, as of Pontick Wormwood, which is of an Aromatic and Astringent Taste,
of Roses, Indian Spike, most Odorous Plants, of Old Wine, of Juice of Quinces
likewise binding, and Sugar, therefore they commanded them all to be boiled in
an Earthen Vessel being open, That so the Volatile Spirit of the Old Wine might
carry off the Aromatic Odors, both of the Spike, as also of the Wormwood and
Roses; and so the Odors, as Galen says, can do no hurt to those, who otherwise
are not able to bear them (words in my Hippocrates Chymicus Chap. 30. either
not understood, or malignantly changed) and their Syrup may help a weak
Stomach, not by the Odorous Spirit of Wine, but by a moderately Astringent
Faculty. This is the reason why such a Syrup was found out, as the Text
witnesses: From whence we learn the deep Judgment and diligent Observation of
our Predecessors in compounding of Medicines, and why they appointed this Syrup
to be Inodorous? See for this the Tetras of Quercetan, consult all
Practicioners, and the Truth of the thing will appear; which, by how much the
more it is oppressed, by those that hate it, so much the more gloriously it
triumphs and treads down falsity under her feet. For it is not enough, out of
mere ignorance to condemn the memorable Observations of the Ancients faithfully
made, by long study and many watchful lucubrations, and so transmitted to us,
and farther by unusual clamours, without any known reason and cause to Reform
them; defaming also all such who tread in their steps: but Men had need to
demonstrate the contrary, if not by Authority and Experience, yet at least by
reason; otherwise all their ridiculous and inept approbations, together with
their absurd clamours, will not only be judged to be false and vain, by Wise
and Understanding Persons; and therefore worthy to be sent packing from whence
they (...) but will also be reckoned by the Vulgar amongst futile and sordid
devices and fogeries and the highest levities; for so indeed they are. 'Twas
never read in the Writings either of the Old or New Interpreters of Nature,
that They taught, That Distilled Vinegar was Celebrated Spirit of Venus, or was
as Alcahest; That the Poison of Copper, extracted by Vinegar, was an
Epileptick, or Hysteric Remedy; That Elementary Water was Volatile Salt of
Tartar, and a Panacaea for disperate Diseases; or That Corals, which both by
Wise Men and by Idiots too, are reckoned amongst Gemmes; should be compared to
Common Corrosive Calx, and pronounced unuseful; or That the Vinegar distilled
from Meal was Acid Spirit of Sal-Armoniack; or That Minium could condense the
Air into a Ponderous Body; and many hundreds more of such falsities,
destructive to Mankind, and worse than the dotages of frantic Persons; which
besides the corruption of good manners, can hardly be read without tediousness:
such things I say, and others like them, were never taught by our Ancestors,
and yet though they are found most false, by Experience, Reason, and Authority,
and to be to the detriment of Physic and Mankind: nevertheless They are
approved and cryed-up by our foresaid Magnifick Doctors. Hence it is, that
Aristotle in a passion commands. Sciolists, to dip their Pens in their Minds,
before they do it in Ink, least one inconvenience being granted, a thousand
false conclusions do follow: As not only the Studiers of Ancient Physic do
find to their great detriment, but Physic it self (and that which is more to
be lamented, the Sick) suffers under such things, as manifestly appears in the
Syrup of Wormwood, which the Ancients appointed to be made without any smell,
that it might be given for an Astringent to every individual; as clearly
appears by the Reasons and Experiences just now alleged: but These men,
against the institutions and precepts of Medicine, yea against the order of
Nature her self, do mix it with Aromatized Spirit of Wine and that most
odoriferous, and do so prescribe it, being induced thereunto, by this false and
vain opinion, That Odors are good indifferently for all, both Men and Women.
But with what fruit or profit they so think, Let Practicioners speak, and let
those judge who have but the Spirit of a Man in their Breasts, and who have
ever seen the Female Sex troubled with Uterine Distempers. I confess in a
pedantick slavish Writer, this error were tolerable, and need only simple
correction; but it is an abominable wickedness, and not to be endured in the
Deans and their Colleagues, who sore at such High things, and boast that they
can teach others Skill, themselves being in the mean time ignorant of the
common and safe way of healing, prescribed by Galen, as I have showed. For if,
the Ancients (whom they insult over) could find out Syrup of Wormwood, and
Syrup of Quinces, as we see in Dioscorides, what difficulty had it been for
them to add odoriferous Spike and Roses, if Odors and Spirit of Wine had been
useful in this Compound? It appears by this, that They knew well a Dog from a
black Sheep (to speak proverbially) and could distinguish things, that smelt of
Garlic, of the Hogsty, of the Sow and Goat mixed together. I have sometimes
admired, why not only Hippocrates enjoined that we should only speak of Those
Things, which are known to Plebeians, but that Arnold, Holland, and many others
have so industriously concealed the Ancient Foundations of this Art? Yea,
heretofore It was confined only within the Family of Aesculapius; but my wonder
ceases, when now adays I see the Truth judged, condemned, and cast out of
doors, by Those who are bound to advance it, for their Neighbors good; and
this not by choice of Doctrine or Science, but by a mere fit of foolish
temerity, before they understand the cause of the matter, as I have evidenced
in this whole Tract from the beginning to the end very copiously; not by
opinion only, as Southsayers do, but by clear Reasons, Authority, and
Experimental Operations. Wherefore let such Putative and Insipid Doctors be
hissed out of the Theater of Wis^om, and cast forth unto their sluggish
Colleagues, together with their emendicated and inept Receipts, ill ^nderstood
and falsely approved; That so the Ancient and True Hippocratical Physic, the
Noblest of all Arts, may be redeemed from the contempt of the Vulgar, and by
degrees may recover its Ancient estimation and luster.

Take therefore in good part, The Conclusion.
O ye Curious Readers and Lovers of the Ancient Truth, this my Clavis, which I
sincerely and faithfully offer to you, by the help whereof you may unlock and
open the Ancient Cabinet of Hippocratical Medicine. Sluggish Doctors, who by
their ulcerous, yet reforming Doctrine, do endeavor to pervert Natures order,
and to hinder the progress of Hippocratical Physic, to their Neighbors
detriment, are conversant in thick darkness, far from the Light of Truth; who
not being able to get out from thence by their own strength, do study how to
lacerate and revile the fame of their Predecessors, yea the works of Nature it
self, that they may obtain a Name and Praise amongst such as are like
themselves. It Is wonderful to consider, how far this mad rage of evil speaking
has extended it self (by occasion whereof the unshaken Wisdom of the Ancients
shines forth with greater luster, and the fundamental Verity and Excellency of
the most Noble Hippocratical Physic does the more appear:) so as laying aside
all modesty, Men dare petulantly to rise up against the minds of Hippocrates
and Galen, yea against the Truth it self, against Experience and the Law of
Nations, and openly, to their perpetual shame, to extol, subscribe, and
approve, miserable fooleries and false receipts, to the damage of their
Neighbors and their Posterity.

Wherefore let the unprejudiced Reader weigh with an equal balance and
indifferent mind, This Ancient Doctrine of Truth, and Firm Foundation of our
Forefathers, which are laid and established in my Hippocrates Chymicus and in
this Comment upon it, according to their mind and opinion; and then I doubt not
but he will pass an equal Sentence: for he will find all my Experiments deduced
from the same Fountains from whence the Venerable Ancients and the more Novel
Interpreters of Natures Secrets have drawn Theirs, and therefore in no fort
^allacious; yea he will find a necessary connection of Causes amongst
themselves, so as some depend on others, the last on the first, the inferior on
the supreme, the less on the greater, the weak on the stronger, according to
the Wise Series of Nature; and that all things are increased, preserved, and
destroyed by mutual commutation, digestion, and sermentation; and again how
they ^ise up into new beings before our eyes, as says Hippocrates de Diaeta.
And as I have showed Mechanically, that such things must infallibly be in the
Macrocosme; Hermes in Schedul^.
so I have concluded by just reason according to the Opinion of the Ancients,
and by evidence of Experiments, that they must be so in the Microcosme; so that
Diseases are caused by this method, and by the same method they are cured,
since Art imitates Nature, and Nature Art, according to Hippocrates; whose
Ancient Doctrine, underpropped by the firm Principles of Fire and Water, I hope
as long as I live, to defend by my self alone, against all unjust invasions and
assaults; for in doing hereof, I shall not need in a meretricious way, the
assistance of many flattering woers, as the destroyers of this Noble Medicine
do.

But if any Man accuse the Inelegancy of my Style it shall not trouble me at
all; I give leave to every Ignorant Fellow to bark, prate, and rail; for I
sear not the buzzing of such Hornets: indeed for their greatness and multitude
they are terrible, but their Stings are out, and let them do what ever they
will or can, yet they shall never get the victory. Cicere.
Let me tell thee this one thing, O Man; such as thou art, so think thy self to
be; and as far as thou art remote from the turpitude of Things, stand at the
same distance from the Licentiousness of Words; and moreover, speak not that
falsely against another, which, when it is answered, may cause thee to blush.
Horace.
I know how to defend my self (to speak without boasting) as well as another,
yea I know how to return opprobrious speeches to others, if I so pleased, and
would indulge my self that liberty. But here, friendly Reader, I conclude,
since my Book may not justly be extended to a greater Iength; but hereafter I
shall speak to thee in a graver Tone.

FINIS.
Show me better, if thou can (before thou carp at mine) and I shall give thee
thanks.
THE INDEX Of the CHAPTERS contained in this CLAVIS.
ACid and Alcaly the most Ancient Principles of Things, what they are? Chap. 1.
Page 1. Acid as being spiritual, is not subjected to the Censure of our Outward
Senses; Chap. 2. p. 3. Alcaly what it is, and how it is made, both by Nature
and by Art, and whence it has its Name? Chap. 3. p. 8. Meat or Common Salt,
how much it differs from Vitrifying and Saponary Alcaly? Chap. 4. p. 16.* The
Preparation of Medicinal Salts; Chap. 5. p. 24. That the Seminal Virtues of all
Things is Acid, and that Acids draw Alcalyes as they please; and that every
Acid Liquor is a solution of Acid Salt in Elementary Water; Chap. 6. p. 26.
That no Matter can be so destroyed, but it must remain under some form; Chap.
7. p. 49. That Acid does destroy and perfect; and that Fire, the Sun, and Acid,
have the same powers: Chap. 8. p. 59. That Acid and Alcaly in Animals is the
Innate Calid and Radical Humid: Chap. 9. p. 78.
THE INDEX: Containing the PRINCIPAL EXPERIMENTS and other Observable Things,
Which occur in the CLAVIS AFOREGOING.
Note, That the four pages, viz. p. 15. p. 16. p. 17. p. 18. of the Clavis,
being by mistake doubled over, what occurs in the first of either of them is
marked with an Asterisk* annexed to the Figure; as p. 15*, and so in the other
three.
A
ACid and Alcaly, their effects page 2 Acid the producer of Calidity and
Siccity in mixed Bodies, p. 2 Acid contains the Seeds of all things
imperceptibly to our senses, p. 3 Acid has its Seat in the Air, p. 3 Acid has
the Sun for its Father, p. 3. Acid the Son of Fire, page 3. Acidity of Gold,
proved by Experiments, p. 4. Acid and Pinguous, The most Ancient Principles,
the Life and Fountain of all Things, p. 6 Acid is Occultly latent in all Seeds,
p. 6. Acid Natural and Light are one, only they differ in their offices, p. 6
Acid Natural, (...) Merc^^y, its multiplicate on pro^ed by Examples, p. 7 Acid
in a Flint perishes not after it is turned into Lime, p. 8 Acid, Natural and
Light, flow from the Sun as their Fountain, p. 6 Acid, the Vital Spirit fixed
in Alcaly, p. 9, 10 Acid fixed, affirmed to be in Nature p. 13 Acid and Alcaly,
produce all things in the V^^verse, p. 15 Acid Spirits, their changes recorded,
p. 30 Acid Natural, its quantity in a Seed, p. 59 Acid of Pearls suffocated by
a Foreign Acid coming to it, p. 60 Acid is coagulated when it dissolves, p. 61
Acid or Ferreous Waters their use, p. 71 Acid Vital in the Milt, p. 74 Acid
Fountains yield a most grateful smell, p. 111 Acid, absuming Iron in the Body,
differs from Acid in the general, p. 76 Acid, which burnt Hartshorn imbibes, in
some Fevers is a Specific, p. 77 Acid of the Stomach, turns the Aliment into
Chylep. 80 Acid Occult in the Blood, p. 89 Acid most grateful to Man's Nature in
Vitr^^l, p. 94 Acid (...) co^rupts the Acid of the Stomach, p. 96 Acids
diverse, diversely attracted, proved by Experiments, 108, 109 Acid Vterine
sapors absorbed by several things, p. 113 Air cannot add weight to Minium, p.
62 Air impatient of a vacuum, p. 62 Air supplies all the Three Kingdoms with
the Fuel and Food of Life, p. 83 Alcaly, how produced by Nature, p. 9.
Alcalyes the producer of Humid and Frigid in mixed Bodies, p. 2 Alcaly appears
not, unless detained by the Acid, p. 8 Alcaly in Water, p. 10 Alcaly Volatile
in the Earth, p. 10 Alcaly Nutritive in Water, p. 11 Alcaly Artificial, p. 13
Alcaly with Oil made Soap, p. 13 with Flint made Glass, p. 13 Alcaly made Salt
p. 13 Alcaly of Calcined Flint, p. 15* Alcaly for Soap, p, 15* Alcaly what? p.
15* Alcaly whence? p. 16* Alcaly commended for making in Glass, but not (...),
p. 16* Alcaly and Acid in Flint, p. 17* Alc^ymy, whence derived, p. 17* Alcaly
made Glass, p. 17* Alcaly is the Female in respect of Acid the Male Child of
the Sun, p. 18* Alcaly called Luna, p. 18* Alcaly receives, putrifies,
cherishes, etc. Acid the Suns Child, p. 18* Alcaly of Tartar, p. 18* Alcaly so
called, to distringuish it from Common Salt, p. 18* Alcaly informed with Acid,
the Child of the Sun, called Salt, p. 15 Alcaly unknown to most Men, p. 16
Alcaly not in Nature corporally, p. 16 Alcaly Artificial, never pure without
Acid, p. 17 Alcaly contrary to a Salt Acid Taste, p. 17 Alcaly, why it promotes
putrefaction, p. 17 Alcaly absorbes Acid Spirits p. 18 Alcaly Distilled in an^
open Fire, gives forth a bitter Liqu^r, p. 18 Alcaly Volatile of Lilly convaly
p. 20 Alcaly why it received Filth p. 22 Alcaly its effects, p. 22, 23 Alcaly
not a Salsum, p. 23 Alcaly and Acid, all things in the World may be referred to
them, p. 23 Alcaly attracted and led as it pleases the Acid, p. 27 Alcaly of
Tartar made Sal-Kermes, p. 28 Alcaly of Tartar made Tartar of Wine, p. 28
Alcaly of Tartar made Common Salt, p. 28 Alcaly regenerated with Nitre into
Alum, p. 28 Alcaly made Vitriol, p. 29 Aloahest what? p. 42 Aloalyes retain
something of the Form with which the Mixta were saturated, proved by
Experiments, p. 49 Alcaly of Vinegar, p. 45 Alcaly its Form not who^ly consumed
by the Fire, p. ^1 Alcaly of Vegetables (...) the Acid from Calcined Corals, p.
67 Alcaly of Man's Blood, p. 89 Alcaly of Metals, p. 90 Alcaly of Vipers, p. 91
Alcaly of Urine, p. 90 Alcaly of Sweat does not stink as Alcaly of Urine, p. 90
Alcaly of (...) it retains the Form of Animals understroyed, p. 90 Alcalu^
(...) Odor, (...) from the (...) burning parts of Animals, is destructive of
(...), p. 114 Amber, p. 111 Acid the Seat of the Soul, p. 47 Aqua Fortis loves
Copper and Iron, p. 74 Aromaticks do all yield a Fermentable Odor, p. 114 Art
imitates Nature, p. 12 Aura Vitalis, p 96 Aura, the cause of Diseases, p. 96
Aura of the Stomach, being mixed with a Foreign Odor, can penetrate even to
the Joints of the Toes, p. 101 Air contains the Sead of Life, p. 82 Alcalyes
Medicinable, p. 51
B
BAsilius, his Pugiles and Gladiatores p. 1. Barley having no smell of it,
self, becomes odoriferous, p. 111 Bread and Water made a Body, p. 100 Bread and
Water made Spirit, p. 101
C
CAlid innate, its difference from Radical Moisture, p. 83 Cause Efficient
what? p. 1 Cause coagulating Water in Herbs, p. 7 Calid what? p. 82 Cephalic
Herbs afford a Volatile Alcaly p. 20 Contraries coagulated by contraries, p. 34
Corals dissolved in Vinegar increase in weight; p. 43 Coral its Magistery p. 44
Corals dissolved by any Acid, p. 66 Corals increased in weight by the Fire, p.
66 Corals their Life, Redness, p. 67 Corals Calcined are not Calx, p. 67 Corals
their Tincture, p. 67, 68 Crocus Martis made with melted Gold, p. 5 Crocus
Martis Natural, p. 68 Crocus Martis Artificial, p. 69 Crocus Martis, its
invention, p. 70 Crocus Martis made by the help of Fire, p. 70 Crocus Martis,
opens and binds, as it is prepared several ways, p. 70 Crocus Martis, whom it
hurts? p. 71 Crocus Martis, whom it is good for? p. 71 Crocus Martis, It tinges
the Excrements of the Belly, p. 75, 76 Why called Sterilis Rubigo, p. 76
Cryptography, how performed, p. 97 Copper is not destroyed by Acid Liquors or
Vapors, p. 36 Copper made Green by all Acids, p. 37 Copper has Acid
prevailing, p. 47 Copper precipitates Silver, dissolved in Aqua Fortis; p. 74,
75 Copper dissolved in Aqua Fortis, precipitated by Iron, p. 75
D
DIseases Coagulated what? p. 95 Diseases of the Womb, easily excited by Odors,
p. 114 Diseases excited and caused by sweet smells, are cured by stinking ones,
p. 112
E
Experience, who is said to have? p. 21
F
FIre why called soft? p. 88 Fire in Man, soft and Acid, p. 79 Flesh Salted
has less Radical moisture than when it is Fresh, p. 89 Fermentation what? p.
59 Ferment of the Stomach does change the Radical Moisture of the Aliments, p.
80, 81 Ferment of Putrefaction, p. 90 Form what? p. 1. Fermentum Vitale, p. 87
Fire, Acid, and Pinguous, p. 6 Fire, Sun, Gold, Spirit, Sulphur, Form, Humid,
Calid, Dry, etc. are Synonymous, p. 6 Fire Natural differs from Artificial, p.
6 Fire Natural its effects, p. 6 Fire, an inflamed Acid, p. 61 Fire Beaut fies
all things in the Body, p. 78 Flint not increased by flame, p. 66 Flint its
Powder from Glass, p. 14 Flint made Alcaly, p. 15* Flint not corroded by any
Acid, p. 65 Flint made Caustic in Fire, p. 66 Flint burnt called Lime, p. 66
Flint how differs from Corals, p. 65
G
GOld is an Acid perfect, fixed constant, p. 4 Gold called Aurum Fulminans, its
preparation, p. 15 Gold Acid and Pinguous, p. 5 Gold, because most Acid, is the
most perfect of Metals, p. 47 Gold turns Iron into Crocus or Rust, p. 69 Golden
Nail p. 69 Gold and the Sun in the Firmament compared, p. 4 Glass its Fell not
good to made Glass, p. 19 Glass its Fell, shows like Common Salt, p. 16* The
usefulness of its Fell, p. 16* What its Fell is? p, 16* Grape of it self
inodorous, made to give a strong smell, p. 111 Glass may be made of any Herb,
p. 13 Why it crackes, p. 13 Its Resolution into a Liquor, p. 14 Its Destruction
by the Ancients, p. 13 How it is made? p. 16*
H
HVnger whence? p. 79, 80 Hippocrates his Principles, called by this Author,
Acid, and Alealy, p. 2 Hyle or Matter, why called The First Principle of all
Things? p. 2 Humid Radical, its Seat in Man, p. 86 It Is Volatile in all
Animals, p. 89
I
INk its foundation and way of making, p. 110 Iron what? p. 68 Iron why it
acquires strength, being quenched in Water, p. 68 Iron both Aperitive and
Astringent of itself, p. 70 Iron unduly given, has a deletery Virtue, p. 71
Iron two ways of precipitating it, out of Dioscorides, p. 72 Jasper Stone its
Virtues, p. 108
L
LIme contains Acid, p. 8 Lime is Salt, and does not precipitate Mercury, p. 50
Lime inodorous of it self, when it diffuses an Odor hurtful to Man? p. 111 Load
stone, p. 106 It is the Mother of Iron, p. 106 Its Child, rust, p. 106 by how
much the purer, so much the more attractive, p. 106 Lodestone of Albertus
Magnus attracting Gold, p. 106 Lodestone quenched in Oil of Mars, increases
double in Virtue p. 107 Lodestone plentiful in the Isle Elbe, p. 109
Lodestone its Virtue like that of the Serpents-stone, p. 109 Lead has little
Acid, p. 47 Lead called the First Matter of Metals, p. 47 Lead, its weight
increased in Fire, p. 62 Like easily mingled with like, dissolved and attracted
by its like, p. 9, 34
M
MErcury takes the form of that by which it is dissolved, p. 55 Mercury
Caustic mixed with Ointments, p. 55 Mercurius Sublimatus, p. 56 once
sublimated needs no second sublimation, p. 57 Mercury sublimate, or percipitate
its revivification, p. 57 Mercury reduced to Elements, p. 57 Mercury, a caution
to be used in its Sublimation, p. 57, 58 Mercury of Mars, p, 72, 73 Medicine
but one, p. 102 Microcosme a Term not proper only to Man, p. 6 Mixture
yielding an wonderful smell, p. 111, 112 Musk; p. 112 Man, whence he lives, p.
79 Moisture Radical remains in Dead Carcasses, proved by Experiments, p. 81
Moisture Radical of all Animals is Volatile p. 89 Moon the Mother of Alcaly, p.
18* Moon why called Mother, p. 18* Matter what? p. 1 Mars, his Root in the Air,
p. 7 Mercury precipitated, obscurely Red, p. 50 Mercury its properties, p. 52
Mercury its Caustickness, how to be taken away, p. 52 Mercury precipitate of
Vigoe, p. 52 Mercury extinguished with Oil and Spittle is Sweet, p. 53 Mercury
precipitate Caustic, p. 52 Mercury absumes the Nature of that to which it is
joined, p. 54, 55 Mercury made Anodyne, Anodynes being added to it, p. 51
N
NAture has given more Alcaly than Acid to all Compound Bodies, except
Sulphurs, p. 6 Nature acts after a Spiritual manner, p. 100 Nitre, its Root in
the Air, p. 7 Nitre, its quantity, whence it depends? p. 9 Nitre of the Earth,
p. 9
P
Potashes, p. 13 Pearls dissolved in Vinegar, not good, p. 60 Paronychia what?
p. 99 Plants how spiritually resuscitated, p. 10 Principles of Hippocrates, p.
1. Proverb, Mentiris ut Medicus whence? p. 21 Purging Medicines whence they
have their force? p. 39 They loose their Virtue when their innate Spirit is
washed off, p. 101 Principles Three of Chemists, whence, p. 2 Pearls their
Pellicles not dissolveable by Vinegar or Spirit of Venus, p. 43
S
SOul of Man what? p. 86 Simples dry, yield little Salt, p. 24 Stone of the
Reins is Red, from the Blood. p. 103 Stone, its Original, p. 102 Stone of the
Bladder, why white, p. 103 Stones of Crabs are not Morbous, p. 102 Stone in the
Gall of an Hedghog, p. 102 Its Virtues, p. 103 It is bitter, p. 103 Its use, p.
103, 104 Stone in the Gall of an Ox, p. 103 Stone of the Reins why Red, p. 101
Stone of an Hairy Serpent, p. 109 It does not attract all Poison, p. 109 Sal
Philosophorum a Medium between Alcaly and Acid, p. 15 Salt Common compared to
the Sun, p. 16 Its necessity, p. 16 It is the chiefest of all Salts p. 16 It Is
of a Salt Acid taste, Why it preserves Flesh from putrefaction, p. 17 It
imbibes no Acid, p. 17 It gives an Acid Spirit, p. 18 Salt, which to be
preferred before other? p. 17 Salt of Tartar Volatile, its process refuted, p.
18 Salt Common washes not away filth, and therefore cannot be made Soap, p. 24
Why it admits not filth, p. 24 Its Virtues, p. 24, 25 Salt in general an Acid
and Alcaly p. 23 Salt Alcalyes their preparation requires fresh Herbs, p. 24
Salt of Wormwood its preparation p. 25 Salt of Vegetables its preparation, p.
26 Salts Artificial, p. 38 Salt of Man's Blood, p. 89 Salt of Vipers, of the
Author, what? p. 91 Saturn attracts Luna, p. 107 Sol and Luna govern Acid and
Aloaly, p. 2 Spirit of Venus, p. 36 Spirit of Venus a counterfeit Panacea and
Alcahest, p. 41 Sun, why called by Aristotle Father, and Earth the Mother of
all Vegetables, p. 3. Sun in the Firmament called Acid of Acids, p. 4 Sun its
effects, p. 6 Suns Child Acid and Pinguous, p. 29 Suns Child assumes not a
Body, but with his Sister, p. 62 Sun and Heart compared, p. 86 Spirit of
Vitriol Acid Sulphurous, p. 29 Spirit It contains the Sulphurous Liquamen of
Metals, p. 31 Spirit the Vehicle of the Soul, p. 32 Spirit of Vitriol twofold,
p. 32 Spirit occultly or manifestly Acid, the Vehicle and Bond uniting Soul and
Body together, p. 39 Spirit of Vitriol with Corals makes a counterfeit show of
curdled Milk, p. 44 Spirit of Vitriol returns more subtle after coagulation
with Metals, p. 46 Spirit of Vitriol Volatile, the Suns Child and Brother of
our Vital Spirit, p. 94 Sulphur, Sol, and Salt have more Acid than Alcaly, p.
17
T
TArtar of Grains of Kermes, p. 27 Tartar of Wine regenerated, p. 28 Tartarus
Vitriolatus, p. 29, 30 Tartar Vitriolate cannot be distilled, p. 31 Tartarus
Vitriolatus of the Author, p. 33 Tartar Vitriolate of the Author, not fixed, p.
34 Tartar Artificial, p. 37 Tartar Vitriolate of Alcaly of Tartar and crude
minera of Vutriol of Mars, p. 91
V
VInegar its Pinguedo conceives flame, p. 27 Vinegar dissolv^s Corals, p. 42
Vinegar from Aerugo why more sharp than the simple, p. 45 Vinegar from Copper
returns more Acid, not from Alcaly, p. 46 Vinegar returns insipid from Lead, p.
47 Vinegar cleanses, p. 48 Vinegar what? p. 84 Vinegar destroyed, p. 85
Verdigrease, the way of making it, p. 35 Vener is Spiritus, examined, p. 38
Venus Spirit with Alcaly, made Tartar, p. 39 Veneris Spiritus dissolves Corals
and Pearls, p. 42, 43 Venus Spirit counterfeit, discovered from its very rise,
p. 40, 84 Vitriol its root in the Air, p. 7 Vitriol of Venus, grows not black
with Juice of Galls, p. 30 Vitriol of Mars does, p. 30 Vitriol of Venus its
color, p. 31 Vitriol of Mars its color, p. 31 Vitriol white, p. 31 Vitriol
Artificial of Mars and Venus, p. 34 reduced p. 35 Vigoe his Plaster of Frogs
with Mercury, p. 53 Vitriol, why added in the Sublimating of Mercury, p. 56
Vitriol its Caput Mortuum exposed to the Air, impregnated with a new Spiritual
Humidty, p. 63 Vitriol its Caput Mortuum not regenerated in the Air into
Vitriol, p. 64 Unicorn not a four-footed Animal, but a Fish, p. 69
W
Water the first matter of all things, p. 9 Water of a Feminine Nature, p. 9
Water the root of many things, p. 9 Water called Alcaly, p. 9 Water, Catholic
Wine, p. 11 Water nourishes all things, p. 11 Water Elementary contains an
occult Alcaly, p. 45 Water nourishes all in the Body, p. 78 Water of Frogs
Spawn rich in Alcaly, takes away inflammations of the Gout, p. 102 Wood rotten,
void of Lixivious Salt, p. 24
FINIS
An Advertisement concerning the ERRATA.
In regard the Translator could not at all attend the Press during the whole
time of the Impression, several mal-punctations and literal mistakes have
happened, which are left to the Reader's candor and ingenuity to amend with his
pen: But the Errata which do most affect the sense, are these which follow:

In HIPPOCRATES CHYMICVS.
PAge 15 l. 7 read in for into; p. 14 l. 10 r. command for commend; p. 16 l. 7
r. it ran into Chrystals as Nitre, for, it was chamfered in its coalition as
Nitre; p. 17 l. 20 r. In Alcaly of Tartar is made Nitre, for in Alcaly is made
Nitre of Tartar; p. 20 l. 34 r. in a Test, for in an Earthen Pot; p. 21 l. 10
r. the Covers of the Test, for the Earthen Covers; p. 21 l. 5 r. allayed, for
bound in; p. 22 l. 27 and 34 r. Neighbor Vessel, for Neighbors Vessel; p. 23
l. 22 r. to fall for to run; p. 27 l. 3, l. 7, l. 9, l. 13, r. plate for slate;
p. 39 in margin r. c. 6. for l. 16. p. 40 l. 10 r. from Acid into a Lacteous
Salt Chyle, for from an Acid Salt into a Lacteous Chyle; p. 41 l. 18 r. precede
for proceed, p. 42 l. 22 r. apart for part; p. 43. l. 33. r. in all vacuities
for all vacuities; p. 44 l. 14 r. bitter for better; p. 45 l. 32 r. with all
its strength, and is grateful, for of great strength, and is grateful; p 46 l.
15 r. there is acidity in the Stomach, for the acidity in the Stomach; p. 48 l.
2 r. Liquor for dissolving the Stone with Ludus, for a Liquor for the Stone
Ludus; p. 52 l. 30 add more dark; p 56 l 21 r. spirit for powder; p. 67 l. 28
dele e; p. 70 l. 23 r. simples for simply; p. 73 l. 30 r. as in for in; p. 75
l. 18 r. Homun^^lus for man; p. 78 l. 17 dele of the; p. 76 l. 34 r. constancy
for consistency; p. 78 l. 32 r. things for salts; p. 79 l 37 dele their; p. 84
l. 23 r. petechiales for petectriales; p. 83 l. 2 r one acidity alone, for
acidity alone; p. 85 l. 34 r. lilium for libium; p. 88 in margin r. mumial for
mumail; p. 90 l. 5 r. Acid and Salt for Acid from Salt; p. 102 l 14 r.
Campanam; p. 108 l. 3 dele the; l 5 r. into for in; p. 113 l. 18 r. Nitre for
Glass; p. 118 l. 30 r. impertinently for impatiently.

In the CLAVIS.
IN the Epistle r. favourer for feavourer; p. 3 in margin r. Sun for Son; p.
11. l. 27 r. is coagulated for as coagulated; p. 13 l. 4 dele comma, after
Salt; p. 18 l 3 r. Sun for Son; l 35 r. Acids imbiber for Acid an imbiber; p.
24 l. 31 r. apluda for aplauda; p. 28 l 2 r. Salts for Stals; p. 27 l. 25 r.
Acid for Alcaly; p. 25 l 7 r. catch not flame, for catch its flame; p. 31 l 17
r. can for cannot; p. 33 l. 24 r. covets the bottom for covets the fire; p. 36
l. 33 r. luted for plated; p. 38 l. 9 reduced for reduced; p. 40 l 4 r. had for
hid; p. 54 l. 6 r. Mercury simply dissolved in Aqua fortis, and precipitated,
for Mercury and simple dissolved in Aqua fortis precipitated; p 58 l. 9 r. to
whom for from whom; p. 59 l. 26 r. which though it beinflameable, is yet Acid,
for yea, though it be inflameable; p. 66 l. 15 r. coals for corals; p. 83 l. 22
r. Pluto for Plato; p. 33. l. 14 r. mystae for myxtae; p. 97 l. 1 r. muscle for
male; p. 98 l 39 r. ferment, viz. Acid, for viz Ferment either, etc. p 102 l. 6
after attributes insert (i. e.) various Acids; p 107 l. 9 after Son, insert, of
the Sun; p. 109 l. 3 r. magnet for magne^^k; l. 5 r. soil for Oil; p. 115 l. 7
r. indivisibili for indivisibility.


