A SPEECH OF William Thomas, Esquire. January, 1641.

Concerning the right of Bishops sitting and voting in Parliament: wherein he
humbly delivers his opinion, that their sitting and voting there, is not
only inconvenient, and unlawful, but that it is not necessary for the making
up of free and full Parliaments; nay, that they have no right thereto, for such
reasons as he declares.

Parliaments and Statutes therein made being of force, and no way nulls,
notwithstanding their absence, whether voluntary or enforced; and that they
have not right to their temporalties, whereby they challenge their right to sit
and vote in the House of Lords, Lay Peers:

And therefore under correction he does think that the several Petitions of
the City of London and others, as unto that, were fairly and justly offered:

And as they ought of due right to be admitted and received, so to be speedily
debated, and voted, as he humbly conceives.

Printed at London by Th. Harper. 1641.

A SPEECH OF William Thomas, Esquire.
I Have lately declared my opinion herein in part as to the inconvenience: I
have also expressed that I was of the same mind as to the unlawfulness of the
sitting of Bishops in the house of Lords, which I did but briefly touch,
therefore desire I may a little further enlarge my self, there being a
necessity thereof, (as shall appear) for that in the delivery of that which I
am now to speak of, it cannot be avoided. I say now that I do likewise
conceive that they have no right to sit there, and in my render and proof
hereof I will be as brief as I may, or the matter permit, avoiding repetition
of any thing formerly spoken: for I will not Actum agere, or Cramben bis coctam
ponere; it has always been ill relished, and cannot at this time but be most
distasteful: for as with Iuvenal in his Satyrs, Nam quecunque sedens modo
legerat haec eadem stans,
Proferet atque eadem cantabit versibus lisdem,
Occidit miseros Crambe repetita magistros.
Answerable to the Greek Proverb, (...).

But to the point of the right of Bishops to sit there, which I deny, alleging
it to be a mere usurpation, and a possession unduly gained, and wrongfully
held, yet such as received interruption: and as King James in his premonition
speaks of the Bishop of Rome and his usurped authority, so may I of their
sitting in Parliament: It is not enough (says he) to say as Parsons does in
his answer to the Lord Cook, that far more Kings of this Country have given
many more examples of acknowledging or not resisting, some perhaps lacking the
occasion, and some the ability of resisting; for even by the Civil Law in the
case of a violent intrusion and long wrongful possession, it is enough if it
be proved that there has been made lawful interruption upon convenient
occasion.

That there has been interruption, plainly appears, for that diverse Laws
have been made in their absence, and yet remain in force, as we may see in
Jewel, fol. 644. Fox Monuments, 421. Lamberts Perambulation of Kent page 221.
and others, declaring several Parliaments to be held excluso Clero, the Clergy
wholly exempted and left out, as in Ed. 1. Ed. 2. Ed. 3. and other Kings
reigns. Nay, they came not into the house many years after the beginning of
Parliaments, the first time they were there present being in the reign of Henry
the second, as Matthew Paris 185. so that they were not in the reign of Henry
the first, or King Stephen. Nor when they came to be members, if such I may
call them, or that they had votes, were they to vote in all things, as the
twelve Bishops have passed verdict in their petitionary, if I may not rather
call it proditory Protestation, which some of them have wisely retracted; in
regard whereof, and their former worthy endeavors and expressions in defense
of Protestant Religion, I should be most ready to entreat for. But as we cannot
deny, but must thankfully acknowledge that the services formerly done by them,
were truly honorable, and worthy great reward, but not worthy to countervaile
with a following wickedness. Reward is proper to well doing, punishment to
evil doing, which must not be confounded, no more then good and evil are to
be mingled, therefore has been determined in all wisdoms, that no man
because he has done well before, should have his present evil spared, but
rather so much the more punished, as having showed he knew how to be good,
would (against his knowledge) be naught. The fact then nakedly without passion
or partiality viewed, without question they are culpable. And what Seneca says
of Alexander killing Calisthenes, so may I of the Bishops, Hoc est Alexand,
crimen, etc. This is the eternal crime of Alexander, which no virtue nor
felicity of his in war shall ever be able to redeem; for as often as any man
shall say he slew many thousand Persians, it shall be replied he did so, and he
slew Calisthenes, when it shall be said he wan all as far as the very Ocean,
thereon he adventured with unusual Navies, and extended his empire from a
corner of Thrace, to the utmost bounds of the Orient: It shall be said withal
but he killed Calisthenes let him have outgone all the ancient examples o:
Captains and Kings, none of all his acts make so much to his glory, as
Calisthenes to his reproach. So after the enumeration of their several demerits
from the Weale-publicke, it will be answered, Vulner averunt Parliamentum.

I read in Apollodorus de origin Deorum, that when Dionysius had cast
Licurgus into a fury or frenzy, he in this distemper taking a hatchet in his
hand whilst he had thought he had smitten down the branch of a vine, with the
same hand and hatchet slew his own son. So I fear these Prelates of late have
given to their birth and being a deep wound if not mortal, by offering to cut
down a branch, a maine branch, privilege of Parliaments: Sir Walter Rauleigh
in his Preface to his History of the World, speaking of some worldly politic
Princes of this and other Kingdoms, concludes that they did bring those
things to pass for their enemies, and seen an effect so directly contrary to
all their own counsels, as the one could never have hoped for themselves, and
the other never have succeeded, if no such opposition had ever been, God has
said it and performed it ever, Perdam sapientiam sapientum, I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, Quos vult Deus per dear hos dementat: the application is
easily made, shall I go a little further in his expression: To hold the time
we have, says he, we hold all things lawful, and either we hope to hold them
for ever, or at least we hope that there is nothing after them to be hoped for.
But humbly craving pardon for this digression, I proceed forward; and will
return where I left. I say they were not to vote in all things; for by Law
they were to avoid the place when the matter came to loss of life or limb,
10. Edw. 4. but as I said before, whole Parliaments have been held without
their presence or votes, which God forbid should be nulls.

But to return to my first purpose, to declare that they have no right to fit
there, I conceive it will not be denied by any: And therefore I do take it as
granted, and so need not labor much therein, that their such sitting is by
reason and by right of their temporalities, or to speak more properly because
of their possessing the same occasioning it, for as by their Ecclesiastical
function, they have the title Right Reverend, so by their Temporalities they
are styled Right Honorable, as we find it in the books of Heralds, and
thereby become they Peers of Parliament, and sit with the lay Lords as we
find in Kelleway 184. that the Justices say, that our Sovereign the King may
well hold his Parliament by himself, his Lords Temporal and Commons, without
his Spiritual Lords, neither have they any place in Parliament by reason of
their Spiritualty, but by reason of their temporal possessions; therefore it
is not such an indubitate right as is alleged, the like whereto we find in
the Spiritual Peers of France; the three Archbishops of Rhems, Langres, and
Laon were Dukes; the three Archbishops of Beavoies, Chalon and Noyon, Earls of
the same places, and thereby Princes and Peers so made by Charles the great, as
Cassaneus; likewise every Bishop of England has a Barony, Cook Com. fol. 70.
Sect. 137. and Mr. Seldom Title of Honor, fol. 699. and fol. 702. so that they
have not, nor do I conceive that they do challenge their temporalities due to
them, Iure Divino: for as an ancient Father answers such of them as say, Quid
mihi and Regi, quid tibi ergo and possessioni per jura Regis possides
possessiones, whereto agrees that memorable speech of King Ed. the third in
his Proclamation against that insolent Prelate John Stratford, Archbishop of
Canterbury whom he most favored, and trusted upon some complaints against
him, Cum ipse and alli Prelati regni, qui de nobis ecclesiarum suarum
temporalia recipient ex debito fidelitatis juratae fidem, honorem and
Reverentiam debeant exhibere solus ipse pro fide, perfidiam, pro honor
contumeliam, and contemptum, pro reverentia reddere non veretur, unde etsi
paratissimi and semper fuerimus patres spirituales ut convenit, revereri, little
tamen offensas quos in nostri and regni nostri periculum redundare conspicimus
non debemus conniventibus oculus preterire, so that it seems at most to be
but Iure humano, and not Iure divino, as some do urge and press it. For as I
read in Sleyden, speaking of the contention for primacy betwixt Rome,
Jerusalem, Antioch, and especially with Constantinople, the ruin of al which
Rome at last effected. The Bishops of Rome, says he, amplified with abilities,
prevailed, and in the possession of the Church, would erect to themselves a
Tower, which whether reared by the hands of men, or favor of Princes, now
carries the name, as though it were founded by power divine.

Now some will retort upon me that therein I confess they hold it though not
Iure divino, yet Iure humano, and so de Iure, I am not yet of that mind, but
may when I hear reason to convince, with Saint Augustine, Errare possum,
hereticus esse nolo. I grant that these temporal Lordships, Lay means, and
revenues, are commonly called the possession of the Church; but I think as
unproperly so termed, as unjustly by them held and detained from their right
owners: for I think I may be bold to say, that the Bishops never had property
therein, or right thereto, the same being never intended for them, or given to
them, but they were only made stewards and dispencers of these bona sacra, to
dispose and distribute them as was directed by the pious doners, to the poor,
and other chatitable uses, as I will make appear by fair verdicts and
testimonies sans exceptions.

The Bishops shall have for their Jury, Bishops, and those not twelve, but
twice twelve hundred, and those assembled in several Councels, twelve hundred
years ago, or thereabouts, the latest. And when I pass from those primitive
times, by other sufficient Enquests and Verdicts to make up a dozen of Juries,
that these temporal and lay possessions were not so annexed to the Church, but
that they might and were severed and aliened away, and that by the very Canons
of the Church, and Laws Ecclesiastical, as will appear to any that will
peruse the same. And we may see the same not denied by the Church of England,
no not in the time of Popery. And also that it is altogether unlawful for them
to intermedle in temporal affairs, or to sit as Judges, and to vote in Courts
of Judicature. When thus it shall appear to be neither Iure divino, no part of
Spiritual function, nor Iure humano, themselves not being of the first
foundation, not entering into Parliaments with the lay Lords, but coming in and
sitting there, either by intrusion, or of courtesy: the first in the time of
superstition, the later since Reformation, permitted to sit there rather for
their opinions and advice in points of Religion, as Judges do of Law, but not
to give votes concerning spiritual or temporal affairs: and this their
entrance being some half a hundred years after the beginning of Parliaments:
Then if neither Iure divino, nor Iure humano, I understand not quo jure,
unless it be Iure Luciferiano, whose ambition will challenge a seat that God
has not appointed. It is said that where a Snake may creep in with the head,
it will draw with it the whole body: so when the head, the proud Prelacy of
Rome, had usurped and entered into temporal government, it drew with it the
tail inferior Bishops to trample upon Regal and Civil power. Thus corrupt
and proud Prelacy, like a Serpent, has a sting as well in the tail as in the
head: and this viperous brood has gnawed and rent the very howels of the
mother Church. For as a Reverend Doctor, and worthy Divine has delivered;
When once, says he, the Spiritual authority (which ought to be subordinate
to the Temporal) began to interpose it self in Temporal affairs, and within
a while after to oppose it self against the Temporal power, it made a ready
way to the destruction of both. But let me not be too far misunderstood, as if
I should deliver, That Bishops neither are nor can be good; I do not judge all
the present bad, nor am I diffident but that (as very many have been
heretofore) we may also have many very good hereafter; but Bishops either
Papal or hypocritical, I utterly disallow, or at least wise dislike. Now if
Popish Bishops or their favorers will censure me for over bold sauciness, to
use this freedom of speech, which perhaps they will term not only a harsh and
malicious render, but an undeserved tax, and a most unjust charge, I will be
further bold to tell them, that their own fellow Bishops and such as
understood them better, have left recorded of them such things as I should be
very unwilling to be uttered by my tongue, or to pass my pen: I will instance
in some few of many that I might recite; first Bellarmine, Does not he in his
Chronology say, that the Bishops of Rome did degenerate from the piety of
their Ancestors? And speaking of Hildebrand, says, That he usurped power to
depose Princes, for which all honest and good men detest. And speaking of his
own Lord and Master Sixtus the 5. Sine poenitentia vixit, and sine poenitentia
moritur, proculdubio in infernam descendit. And after: Quantum capio, quantum
sapso, quantum intelligo in infernum desoendu. And does not Machiaversay as
much of his Master: does not Baronius speaking of Landus, John the tenth, and
others possessing the Sea of Rome, about anno 912. deliver this testimony of
those Bishops, Qua tunc facies Ecclesia Romana, etc. What was then the face of
the Church of Rome? How filthy, when most potent and most filthy whores ruled
all in Rome, at whose appointment Sees were changed, Bishoprics translated,
and that which is most horrible, and not to be spoken, their lovers (false
Popes) were thrust up into Peter's chair, who were not fit to be written in
the Catalogue of Bishops, but for the summing or computation of time. Does not
Gerochus Bishop of Richenberg say of those two firebrands of hell, Octavianus,
alias Victor, and Alexander the third his competitor, that they were
Antichristians, etc. Nay does not Bishop Theodoricke a Niem, the Popes
Secretary, conclude the Bishops of Rome to be Devils incarnate. I agree, says
he, to what the Canonists dispute, that Popes are neither Angels, nor men, but
Devils incarnate.

Saint Bernard, and many others, speak little less of some Bishops. I am
willing to believe that our Bishops be no such as those formerly spoken of, yet
I think that they might be well spared in the House of Lords, where they have
weaved Spiders webs, and hatched Cocatrice eggs; and therefore, under
correction, deliver my opinion; Their room it better than their company.

Now to draw to a conclusion of this Preamble, and to proceed to the verdicts
of the Juries formerly offered, whereof the first is Saint Augustine, and his
fellow Bishops.

But these Jurors being so many, desire that (being withdrawn) they may have
some short time to consider of their inquisition, and return, and they will
not stay long before they bring their joint agreeing Verdicts.

THE TWELVE IURIES.
1 Ancient Fathers. 2 Foragine Bishops. 3 Foraigne Doctors, and Authentic
Writers. 4 English Bishops. 5 English Divines. 6 Popes and Cardinals. 7
General Councels. 8 Church Canons, and Ecclesiastical Constitutions. 9
Petitions of Lords and Commons in several Parliaments. 10 The Common Laws and
Statutes of this Realm. 11 The Edicts of Emperors and Kings. 12 Angels,
Prophets, and Apostles.
ANCIENT FATHERS.
St. Augustine. St. Ambrose. St. Hierome. St. Origin. St. Tertullian. St.
Gregory Nazianzen. St. Chrysostom. St. Basil. St. Bernard. St. John the
Alminer. St. Zeno. St. Spridian.
FOREIGN BISHOPS, AND DIVINES.
Hincmar Archbishop of Rhemes. Waltram Bishop of Naumberge. Ivo Bishop of
Carnotum. Bishop Theodericke a Niem. John Calvin the Divine. William de Occham.
Bucer. Nicholaus de Clemangiis. Petrus Damianus. Johannes de Parisiis.
Aventinus. Franciscus a Victoria. Hildebert de Turim.
FOREIGN DOCTORS, AND Authentic VVriters.
Albertus Magnus. Albertus Pighius. Thomas Waldensis. Guntherus Ligurianus.
Cornelius Jansenius. Dureus a Jesuit. Duarenus. George Hiemburge. Jacobus
Almaine. Johannes Mayor. Marfilius Patavinus. Antonius Rosselus. Potho.
ENGLISH BISHOPS.
St. Aidan. St. Anselme. St. Thomas Becket. B. Thomas Arundell. B. Matthew
Parker. B. Hooper. B. Hugh Latimer. B. John Elmer. B. Thomas Bilson. B. John
Bridges. B. Alley. B. Gardener. B. Bonner. B. John Jewel.
ENGLISH DIVINES.
Petrus Blecensis de Bath. John Wicliffe. William Swinderley. William Fish.
William Tindall. Doctor Barnes. John Freth. Thomas Becon. Robert Parsons.
George Blackwell. Nicholas Sanders. Fox in his Acts and Monuments.
POPES AND CARDINALS.
P. Gregorius. P. Damasus. P. Nicholas. P. Celestine. P. Adrianus. 4. P.
Celestine. P. Paulus. Ottobanus Legate.
Ca. Cusanus. Petrus de Aliaco Cardinal of Cameracum. Ca. Baronius. Ca.
Bellarminus.
GENERAL Councels.
C. Antioch. C. Calcedon. C. Carthage 3. C. Carthage 4. C. Carthage 6. C.
Constance. C. Macrense. C. Reginoburg. C. Rhemes. C. Laodum. C. Tours. C.
Trent.
CHVRCH CANONS AND Constitutions.
Gratian. Linwood. Ivo Carnotensis. Johannes Loughconcius. Hostiensis. Summa
Angelica. Gregory. Silverius. Paulus. Ottobon London 1268. London 1537. Card.
Poole London 1556.
Petitions Of Lords and Commons in several Parliaments in the Reigns of
Henry 3. Edward 3. Richard 2. Henry 5. Henry 8. Charles 1.
The rest are made up by this present Parliament.

The Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm.
Common Law.
Regist. pars 1. f. 187. Quia non est consonu^. Kelway 184. The Justices say,
etc.
Statute.
Ed. 1. Excluso Clero. 14. Ed. 2. Excluso Clero. 38. Ed. 3. Excluso Clero. 11.
Rich. 2. Excluso Clero. 10. Ed. 4. Excluso Clero. 14. Hen. 8. Excluso Clero.
27. H. 8. 34. H. 8. 35. H. 8. 3. E. 6. 6. E. 6. 2. Mary. 8. Eliz.
The Edicts and Proclamations of Emperors and Kings.
E. Theodosius. E. Honorius. E. Justinian. E. Hen. 4. K. Bohemia. K. Kich. 1.
K. Henry 3. K. Edw. 1. K. Edw. 2. K. Edw. 3. K. Henry 8. K. Edw. 6.
Angels, Prophets, and Apostles, and sacred Writers.
Moses. Josua. Samuel. Ezekiel. Hosea. Haggai. Matthew. Mark. Luke. John.
Peter. Paul.
Angels, (as Bishop Jewel out of Parisiensis, Polycronicon and others,) did
pronounce woes to the Church, for that by the donation of Lordships and
Possessions by Constantine to the Church of Rome, poison was powered thereon.

O let this venom Lordships and Temporalities be taken away, and removed from
Episcopacy, for it has well near poisoned and destroyed it: Now I desire to
offer two or three words in my own behalf: Am I become an enemy to
Episcopacy, because I speak the truth? Do I not rather declare my self a
welwisher, if not a firm friend to Episcopacy, desiring only the cure and
preservation thereof? My voice is not like to that of Edom in the day of
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even to the ground, But the voice of
Judah at the reedifying of the Lords House, Grace, Grace, I mean really
spiritual, not Lordly titular Grace, I do not say destroy the tree with the
fruit thereof, but rather destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it, the
fruit is good for meat, and the leaves for medicine, I am not for eradicating
or demolishing, but my wish is and it ever shall be my endeavor to repair the
breaches of Sion, and renew the beauty of the Sanctuary, I do not mean it
beautified with Images and pictures, paintings and pinacles, for quo nudior co
venustior. In my opinion and conceivement, I should express a cruel pity to
my dearest darling being diseased or desperately sick, if I should forbear in
my self, or hinder in others the curing of what I so deerly affected and
professed so to do, because I hear it cry out, or perceive impatiency in him
to endure the suffering of the cure. God forbid I should be deemed an enemy to
the Church for wishing and advising it with Adulterous Israel, Hosea 2.7. to
return to her first husband, for then was it better with her then now.

Mild Lenitives are not always to be applied, but sometimes sharp corrosives,
there must be as well wine to search, as oil to supple, there is a crudelitas
parcens, as a misericordia puniens, (says Saint Augustine) now some will
term me though not harmefull in regard of disability, yet in respect of will
to hurt a hot adversary, yet others that perhaps have not so ill an opinion of
me, will censure me likewise to be but a cold friend, and say with Erasmus,
Vno spiritu efflas calidum, and frigidum, or with Seneca, de beneficiis call it
panem lapidosum, which Plautus delivers in like words, -- Manus altera panem,
Altera fert lapidem. --


As if I did claw the head with the one hand, and smite the cheek with the
other, but passing by this, me thinks I hear some tell me with Cicero lib.
1. Tuskulan, pugnantia te loqui non vides, ubi est acumen tuum, you delivered
in another Speech that the Bishops entered members of the House of Lords at the
first Parliament, and continued there till this last; thereto I answer the
scope, drift or end of that delivery was to declare their demeanor and actions
in Parliament, not the right of sitting or voting, and I only as I remember
said that it was not denied, but though it should be granted, was most
inconvenient and hurtful many such and other objections and carpings I shall
at leisure think of, and yield answer unto.

And whereas I have made a vaineglorious flourish (as it will be termed) by
offering so many Juries and Testimonies, I conceive it will be judged an offer
rather ad specimen then ad vulnus, as Cicero de Oratore: like that of Cyrus
King of Persia (as Julius Frontinus records) besieging the City of Sardis,
who did put upon long poles the images of men, arming them like Persian
soldiers to terrify Cresus and the City of Sardis; or else my arguments and
testimonies shall have an ironicall reply, in the words of Tertullian, Si non
possunt valere, quia magna non sunt valebunt forsan quia multa sunt; well
granting some of these to be but Milites levis Armaturae, (as I conceive they
will not prove to be) yet undoubtedly some of the rest will charge with a
sharper assault.

Then to draw to a full conclusion, let Papal Episcopalians censure my self
and arguments as they please, it shall no way move me, I shall still possess
my soul in patience, though they account me but a Phylotus Cous, who (as
mentions Athenaeus) was of so light and slender a body that he had weight of
lead tied to his heels, left by a blast of wind he should have been blown
away, and my arguments or testimonies to be clouds without water, titles
without evidences like an Apothecaries boxes that have goodly and fair names
without, but have not a dram of any thing good within, I say it little nay
nothing troubles or moves me to hear some say that my Axe has no edge, or
others that the same is but borrowed, or that some others, no less maliciously
then wrongfully charge and tax me with hypocrisy and vaineglory, affirming
most unjustly of me, that which Ireneus did most justly of some Heretics of
his time, to be elatum mihi placentem Hypocritam Quaestus gratiae, and inanis
gloriae operantem.

But with Seneca, Conscientia satisfaciamus: nihil in famam laboremus sequatur
vel mala dum been merearis. Let us satisfy our consciences, and not trouble
our selves with fame: be it never so ill, it is to be despised, so we deserve
well. And as he elsewhere: Laudari a bonis timeo, and amari a malis detestor.

FINIS.

