THE PARABLE OF THE BLACK-BIRDS. And the MAGPIES Vindicated.
ALL Sublunary Things are subject to Mutation. A late Vulturean, to confirm
which Maxim, is become a Blackbird; who listening to Interest, having changed
his Note, whistles to the Second Part of the same Tune, ^ractis'd by the
Black-birds in Forty One, (viz.) Down with the Magpies.

But I find He, like the Owl, rather than Starve (...) the Wood, will submit
to Catch Mice in the Barn; and had rather live privately under the disguise of
a ^lack-bird, then expose himself to the Public danger (...) being thought (in
these times) a Vulturean.

SInce Nature seems Retrograde, the World's Metamorphos'd, Honesty turned
Policy, each ^entence a Paradox, and each Satyr a Parable; things looking all
with Visionary Aspects, as if ^las, in a Rage, had cast the Globe from his wea^
Shoulders, and turned the World Top-side^rvy: I cannot but wonder; and yet
Conform, ^ch others, to amuse the Age with a New Dream, ^gested after an old
Method. And since Parables ^e become Accustomary, and Fables Fashionable,
^ntertain you with One, as follows:

'Twas on a Time, when the Eagle, Sovereign (...) the Birds, began to inspect
into the Grievances his Feathered Subjects, from whom he had re^v'd many
Complaints, especially from the ^ck-birds; who pretended great Impositions ^re
laid upon them by the Magpies, whose Ju^e, Fidelity, and Allegiance, the Eagle
had par^larly observed; and plainly discovered the Black-birds to be full of
Hypocrisy, Malice, Covetousness, pretended Zeal, Ignorance, and Ambition.

The Eagle, with all Care, Equity, and Good Conscience, began Impartially to
Examine into the Cause of this Irreconcilable Difference between Them, that he
might Redress those Injuries the Black-birds had sustained by the Magpies; and
that they might become Friends, and Roust peaceably each upon his own Branch,
one by another.

The Black-birds, by this time, had whistled out all the Infamy against the
Innocent Magpies, that the Malice of such Hedgbirds could contrive; whose
desembling Notes moved the Owls, Cuckoes, Herns, Buzzards, Crows, Ravens, and
Jackdaws, to be inclinable to pity their Complaints.

Upon this, the Eagle, with his Doves, Pheasants, Nightingales, Golfinches, and
Linnets, through a strickt inquiry, fathomed their Designs, and clearly
discovered the Cause of their Discontent, and Envy against the Magpies; who
retaining no manner of ill will against their bitter Enemies the Black-birds,
sought by all means to reconcile their Enmity, and establish an amicable
Friendship between them; procuring them all such Grants of Privileges, as was
requisite for the Ambitious Black-birds to be Masters of.

But these Rebellious Birds, whom no Favor could win, no Reason Convince, or
any Submission Pacify, were still soaring to be Masters of the Magpies
Branches craving all Preferments of the Eagle, and whistling aloud, with
strained Throats, Down, down, with the Magpies; pluck out the White Feather's
from their Wings; they are Marks of the Vulture's Cruelty; Down with them;
Quick, quick, quick!

This Notorious whistle of the Black-birds, being heard through all the
Adjacent Woods, Groves, and Hedges, greatly alarmed the Hawks, Kites, Batts,
Screech-Owles, and Night-Ravens; who, unacquainted with the Whining Deceit, the
concealed Malice, and self-ended Subtilty of the Black-birds, asked them the
Reason, Why they alarmed the Woods with so dreadful a Whistle? Who answered in
great Flocks, which darkened the very Trees they sat on, The Magpies are
bringing Vultury upon us, with Consent of the Eagle; Down with them, down with
them! Which confused, Answer so amazed the Inquisitive Flock, that they all
fell on screaming in discord, to show the dreadful apprehensions they lay
under; promising the Black-birds, they would Perch by them, and use their
Bills, and their Claws, for their Preservation to the utmost.

Some of the Eagle's Loyal Doves, murmuring at the Treasonable Whistles, the
Notorious Villainies, and Rebellious Proceedings, of the Black-birds, flew with
all speed to the Eagle's Court, to inform him of their Treachery and Conspiracy
against him, and his Government; which the Eagle hearing, issued out
Proclamation signed with his broad Claw, to empower the Feathered Quire to make
choice of Two Members for every such Grove, Wood, Bower, and Wilderness, where
they had severally taken up their respective Habitations; that should present,
and lay open, their Grievances before Him, and they should be redrest.

The Black-birds whistling over the Eagle's Proclamation, immediately took
Wing, distributing themselves over all Woods, Groves, etc. under the Eagle's
Dominion; advising all other Birds to make choice of such Members, as would
pluck down the Magpies; for that they designed to bring in Vultury upon them;
which if they took not special care to prevent, they should not Roost safely in
their Arbours, without the danger of destruction.

This Rebellious Stratagem of the Black-birds, whistled such amazement into the
Ears of the Credulous Choristers, that they picked out none but, what were fit
Instruments to carry on the Treasonable Designs of the Black-birds.

The day appointed by the Eagle's Summon the Members whistled out by the
Blackbird consisting of Geese, Woodcocks, Canary-birds, an^ Waterwagtails,
assembled themselves together, an^ Perched upon an Ancient Oak in a
Neighbourin^ Grove, in the Eagle's Palace; where the Eagle, attended by his
Loyal Doves and Magpies, met the^ in his Royal Splendor; where he made to them
a most Gracious Speech, expressing Himself wit^ all the earnest Affection
becoming the Royalty (...) a Sovereign Bird, to his Winged Subjects; declaring
how Industrious his Magpies and Himself were to preserve their Laws and
Liberties from the oppression of the Vulture; and that he would condescend to
any thing they should propose, tha^ might establish their safety upon a more
sure foundation; and that it was plainly evident, the Blac^-birds discontent
proceeded from no other cause than Jealousy and Ambition; and therefore desi^
the Assembly of Birds there present, as he hop^ they were dutiful and faithful
Subjects to Him, (...) Concur in all things required for the Good (...) Safety
of his present Government, under whi^ he desired, that they might enjoy all
Pea^ Plenty, and Satisfaction.

But the Black-birds, having whistl'd out da^Principles into the Ears of the
Feathered Assembl^ that the Eagle's Gracious Speeeh availed nothi^ with them,
so that they all flew out into gre^ Murmurings and Disorders, crying out, Do^
with the Magpies, away with Vultury.

Upon this the Eagle thinking himself not safe^ his old Nest, took Flight, with
his Doves and Ma^pies, to a Wood forty Miles distant from his fo^mer Residence.

In this Interim, the Rebellious Black-birds whistling forth an Oration
throughout the Eagl^ Dominions, That He, and his Magpies, design a Total Ruin
of all the Birds of the Air, by int^ducing Vultury amongst them; exciting them
(...) Rebellion against their Lawful Sovereign the Eag^ and his Magpies.

This Wild Note of the Black-bir^ so tickled (...) Ears of the Credulous Flock
of Poultry, that the whetted their Beaks, and sharpened their Claw and siding
with the Black birds, Levied War again ^ ^veral Skirmishes, and Pitched Battles
they had, many English Cocks falling on the Eagle's fide; and many Owls, ^rds,
and Cuckoos droping on the other; till, ^t last, by a ^as war, many Rebellious
fowls standing up in vindication (...) Blackbirds, they grew too strong for the
Eaglci's Party; at last, they took Prisoner, with several of his Loyal Doves,
Magpies, Erecting a Court of Judicature by their own Ille^mate Authority,
placing Hawks, Herns, and Buzzards on the (...); and Impanell'd a Jury of Black
birds, Owls, and Wood^; by which they tried the Eagle; who made a Royal and
^ous defense; but, notwithstanding, he was brought in (...) by the Woodcocks,
and had his head Chopped off by a One^ Hedg-Bird, upon a block erected by his
own Nest, for (...) Purpose.

This villianie of the Blackbirds being Effected, was Mourn^ sung by the
Nightingales and Goldfinches, throughout all the ^ves in Christendom, which
reduced the Traitorous Blackbirds ^er such an Odium for their Infamy, that
their name grew ^eful to all birds in all Nations.

^t here was not the Period of their Villainies: For the ^ing Eaglet, (who by
lawful Inheritance should have succeed^ in the Sovereignty, which the Villainous
lackbirds, by their ^-thirsty means, had snatched into their own Possessions)
was (...) to Escape into Foreign Thickets, left the same fate of his ^ecessour
should have been barbarously imposed upon hiim. Now, the blackbirds, in the
Eaglet's absence, began to flock a feather, and Consult the safest way to
Continue the Government in their hands, and exclude the Young Eaglet; in order
to ^ich, they Chose an Old subtle Hawk, to Rule over them as ^tector, who
immediately Run his Nose where the Old Eagle ^ set his Breech, and thankfully
embraced the honor the ^ack-birds had conferred upon him.

The Loyal Magpies and Daws, who had escaped the Fury of (...) Old Hawk, and
his Accomplices, were in Banishment with (...) Eaglet, during the time of the
Hawk's Protectorship; which ^nued for some space of Time; till at last he
sickened in ^lting Season, and dyed of the Pip; who was afterward ^g up, to
Scare the Blackbirds out of Paddington-Fields.

^he Blackbirds, at the Death of their Protector, began to about in great
Confusion, knowing not well who to place ^uthority over them; at last after a
general Debate, it was ^ght fit to Confer the Honor of the Protectorship upon
the ^ng Hawk, (still bearing an Exorbitant hatred against the ^es Posterity)
but finding themselves uneasy under the Government of the Young Hawk, thinking
him not rightly ^d to their designs and purposes, they Reassumed the Au^ith of
the Throne into their own hands: Hpon which, ^y discontents sprung up amongst
the Eagletonians; who ^e mighty desirous, that the Young Eaglet might be
restored his ^ightful Soveraignity: and a Loyal Dove, that wanting no^g but
oppertunity to effect this purpose; who having some ^sands of good Old hardy
true bred English Cocks under his ^amand, was resolved (if occasion required
it) to try one ^ng Blow with the Blackbirds, to restore the Eaglet to his ^one;
who having assurance of the Fidelity of the Doves, ^pies. Cocks, and most Birds
of the better Rank and Quality, ^ntur'd to quit his Foreign solitariness, and
Assume the glo^s Sovereignty of the Birds, which lawfully Descended to (...)

(...) Order to effect this Enterprise, he Consulted with his friendly Doves
and Magpies, for the Management of this weighty Affair; who encouraged and
advised him, by all means, to lay hold of the Present Opportunity to do himself
that Justice, which the Blackbirds, if in Power, would never Condescend to do
him.

This so Animated the Royal Virtues of the Eaglet, (who wanted neither
Greatness, Goodness, or Activity to perform a Noble Action) that He Immediately
concurred with Them, and took his flight from his wandering desert, attended
with a Train of Loyal Doves and Magpies, who had conveniently shared the fate
of their most beloved Eaglet; He had no sooner Pearcht upon the Bough, in the
Precincts of his own Soveraignity, but the Nightingals Linnets, and Goldfinches
strained their harmonious Throats, to warble him a hearty welcome from his
wandering Exile.

This News was soon spread by the Eagletonians through all the Neighboring
Groves and Bowers; which being Chirped into the Ears of the Blackbird, soon
made them quit the Doves and Magpies lofty Cedars, and shroud themselves under
their Old Cover, Shrubs, and Hedges, to hide themselves from the Justice of the
Eaglet, which their Villainies had long deserved.

The Loyal Birds plucking of their Rusty Feathers, which the discontent of a
long War had continued on them, they Spruc'd up their Chimes, and, with
unanimous Joy, met the Eaglet, and so Conduct him with all Splendor and
Safety, to the Throne of his Royal Ancestors; which was effectually performed
with all Splendor and Solemnity imaginable.

The Eagle then thought fit to send forth his Gracious Declaration, to assure
his Feathered Subjects, of his Goodness and Mercy toward them, even to the
Rebellious Blackbirds; which gave them such Heart, that they began to have the
Confidence to peep their Mischievous Noddles out of the Bushes, which had
deserved to have been set up for Scare Crows, had not the Eagles goodness been
greater than the Blackbirds Merit.

The Eagle, by this time, being firmly seated in the Throne of his Ancestors,
giving his Subject all the Prospect of a Continued happiness under his
Government, and the Blackbirds giving all assurance of iheir Fidelity and
Aliegance to the Eagle, by humble addressees, filled with all Protestations of
their Loyalty; which the Eagle, for some time, believed, till he discovered
some sparks of Reason to the Contrary.

The Government had not rested long in this Peacable State, when the
Blackbirds, seeing the Eagle continue the Lover of his Ancestors to the
Magpies, reassumed their worsted Infidelity, and began to conspire the Death of
the Eagle: To accomplish which, they (at a time when the Eagle visited a
Neighboring Royal Grove, as his Annual Custom) ambuscaded themselves in a
Ryfield, when the Eagle, with his attendance was to fly by: But He through the
Quickness of his Eye, and sharpness of his Judgment, discovered their desigin
trapping some in a Gin for their Insolence.

The Blackbirds seeing their Plot disbover'd, and Infamy for ea^^ over the
Eagle's Dominions, began to exasperate their Malice so against him, that they
use all possible means to disparage his Royal Virtues, by taxing him with the
same Crimes, with which they had wrongfully accused his Predeces^or; which made
the Eagle stretch forth his Talents, for his own security:

Thus they continued plotting and contriving many Years (...) bring the Eagle,
and the Magpies, to whistle to the Blackbirds ^une; but their Designs were all
frustrated by the Eagle and Magpies policy.

At last, the Eagle tired with his tedious Reign, and very much disturbed with
the Insolence of the Blackbirds, soared up into the Lap of Jove, and left his
Sovereignty to the Ostrich; whom the Blackbirds, as well as the rest of the
Feathered Choire, admitted very peaceably to the Throne; all things carrying a
fair prospect of his own Glory, and his Subjects Happiness.

But, at last, the Blackbirds fixing their Eyes upon the splendid plumes of the
Illegitimate Peacock, began to withdraw that Loyalty and Affection, which till
that time, they had paid with seeming great Devotion to the Ostrich.

The Peacock, seeing himself so adored by the Blackbirds, began to display his
Gaudy Wings and Tail before the Sun, amidst the Admiring Crew of Flattering
Spectators; who Addressed him with all Submission add Applause; entreating him to
take upon him the Patronage of a Flock of Fowls, which so much Admired and
Adored him.

The Peacock, Proud of the Favors he had obtained of them, Returned them
thanks for the great Honor they were willing to Confer upon him: the restless
Blackbird, now having the Gaudy Wings of the Peacock to shelter their ill
Designs, by prevailing Whistles, they persuaded the silly Bird to believe, he
is Right Heir to the Sovereignty of the Birds, or that the Ostrich was an
Usurper, a Tyrant; and that he joined with the Vulturans, to destroy the Rights
and Privileges of the Blackbirds, and the rest of the Feathered Subjects, by
supporting and maintaining Vultures in each Grove and Forest, contrary to the
Laws and Statutes Established in former Ages by the Eagles; and therefore,
ought not to continue in the Possession of the Throne, which by Right was the
Peacocks: This pleased the unthinking Peacock, who asked the Blackbirds, if
they would stand by him, and he would Invade the Dominiof the Ostrich, and
Reduce their Laws and Liberties, by Force of Arms, to the same State, as they
were when the Hawk Governed? They all Answered, Down with the Ostrich! Up with
the Peacock! Down with the Ostrich! Up with the Peacock.

Upon this, the Blackbirds fitted themselves for a Rebellion against the
Ostrich, with all expedition Imaginable, and assured the Peacock of their
fidelity and Readiness to serve him, with their Bills, and Plums, in the
support of this Rebellious Expedition; desiring the Peacock to Proclaim open
war against the Ostrich, and declare his Title to the Kingdom of the Birds; and
that they would Immediately come in, and stand by him, in defense of his Right,
and their own Liberties, to the last blood in their bodies.

The Peacock, deluded with the deceitful Notes, whistled to him by the
Blackbirds, immediately proclaims War against the Ostrich; and Pearches, with
his Birds of Battle, on the Western side of his Dominion; which News was soon
brought ^o the Ears of the Ostrich, who sent out an Army o^ Sprightly Birds;
who making a Vigorous Onset upon the Blackbirds, and their Peacock, soon
defeated their small force, and put them ^ll to flight: The Peacock, for his
safety, flew into a Pease^eld, where he was discovered, and took Prisoner, and
suddenly after, by the order of the Ostrich, had his Head twisted ^ff for
High Treason: And many of the Blackbirds Followers ^ad the misfortune to be
choakt with Hempseed.

The Success of this Victory, added much to the Magnani^ of the Ostrich; to
Whom all Partys, with great submition, ^gan to acknowledge their Allegiance,
and especially Blackbirds.

The Ostrich thinking himself now so safely seated in his The that no Birds
were able to contend with him, or Power rem^ him, begins to consult all
Stratagems, with the Vulturean B^ to Introduce Vultury amongst them; which
design being ^derstood by the Doves and Magpies, they Consulted all means
imaginable, for the Prevention of Vultury comin^ upon them, and the rest of the
Birds:

Whereupon the Ostrich, as a means to effect his Design-Hand, Publishes a
Declaration for LIBERTY for Blackbir^, Woodcocks, Owls, Vulturians, etc.
thinking, by that means (...) give opportunity for Vultury, to grow
perswasively upon (...) Doves and Magpies, till by this means he growing strong
eno^ to contend with them and the rest of the Feathered Choi^ but these
Stratagems were no ways effectual: For the M^pies apprehending the Designs of
the Ostrich* Chattered it (...) all the Birds in the Air, and that not only
they, but the Bla^birds, etc. might beware against such proceedings. And (...)
Magpies being more Inquisitive in this Affair, then the Ostr^ thought
necessary, were seven on them committed into a Cag^ which made excellent sport
for the Blackbirds, who Whistl^ all the Merry Tunes in their Budget, to see the
Magpies un^ such Confinement.

The Ostrich now began to Rule very Tyrannically over (...) Subjects,
entertaining and advancing the Vulturians and Bla^birds chief Preferment about
his Court, and likewise place the in Authority, over all Woods and Groves, etc.
throughout (...) whole Dominion: And to carry on his Design the better, (...)
advised his Mate to steel an Egg out of a Cuckcoes-Nest, ^ hatches it her self,
to Cheat, the Doves and Magpies; who (...) knowing she had not Lay'd-in many
Years before, was v^ much discontented such a trick should be put upon them
(...)

Whereupon a Foreign Spread Eagle, being informed of the Illegal proceedings of
the Ostrich, and his Mate (and at (...) Request of several of the Feathered
Choire) came over, w^ many Martial Birds of the Air: And Invaded the Ostric^
Territories: Upon which the Ostrich being taught with Reflec^ons of his past
Follies, and unkindness to his Loving Subject had not the heart to contend with
the Spread Eagle, who ^ppeared in their Vindication; but immediately taking Wi^
flew over to the Vulture, craving shelter under his Win^ leaving his Subjects
to be Guarded and Redrest by the Spre^ Eagle; Whose care is daily to repleat
that Happiness amon^ them, which the Ostrich, in his Reign destroyed, if not
obst^cted by the Restless Murmurs of the Blackbirds.

Old Shoes and Boots, will you buy any Brooms, H^ Thank ye, Don't ye know one
Joseph Ditchfield, (...) Haberdasher of Old Iron? O Yes, Oliver ye kn^ had a
most Damnable Nose. Why Robbin Jo^ Clark Holds-forth at the Bull and Mouth, on
(...) 31st. day of this Month.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Edward Thompkins, a Lover of the Magpies, 1691.


