Wits Fancies: OR, CHOICE OBSERVATIONS AND ESSAYS, Collected out of Divine,
Political, Philosophical, Military, and Historical AUTHORS.

By JOHN UFFLET. Gent.

Accusator qui consortem defert, sese in^ueator. LONDON, Printed by T.L. and
are to be sold by the Booksellers. MDCLIX.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHen you have surveyed each Page of this little Treatise, you (I hope) will be
able to render an account of it, how you like the Fabric, and if it be well
reared, the thought of falling is not to be feared, though he that did erect
it, did not serve many years to the Profession, nor deserved the attribute of
an Architect, yet he has used his best endeavors to write truly those things
that (by his own Experiences) he knows, and thought it meet (without the least
offense) to Entitle it, Wits Fancies, or choice Observations, etc. being the
marrow of all that ever he read in any History, either Sacred or Profane.

In a word Reader, (not to make the Gates bigger then the City) I entreat thee
with washed hands, and without a prejudicate Opinion, to receives it: So

Farewell.
TO The Right Honorable and Virtuous Sir, T.N.Knight. Health and Happiness.
Honored Sir,
THe confidence I have of your goodness, has imboldened me to put this small
Treatise into your Honor's Protection, which (with some) would have been held a
Crime intolerable. But I know your Honor is so far from being a Censurer, that
you had rather cherrish honest endeavors, then destroy them: And besides this,
there is a self-affecting Sect crept now up in this our Age, that will not
only disgorge their Envy and Malice, but arrest the sense, unless some honest
and judicious Patron be fixed to the fronts-piece, to correct their saucy
peering, (as the beams of the Sun) with blindness: I knowing your Name to be
such as amongst the discerning spirits deserves the highest Attributes of
worth, and of such singular power, that it will extirpate the Malevolent
Thoughts that reign now in the vulgar and infectious Traducers; for now may it
be truly said of this Age, Saturitas illece brarum Nutrix, That sulness is the
Nurse of Wantonness; and because such a glut of Books is come forth into the
world, Vulgi genus perplexus, the spirits of the common people are troubled and
perplexed. I therefore thought good to tender this as my first fruits at the
altar of your Mercy; and if it may be so happy as to obtain the reflection of
the beams of your mercy or acceptance, it will so much encourage your poor
admirer, that I shall be ambitious in the continuance of your Honor's favors.
These are the Maiden flowers of my young age, which in the blossom may be
smothered without your Honor's protection; which in their infancy may be
destroyed by the breath of some Railers; but sheltered by your Honor, they
shall live, and dare the Critics Rancor, retorting to their own shame.

Honored Sir, the fostering this Orphan, will make you famous for Charity, and
impose an Obligation beyond expression, upon

Your Honor's truly devoted, T.Y.

WITS ACADEMY OR, Choice Observations collected out of Divine, Political,
Philosophical, Military and Historical Authors, etc.
Of Evil.
THE abetting of Evil is worse then the commission: the one may be upon
infirmity, the other must be upon resolution.

The reiteration of vicious acts, causes them to be believed to proceed from
man's de praved nature, and not from the necessity of occasion.

Abstinence.
Abstinence merits not; for religion consists not only in the belly, either
full or empty: What are meats or drinks to the kingdom of God which is like
himself, spiritual? but it prepares best for good duty; full bellies are fitter
for rest: Not the body so much as the soul is more active with emptiness:
thence solemn prayers takes ever fasting to attend it, and so much the rather
speeds in heaven when it is so accompanied: It is good to diet the body, so as
the soul may be fatned. Nature pleads for liberty, Religion for abstinence; not
that there is more uncleanness in the Grape then in the fountain; but that wine
finds more uncleanness in us then water; and that high food is not for
devotion, but abstinence.

Actions.
It is not the action, but the quality and manner thereof that is vicious.

In all actions, he that regards not the beginning, foreseeth not the end.

All actions beyond ordinary, limits a subject to sinister interpretation. In a
good action it is not good to search too deeply into the intention of the
agent, but in silence to make our best benefit of the work. In an evil action
it is not safe to regard the quality of the person, nor his success, but to
consider the action abstracted from all circumstances in his own kind; so we
shall neither neglect good deeds, for their success, nor affect prosperous
evils.

Every virtuous action has a double shadow, according to the diverse aspects
of the beholders, one of glory, another of envy.

There is no word or action but may be taken with two hands, either with
charitable construction, or sinister interpretation of malice and suspicion.

A good work is then only good and acceptable, when the action, meaning, and
manner are all good; for a thing may be done in one circumstance, but cannot be
good but in all; therefore what ever business a man go about, let him enquire
what he does for the substance, how for the manner, why for the intention.

To construe an evil act well, is but a pleasing and profitable deceit to a
man's self; but to misconstrue a good action, is a trebble wrong, viz. to a man's
self, to the action, and to the Author.

The instruments of evil actions ought to be punished, whenas having received
the reward of their lewdness, yet go about to charge others with it.

All men which are to enter into great and important actions, ought to weigh
and consider with themselves, whether that which is undertaken be profitable
for the Commonwealth, honorable for themselves, and easy to be acted, or at
least not greatly difficult; withal the party that persuades unto it; whether
besides bare words and advice he adjoyn his own peril thereunto, yea or no: And
if future good favor the action, to whom the principal glory accrueth.

It is well and rare if we can come out of a dangerous action without a foyl.

In actions let not a man do always his best; It is neither wise nor safe for
a man to stand upon the top of his strength. Great actions require mighty
Agents.

The unworthiness of the Agent many times crosses a good action.

Evil actions have oft-times good meanings, and those good meanings are
answered with evil recompenses; many a one bestows his labor, his cost and
his blood, and receives disgrace and torment instead of thanks and reward.

Actions notorious and villainous, may countenance extraordinary means of
prosecution: Every action that is reported, is not strait-wayes allowed; If
every act of a holy person should be our rule we should have crooked lines.

Oft-times the circumstance of an action marrs the substance in divine matters,
we must not only look that the body of our service be sound, but that clothes
be fit; nothing hinders but that good advice sometime may fall from the mouth
of wicked men.

A man's heart can best judge of it self, others can best judge of his actions;
happy is that man that can be acquitted by himself in private, in public by
others, in both by God.

It is very safe for a man to look into himself by others eyes; in vain shall a
man's heart absolve him that is condemned by his actions.

It is certain that all indifferent actions and behavior of a man have an
extreme holding and dependence, either upon virtue, or vice, according as they
are used or ruled, for there is no middle betwixt them, no more then betwixt
their rewards, heaven and hell.

It is not sufficient for a man to have, (and refrain within himself) never so
many virtues and good qualities, except he employ them and set them on work for
the benefit of others; Virus enim latus omnis consistit in action.

The actions and writings of every man take not-except in the matter, subject,
and occasion some commending favoritie to happen to it.

All our actions upbraid us of folly, our whole course of life is: but matter
of laughter, we are not soberly wise.

We commonly measure and censure all actions, and the doers of them, by the
event, one is crowned for that which another is tormented, as Caesar and
Erachus.

Grievous Enormities and bitter Calumnies commonly follow renowned actions.

Present actions are not with safety related, nor are they listened unto without
danger. The actions of our ancestors use to be examined, not to be malignate;
for we not emulate, but imitate them; We willingly listen to the praise of
such, who (gotten long since out of the reach of envy,) seem by their deeds of
fame, to raise the weakness of mortality; and faults which are found in past
actions, displease not, whilst they take from us the evil opinion of the
present times.

The action is easy to be effected, which has nothing of fear in it, but the
act it self: Great actions have need of help, else they will be suffocated by
simplicity.

It is easy to add to the greatness of actions by words, to truth by
appearances it is not amiss.

The government of a State is but a slippery path; one only bad action is
sufficient to ruinate a Prince, who has been raised up by a thousand good ones.

A present good action, is able to make a past bad one to be forgotten, when it
is thought that the like will not again be done.

Actions are not always done by their agents, in an instant, dispositions
proceed them, the truth of whose effects we do not know, because the virtue of
causes is unknown to us.

The sequel of every action depends for the most part upon the beginning;
Dimidium facti qui been caepit habet. So forceable continually is the
beginning, and so connexed to the sequel by the nature of a precedent cause,
that the end must needs err from the common course, when it does not
participate of that quality which was in the beginning.

In nature all violent actions are of short continuance, and the durability,
and lasting quality of all actions, proceeds from a slow and temperate
progression; so that the resolutions of the mind that are carried with an
untemperate violence and favor, much heat and passion, do vanish away even
with the smoke thereof, and brings forth nothing but leasurable repentance;
therefore it is best for men of such natures to qualify their hasty
resolutions, with a mistrustful lingering, that when their judgment is well
informed of the cause, they may proceed to speedy execution.

Fame is the spirit of a great action, and makes them memorable or unworthy by
report.

The actions of men would be none at all, if they were not at first received in
the mind.

Experience teaches, that no action is wisely undertaken, whereof the end is
not wisely forecast in the first place, however it is the last in execution.

It is great justice that our actions should be measured by opinion, and not by
reason.

The nature of man is forward to accept, but negligent to sue for they can
spend secret wishes upon that which shall cost them no endeavors.

Natural Men.
It is the fashion of natural men to justify themselves in their own courses,
if they cannot charge any earthly thing with the blame of their own sufferings,
they will cast it upon heaven; that a man pleads himself guilty of his own
wrong, is no common work of Gods Spirit.

Grief.
Griefs increase exceedingly, when they grow upon occasion which happens
besides all reason: Like as any accident which falls beyond our expectation,
is more greievous, then that whereof a reason may be rendered, and which a man
might suspect to follow.

Service.
Service which is received from an inferior, argues weakness and challenges
great recompense; to equalize the recompense to the benefit received, is to
equalize the receiver to the benefactor; those benefits which are received from
a superior, are willingly acknowledged, for acknowledgement is all he expects,
which witnessing the receivall of them, obliges to an addition of more.

Compellation.
Sweetness of compellation is a great help toward good entertainment of
admonition; roughness and rigor many times hardens those hearts, which
meekness would have melted into repentance; whether we sue, or convince or
reprove, little good is gotten by bitterness.

Not only the vocal admonitions, but also the real judgments of God are his
errands to the world.

Adversaries.
Violent adversaries to uphold a side, will maintain that which they do not
believe; God provides on purpose for his Church mighty adversaries, that their
humiliation may be the greater in sustaining, and his glory may be the greater
in their deliverance.

Love.
It is no love that cannot make us willing to be miserable with those we
affect: the hollowest heart can be content to follow one that prospers;
adversity is the only furnace of friendship; if love will not abide both fire
and envy, it is but counterfeit. All adversity finds ease in complaining, and
it is a comfort to relate it. Prosperity and adversity have ever tied and untied
the affections of the Vulgar. He that is fallen into adversity has not only
enemies to pursue him, but his friends forsake him and become his foes.

Advancement.
Advancement is not always a sign of love, either to the man or to the place;
some men are raised up, that their fall may be the greater; there are no men so
miserable as those that are great and wicked.

Behavior.
Winning Behavior, advisedness and fierceness mingled together, season any
affair excellently well; when the winning behavior appears sufficiently, the
advisedness not at al, and the fierceness but a little.

Affections.
The affections of the body may be inculpable, but not the mind's.

There is no disposition so near bordered upon vice, and leaning to it; but by
the reins of prudence, may be restrained and kept in the right way: so there is
no nature so near akin to virtue, but may be corrupted by ill usage; Therefore
it is good to contemplate the affections of men, as they are attended with good
or ill, and search how far they may be hurtful or valuable, least we
immoderately praise some, and do unjustly undervalue others.

All living creatures by a secret instigation, affect to be most doing of that
thing in which they are best able.

Angels.
Angels when they appear, are conceived to cloth themselves with the Elements.
Of all Creations that are so near us as Angels be, God has shut up the
knowledge of them most from us in Scripture; and no man yet has given a
satisfying reason for it: Some hold that they be one of the three Invisibles,
to wit, God, Angels, and the Soul of man; all which the eye has never seen
their simple existence.

Angels are simple and abstract Intelligences and Substances, altogether
without bodies.

Antiquity.
Any man whatsoever may err in matters of Antiquity. The study of Antiquity is
a fair knowledge, which is most precious for the adoring of humane life, and
strong at least in pleading for humane oftentation. The Order of Dignity is to
be respected before the Order of Antiquity.

Apparel.
Apparel was first instituted by God for three causes; first to hide our
nakedness and shameful parts: Next to make us more comely: And lastly, to
preserve us from the injuries of heat and cold.

Apprehension.
Apprehension gives life to crosses. The efficacy of Gods mavelous works is
not in the acts themselves, but in our apprehension. Some are overcome with
those motives which others have contemned for weak.

Appetite.
Our Appetite must be curbed, our passions moderated, and so estranged from the
World, that in the loss of Parents or Children, Nature may not forget Grace.
Whosoever slackens the reins of his sensual appetite, will soon grow unfit for
the calling of God. The concubisciple and irascible appetite, are as the two
twists of a Rope, mutually mixed one with another, and both twining about the
heart; both good if they be moderate; both pernicious if they be exorbitant. If
the Appetite will not obey, let the moving faculty overruled her, and let her
resist and compel her to do otherwise.

Forms.
God has not appointed to every time and place those Forms which are simply
best in themselves, but those that are best to them to whom they are appointed;
which we may neither alter till he begin, nor recall when he has altered.

Apostasy.
An Apostate is an opposer of the Faith he once professed, and is worse then he
that opposes that which he never professed.

Arts.
The Fame of all eminent Arts is stained by the multitude of Artificers; and
the unskilfulness of them; most of them being unable to do what they promise,
and seeking their commendation only in the vain name of such an Art.

Art Military is despised in time of rest and quiet; and Peace esteems alike
of the Coward and the Courageous. Practice brings, or breeds Art, and Art
obtains Grace. Beauty is more beholding to Art then Nature; and stronger
provocations proceed from outward Ornaments, then such as Nature has provided.

Art can never attain to Natures perfection, imitate it never so near, though
our esteem prefers it; and seeing it gets a little by emulation, attribute much
more unto it.

The practice of every Art is referred to the use or profit, and thereby judged.

Art will be discovered if it be often used, when that would be made seen which
is not, it must be curiously done if any good be expected.

Three things are sought in every Artist, that is to say, Nature, Skill and
Practice; his Nature to be judged of by his Wits his Skill by his Knowledge,
and his practice by Use.

Edward the third brought Artisicers for mahing Cloth from Gaunt.

The strength of a battle consists in the Artillery and Shot.

Aristoeracy.
Aristocracy is a form of a Commonweal, wherein the less part of the Citizens
with Sovereign Power command over all the rest.

Unthankful attempts are always rewarded with grief and disgrace.

Harmless counsels are good for the innocent; but in open and manifest
villainies there is no hopes of safety, but in audacious attempts. Foul attempts
are begun with danger, and sometimes accomplished with reward.

Changes are the aptest times for greatest attempts, delays then are
dangerous; and soft quiet dealing draws more evil then rashly hazarding.

All but Athiests, however they let themselves loose, yet in some things find
themselves restrained, and show to others that they have a conscience.

Every thing has a quantity that it cannot exceed, and has a power to attain
to it; from the generative causes whereof the thing it self is produced; by
which power (if it be not hindered) it dilateth it self gradually in time till
it come to the fullness, where it either rests, or declineth again as it grew
up: the manner of Augmentation proceeds from the qualities that Nature has
infused into every thing, and neither from matter or form.

Evil were as good not seen, as not avoided. To foreknow and not to avoid
evil, is but an aggravation of judgment.

Equal Authority where there is the self same power, is commonly pernicious to
all actions, it being impossible to choose two minds of so equal a temper that
they shall not have some motions of dissenting.

It is the hard condition of Authority, that when the multitude fare will they
plaud themselves, when ill they repine against their Governors.

Authority cannot fail of opposition though it be never so mildly swayed.

Sovereignty abused is a great spur to outrage. The conceit of Authority in
great Persons, many times lies in the way of their own safety, whiles it will
not let them stoop to the ordinary course of nature,

There is no passion that does eclipse the light of reason, or sooner corrupt
the sincerity of a good judgment, then that of anger, neither is there any
motion, that pleases it self in its own actions, or follows them with
greater heat in the execution, and if the truth chance to show it self and
convince a false pretended cause as the author of that passion, it often times
redoubleth the rage even against truth and innocence.

The punishment of banishing offenders was first brought into this Island by
Edward the Confessor.

Liberal modesty is decent, but clounish bashfulness is disgraceful.

That no man should be too much discouraged for the baseness of his
propagation; even the base son of man may be lawfully begotten of God. King
Hnery the second, was supposed to be begotten of Maud the Em^irsse, some time
before by ^tephen of Bloys, before she was married to Geffery Plantagenek Duke
of Anjoy.

In the fifth year of Henry the eight, was a battle fought near Floddon-Feild,
between James the fifth King of Sco^s and the Kings Leivtenant of the North,
the Earl of Surrey, in which the King of Scots was slain, and the Howards
Earls of Surrey, have quartered the Scottish Arms ever since.

It is not good to tempt the fortune of a battle, unless there be either an
offer of a special advantage, or otherwise cumpulsion of necessity.

It is a most dangerous thing for a Prince to hazard his estate in battle, if
he may by any other means make a good end, for a small loss in battle, changes
and alters the minds of his Subjects.

The loss of a battle traineth with it a number of inconveniences to him that
is vanquished.

Beasts as well as men, do soon alter and bastardise their affections.

Beasts may teach us by their examples, and condem us by their practice.

The image of the beast in the Revelation, in his dissimulation, in such as
profess religion, and practice infidelity, they fain to be what they are not,
and their show, (not their truth) procures them the name of Christians.

Beauty is lively, shining or glittering brightness, resulting from effused
good; by Ideas seeds, reasons, shaddows, stirring up our minds, that by this
good they may be united and made one.

Beauty is the perfection of the whole composition, caused out of the Congruous
Symetry, measure, order, and manner of parts; and that comeliness which
proceeds from this beauty is called grace, and from thence all fair things are
gracious, for grace and beauty are annexed together

It was beauty first ministered occasion to art, to find out knowledge of
carving, printing, building, to find out moulds, prospectives, rich furnitures,
and so many rare inventions.

Beauty is natures privilege, a dumb comment, a silver fraud, a still
Rhetoric that persuades without speech, a kingdom without a guard, a Tyranny
that Tyranizeth over Tyrants.

In beauty that of favor is preferred before that of colors, and decent
motion is more then that of favor.

Beauty is the g^ft of God, but given to the evil also, least the good should
imagine of too great worth. All bodily beauty is a congruence in the members,
joined with a pleasing color, and where that is not, there is evermore
dislike, either by reason of defect or superfluity; Beauty is of two sorts, one
wherein dignity excels, another wherein comeliness; Beauty is the flower and
blossom of virtue.

Beatitude is not attained unless it be affected; Beatitude consists not in the
knowledge of Divine things, but in a Divine life, for the Devils know more
then men.

Beatitudo non est Divinorum cognito, sed vita Divina.

Fair beginnings are no sound proofs of our proceedings and ending well how
often has a bashful childhood, ended in an impudency of youth; a strict
entrance in licentiousnes, is early forwardness in A theisme.

A comely and graceful carriage, and behavior is an ornament to the virtue of
brave men; but to weak spirits, it serves but a vigor or natural coverture,
to hide or qualify their abject and low minds.

Pope John the 14 th. Christened the great Bell of Lateran after his own name,
he being the first that ever Christened Bells.

It suffices for a Christian to believe this was, or that shall be, let the
means alone to him, who concealeth the plainest works of nature from our
apprehensions; more belief ought to be given to things which appear
impossible, then to those which admit of likelihood; who would make a lie to
be believed, delienates forth a seeming truth, and not an impossibility.

The best rule which can be given for living in safety, is always to fain
belief, yet always to doubt, men willingly believe that which they would have
come to pass.

We honor God when we do believe him, for thereby we give him the glo^ of all
his attributes.

How far a thing is dissonant, and disagreeing, from the guise and trade of the
hearers, so far shall it be out of their belief.

King Edward the fourth, in the second year of his reign, was the first King of
England, that ever did exact money of his subjects by way of benevolence.

In point of entering a breach, there is a little or no difference, between a
strong town and a weak, for the beseiged in either do wholly trust to their
new and sudden works.

The obligation of a benefit has wholly reverence unto the will of him that
gives.

Men are more dull in felling of a good turn, then of an ill; we have not so
sensible and perfect feeling of health, as we have of the least sickness.

Good turns or benefits are no longer well taken, then they may be recompensed;
when they grow greater then hope of requital, instead of thankfulness they
breed hatred and ill will.

Dangerous are too great benefits from a subject to a Prince, both for
themseves and the Prince, when they have their minds capable only of merit, and
nothing of duty; benefits are more easily forgotten then injuries.

All benefits lose much of their splendour, both in the giver and receiver,
which bear with them an exprobative term of necessity.

It is too much niceness in them to forbear the benefits, they might make of
the faculties of profane and heretical persons, they consider not they have
more right to the good such persons can do, then they that do it, and challenge
that good for their own.

The way to obtain any benefit, is to devote it in our hearts to the glory of
God, of whom we ask it; by this means shall God both pleasure his servant, and
honor himself; whereas if the scope of our desires be carnal, we may be sure
either to fail of our suit or of a blessing.

A Benefit that is upbraided, becomes burdensome, and odious, and is not
thankfully accepted; Commemoratio, est quasi exprobatio.

Benefits are always willingly received, but the benefactors are not always
willingly beheld: The obligation which remains, sowers the sweet of the benefit
received.

All birds build their nests toward the East.

It is a thing that ordinarily daunteth and casts down the heart of a man,
when he is privy to the baseness of his birth, and knows some defect,
blemish; or imperfection in his parents.

That birth detracts from the merit of great actions, which obliges to greater.

In the 12: th. year of William the Conqueror Lanfranke, Archbishop af
Canterbury, in a council holden at London, removed certain Bishops-See from
small towns as; Kirtor, Wells, Shirburne, Dorchester and Li^chfield, to towns
of more eminency, as to Chichester, Exeter, Bath, Salisbury, Lincoln and
Coventry.

In the 10 th. year of Hendry the first, Ely-Bishoprick was founded, and
Cambridge-Shire taken from the Sea of Lincoln and annexed to it; one Harvie
was the first Bishop.

In the first year of Richard the first, Hugh Pudsey Bishop of Durham for a
great sum of money was created Earl of the same place, the King saying he had
made a young Earl of an old Bishop.

Bishops were first chosen to avoid dissension of equality.

In the two and 20. th. year of King Henry the second, it was sufficiently
proved that all the Bishops of Scotland, were subject to the Archbishop of
York, who with the beginning of the Popes of Rome, was Primate of all Scotland,
and all the Isles of the same.

The 10. th. year of William Rufus, the Archbishop of Canterbury being Primate
of Ireland, consecrated Malchus Bishop of Waterford, which place was mada a
Bishops-See at the same time.

In the 6. year of William the Conqueror, it was decreed at a Synod holden at
Windsor, that the Archbishop of York should be subject to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and that the Archbishop of York, with all the Bishops of his
Province, should come to such a place as the Archbishop of Canterbury should
appoint to hold a Counsel at.

It is no true Bishop that desires rather to be Lordly himself then profitable
to others; Leo the fourth Pope of Rome made a decree, that a Bishop should not
be condemned, but by 72. witnesses: The good Bishops of Rome, continued almost
300. years, the first of them was named Limus.

Blood is hot, sweet, temperate, a red humor prepared in the meseraick veins,
and made of the most temperate parts of the Chilus in the Liver, whose office
is to nourish the whole body, to give it strength and color, being dispersed
by the veins through every part of it, and from it spirits are first begotten
in the heart, which afterward by the Arteries are communicated to all the
other parts.

The force and power which lies in the blood, the spirits and in the whole
body, is that which causes the diversity of passions, by reason that the
passible part growing out of the flesh, as from a root does bud and bring forth
with it a quality and proves semblable

The bodies misgriefes proceed from the soul, and if the mind be not first
satisfied, the body can never be cured.

The corruptable body suppresseth the soul, and the earthly mansion keeps down
the mind that is much occupied.

Man's soul though it be immortal, dies a kind of death, it is called
immortal, because it can never leave to be living, and sensitive, and the body
is mortal, because it may be destitute of life, and left quite dead in in
self, but the death of the soul is when God leaves it; and the death of the
body is when the soul leaves it; so that the death of both, is when the soul
being left of God, leaves the body.

Labienus of Rome was the first on whom the punishment of burning books, or
writings, was excluded upon. Books are living Ideas of the Authors mind.

Something it is to have a fame go of a man; yet words are as fame, soon blown
over, when Libera scripta manet; Books out live men.

Boldness or Valor is not terrified with a man's own danger, but to fear in the
behalf of others, is humanity.

Boldness and fear are commonly misplaced in the best hearts, when we should
tremble we are confident, and when we shoud be assured we tremble.

A cold and moist brain is an insepetable companion of folly.

Brevity although it breed difficulty, yet it carries great gravity.

Brevity when it is neither obscure nor defective, is very pleasing even to the
choycest judgments.

Brevity makes counsel more portable for memory, and easier for use.

The Brownists say, they did not make a new Church, but mended an old.

The Brownists separate, for these four causes or points, A hateful Prelacie, a
devised ministry, a confused communion, and an intermixture of errors.

The Brownists charge Episcopacie with four heresies, first their Canons,
secondly sin uncensured, thirdly their Hyrarchy, fourthly their Service book.

The agreement of brothers is rare, by how much nature has more endeared them,
by so much are their quarrels more frequent and dangerous.

Butidius a man well qualified, and if he had taken a right course, a man
likely to have come to honorable preferment, over much haste pricked forwards,
and at the first went about to out-go his equals, then his Superiors, and at
last of all to fly above his own hopes, which has been the overthrow of good
men, who contemning that, which by a little patience is had with security;
hasten to that which gotten before his time, breeds their ruin and
destruction.

Buying and selling of men and women, which was used in England until the
third year of Henry the first was then prohibited.

In the third year of Henry the first, by a Synod holden at London, it was
decreed, that all burialls should be in their own Parish, because the Priest
should lose his ^ees.

The care of burialls, the pomp of funerals and magnificent Tombs, are rather
solaces to the living, then furtherances to the dead.

A Canon is that which in a universal counsel is established.

Innocent the fourth, was the first Pope that caused Cardinals to wear red
hats, and to ride with trappings.

A Canteed contains a hundred Townships.

Nothing comes to pass without an efficient cause: There be three sorts of
causes natural, voluntary, and casual; Nothing is ended or begun without a
Precedent cause; that cause can hardly rise again, and recover grace which has
been once foiled; It is a sign of a desperate cause to make Satan our
Counselor or our refuge.

Although a man have a good cause, he may fail in obtaining his right by Law,
unless he follow it earnestly, defend it stoutly, and spend freely.

Those things are casual whose act is not premeditated by any Agent,

It is the weakness of good natures, to give so much advantage to an enemy;
Wha^ would malice rather have, then the vexation of them whom it persecuets? We
cannot better please an adversary, then by hurting our selves; this is no other
then to humor envies, to serve the turn of those that malign us, and to draw
on that malice whereof we are weary; whereas carelessness puts ill will out of
countenance, and makes it withdraw it self in a rage, as that which does but
shame the Author without the hurt of the patient; in causless wrong the best
remedy is contempt.

In the first year of Richard the first, the City of London received their
Charter of freedom, and to choose twenty six Aldermen, and out of that numto
choose a Major to rule the rest, also two Bailiffs or Sheriffs, whereas from the
Conquest, they were governed by Port-greeves.

In the 21. year of Henry the third, the King at a Parliament at Westminster,
comfirmed the great Charter: The 26. of Edward the first, the great Charter
was, confirmed, and at the same time it was enacted, that the King should not
charge the Subjects with any taxes or tullages, but by Parliament: It was also
confirmed again in the 27. year of his reign, with these words added, Salvo
jure Coronae nostrae; Edward the third confirmed the great Charter in the 15.
year of his reign.

The Duke of Orleans, the French Kings brother, challenged King Henry the
fourth to meet him with 100. Knights completely armed, against the like number,
and the vanquished to be ransomed at the victors pleasure.

A substantial change is above the reach of all infernal powers, and is
proper to the hand that created the substance of both.

The good creatures of God that have been profaned to Idolatry, may in a
change of their use be employed the the holy service of their maker.

Where there is a settled course of good government (howsoever blemished with
some weakness) it is not safe to be over forward, to a change though to a
better.

The change of a Prince never happens in any Realm, but it trayneth with it
great troubles and sorrows, because at an alteration, men are forced to change
and alter their manners and form of living suddenly; for that that pleases one
Prince disliketh another.

It never yet happened to anyman since the beginning of the World, nor ever will,
to have all things according to his desire, or to whom fortune was never
opposite, or did change.

Great charges can hardly be governed without some indiscreet policies.

In those actions whereby an offense may be occasioned, (though not given;)
charity binds us both to clear our own name, and the conscience of others.

As faith draws home generalities, so charity diffuseth generalities from it
self to others.

If we may refresh the soul of the poor, with the very offalls of our estate,
and not hurt our selves; woe be to us if we do it not.

Where there is a misconceit of God, no marvel if there be a defect of charity.

The nature of charity is to unite and bind men together in all mutual
christian offices, and it does not only unite and bind men, but keeps them so
when they are together. Charitas, est quasi chare unitas.

There is no matter of such consequence in it self, but may be much graced with
ceremonies and complements, which like Officers add much respect and majesty to
the action; which otherwise being but boldly presented, appears far meaner,
and of less regard.

The vulgar use to censure him that punished the fault, not him that makes it.

Wise men must care not only to deserve well, and to wipe off not only the
crimes, but censures also.

It is not safe to censure all men's actions by our own conceit, but rather to
think there may be a further drift, and warrant of their act then we can attain
to see.

It is no censuring of the truth of our present sorrow, by the event of the
following misarriages.

We ought not to censure men's worths by singularity, but to take them carnal
with all their qualities together.

Carnal men think that impossible to others, which themselves cannot do; from
hence arise their censures, hence their exclamations: There must be discretion,
there must be partiality in our censures of the greatest.

There be five limitations of enjoined ceremonies, first they that be not
against Gods word; secondly, that justification or remission of sins be not
attributed unto them; thirdly, that the Church be not troubled with their
multitude; fourthly, that they be not decreed as necessary, and not to be
altered; fifthly, that men be not so tied to them, but that by occasion they
may be omitted, so it be without offense and contempt.

External ceremonies of piety, and complements of devotion, may be well found
with falsehood in religion, they are a good shadow of truth, where it is, but
where it is not they are the very body of Hypocrisy.

In the 21. yeaar of Richard the second, Cheshire was made a principality.

In children there are often presages of virtues and vices.

Armies and Navies are not so strong defenses, and rampires of a Princes
estate, as the multitude of children-Friends with time and fortune, sometime by
unadvised desires or oversights, decrease, and fall away from us and fade,
whereas a man's own blood cleaves fast, and cannot be dis-joyned, especially in
Princes, whose prosperity as well may others enjoy, but their adversity
touches none so near, but their nearest in blood. And how should brethren
agree, if they have not an example from their father?

Children are the living goods of their parents, and therefore must wait upon
the bestowing of their owners.

Such children as dispose of themselves without their parents, they do wilfully
unchild themselves, and change natural affection for violent.

As it becomes not children to be forward in their choice, so parents may not
be too peremtory in their denial; it is not safe for children to overrun
parents in settling their actions, nor for parents (where the inpediments be not
very material) to come short of their children, when the affections are once
settled the one is disobedience, the other may be tyranny.

Children do easily learn to contemn the poverty of their own parents.

Reverence and loving respects of children to parents, never yet went away
unrecompenced; God will surely raise up friends amongst strangers to those that
have been officions at home.

The propagation of children belongs to the glory of marriage, and not to the
punishment of sin.

The fountain and root of all goodness and honesty, is the good education and
training up of our children in their tender age.

Children are bound to obey their parents if they be good; if bad to forbear
them; however to reverence them.

As it is good for a man to have an enemy, so it shall be our wisdom to make
use of his most choleric objections; the worst of an enemy may prove most
sovereign to our selves.

Choler is hot and dry, bitter begotten of the hotter part of the Chilus, and
gathered to the gall, it helps the natural heat, and senses, and serves to the
expelling of excrements.

It was necessary for Christ the Mediator between God and man, to have a
temporal mortality, and an eternal beatitude; to have correspondency with
mortals by the first, and to transfer them by eternity by the second.

The dignity of Christ's person being infinite, gave such worth to his
satisfaction, that what he suffered in short time, was proportionable to what
we should have suffered beyond all time.

Christ his manhood, is the churches head, his Godhead is the life and soul
of it.

It were impossible the Nations should desire Christ to come in his glorious
power to judge the world (as we see they do) unless they had been first united
in their true belief upon him, when he came in humility to suffer.

Christ's sufferings and his life, has not only left us the virtue of the
Sacraments but his example, whereby to direct our selves in all our courses.

God the father in his personal presence, will judge no man, but has given
all judgment unto his son, who shall show himself as man to judge the world,
even as he showed himself man, to be judged of the World.

When our Savior asked his Disciples, Whom say men that I am? Peter answered,
thou art the Christ, etc. to whom Christ replied, thou art Petes, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, etc. meaning not so much upon the person of Peter,
as upon Peter's confession.

Lucius King of England, and Donald King of Scotland, cotemporary Kings in this
Island, received the christian faith Anno Christi 203. Christianity is of power
to discover the Devils subtilty, and delight in deluding ignorant men.

Christianity gives not rules but power to avoid anger.

Philippus Vostrencis was the first Emperor of Rome that professed
Christianity.

He is no Christian whose says is not as sure as his sense.

The thoughts of death in a Christian, are but the throes of the soul to a new
birth, for the second life; for then chiefly a Christian begins to live, when
he is thought worthy to die in Christ.

A City taken by force, is always subject to the Soldiers fury, but if
surrendered by composition, the Commanders are benefited by their corruption.

A City is nothing else but a multitude of men, combined in one band of society.

That City is but in an in condition, the riches whereof consists in some
particulars, and not in the public.

In the 22 year of Henry the second, in a Parliament held at Northampton,
Justices Itenerants were instituted to ride the Circuits; the Realm was divided
into six Circuits, and three Judges to every Circuit.

In the 23. year of Henry the 8. the Clergy of England did grant to the King
00000 l. pounds to be good to them, because they were within compass to be
attainted by the Statute of Praemunire, for maintaining Cardinal Woolsyes power
Legantine; they also at the same time acknowledged, and confessed the King to
be supreme head of the Church, which they would never assent unto before.

The opinion of Clemency is needful, in those which are to sound a new Empire.

Far be the Sword from the hand of Princes; Clemency, not cruelty, enforces
men's hearts, the latter used against, or alone, begets the hatred of a
thousand; the former is not used without the addition of friends.

Private Cogitations, have their progress of such a condition, that they may
take neither more or less of fortune; but those which have raised their
thoughts to sublimity of dominion, a re no more in their own power, having no
means to step upon between the highest of all and precipitation.

The Cogitations of the heart, fly swiftly through the intrinsicall middle of
our life, and leave behind in our memory such impressions of our lusts,
passions, wrongs, and sufferings, that we make work enough in our minds to
cover us all over with misery.

The intermission of comforts has this advantage, that it sweetens our delight
more in our return, then it was abated in the forbearance.

Comfort shall come unseasonably to that heart, which is not apprehensive of
sorrow.

A man's comfort must be in himself, the conscience of deserving well.

The best things are but burdens to those that have them, and to those that
use them; the worst things have some mixtures of comfort to those that groan
under them.

A private commodity ought to yield to a public benefit.

No Commonwealth can stand without equity.

As the Commonwealth is but one body, so it ought to be governed but by one
head.

It is a sign of a corrupt CommonWealth, where laws are multiplied upon laws.

The riches of a Commonwealth are either natural or artificial; natural good
lands, rich mines, etc. Artificial are manufactures, etc.

The definition of a Commonwealth, is the estate of the people, Res-publica
quasi res populi.

A Kingdom is the government by one; a Commonwealth by many.

A Prince kept within bounds, a People not corrupted, and an humble Nobility,
is an excellent composition for a lasting Commonwealth.

A Commonwealth is a lawful government of many families, and so that which
unto them belongs in common, with a puissant Sovereignty.

For as much as the welfare of private men, and all the goods of the Subjects
are contained in the health of our Country; it beseems private men without
grudgeing, to forgive unto the Commonweal, not only their private injuries
received from their enemies, but to yield also their goods for the benefit of
the Commonweal; there is three sorts of Commonweals: Monarchy, Democracy,
Aristocracy.

The Commonwealth contains each private man's estate, and a part must be put
to hazard for the preservation of the whole.

Common-sence is the judge over all the senses corporal, or a thing that is
universally inherent; as for the mother to love the child; and natures
community are those general inclinations which are in all men.

A Commissioner is a public person, but with an extraordinary charge to him
limited without Law, by virtue of Commission only.

He leaves men's minds apt to commotions, who takes not from them all means of
defense.

Tell me with what company do thou converse,)
And straight I will thy deeds rehearse.)
Pity is a compassion in our own hearts, of another man's misfortune, urging
us, as far as our power stretches, to relieve him.

Complaints are long muttered of the great, ere they do break forth to open
contestation; Public accusations of authority, argues intolerable extremities
of evil.

Comparisons ought not to be taken precisely, but in resmblance; they are not
of equality, but of quality.

Peace and composition is for the glory of the Conquerours, and for the utility
of the Conquered.

Pope Innocent the third who was also called Nocentissimus: was the first that
brought in Auricular confession, and he was the first also that denied the Wine
in the-communion to be administered to the Layety; he also ordained that a Bell
and a Candle should be carried before the Sacrament to the sick.

Sins are so much the greater as they are more common, so far is evil from
being extinuated by the multitude of the guilty, that nothing can more
aggravate it with men; community may plead for favor, with God for judgment.

The rareness of Christian Communication argues poverty of grace.

The Custom of giving Lisence or Conducts for Passage, was first begun in the
6, year of William the Conqueror, who prohibited the Subjects going beyond the
Seas, but by Lisence.

He that will cast a stone at an offender, must be free himself, otherwise he
condemns and executes himself in another man's person; the conscience stops the
mouth of the guilty man, and choakes him with that sin which lies in his own
breast, and having not come forth by a penetent confession, connot find the way
out in a reproof, or if he do reprove, he does more shame himself then reform
another.

Natures power is such, that a Woman having once conceived, cannot second any
conception, until she be delivered of the first; it is the same in all other
Creatures, except the Hare, and the Conney, which only conceive double upon the
first conception, and having young in their bellyes will conceive a fresh.

The Splendour of wit, as of all things else, are often spoiled by too great a
confidence of it self: Nothing but innocence and knowledge can give a found
confidence to the heart.

Confession of our sins does no less honor God, then his glory is blemished by
their commission; where an act cannot be reversed, there is no better amends
then confession.

Gods judgments are the rack of Godless men, if one strain make them not
confess, let them be stretched but one wrench higher, and they cannot be
silent; the just avenger of sin will not loose the glory of his executions, but
will have men know from whom they smart.

Men had rather die then endure torture, therefore extorted confession cannot
be good.

It is both lawful and fit in things not prohibited, to conform our selves to
the manners and rights of those with whom we live.

The same day fotty years, after England was conquered by William the father,
was Normandi conquered by William Rufus the Son, it being the 27th. of
September, 1106.

A Conquest draws to it the alteration of these three things, viz. Apparel,
Law, and Language. Conquest is confirmed by continuing possession.

The price and honor of a Conquest is rated by the difficulty.

A Prince that has conquered, and joined a strange Country to his domions,
ought to be circumspect what Governors he places there.

Conduction is that which is sooner overcome and altered, by that which it
nourishes; and Crudity is that which is strong and hard, and will not suffer
it self to be altered.

A short conclusion of long premises best befits the memory.

Henry the eight in the 38th. year of his Reign, by his Letter commanded the
Lord Gray not to demolish Cattillions Fort, but in secret gives him a special
command to ruin it.

Contraries are known by one method, and the privative is known only by
separation of the knowledge of the positive.

Contraries are two opposites of one kind, as black and white both colors,
moist and dry both qualities, but substances have no contraries in themselves.

There be two enemies of peace; first, conscience of evil done, secondly sense
of fear of evil suffered; the first we call sin, the latter crosses.

A wide conscience will swallow any sin, those that have once thralled
themselves to a known evil, will make no difference of sins, but by their own
loss or advantage wickedness once entertained, can put on any shape; trust him
in nothing that makes no conscience of every thing.

Many times the conscience runs a way smoothlywith an unwarrantable action, and
rests it self upon those grounds, which afterward it sees cause to condemn; it
is a sure way therefore to inform our selves thoroughly, ere we settle our
choice, that we be not driven to reverse our acts, with late shame and
unprofitable repentance.

Such as make conscience of sinning, are careful not to be thought to sin.

A good conscience is no less afraid of a scandal, then of a sin, whereas
those that are resolved not to make any scruple of sin, despise others
constructions, not caring whom they offend, so they may please themselves.

Those which have a clear conscience from any sin, prosecute it with rigor,
whereas the guilty are ever partial; their conscience holds their hands, and
tells them that they be at themselves while they punish others.

The conscience may well rest, when it tells us we have neglected no means for
redressing our afflictions, for then it may resolve to look either for
amendment or patience.

A good conscience will make a man undauntedly confident, and dare put him upon
any trial; when his own heart strikes him not, it bids him challenge all the
world, and take up all comers. Contrarily, he that has a false and soul
conscience, lies at every man's mercy, lives slavishly, and is fain to daub up a
rotten piece with the basest conditions.

Conscience is the conserver of religion; it is the light of knowledge that God
has planted in man, which is ever watching over all his actions; and as it
bears him a joyful testimony, when he does right, so it curbeth him with a
feeling that he has done wrong, when ever he commiteth any sin.

Conscience not grounded upon any sure knowledge, is either an ignorant
fantasy, or an arrogant vanity.

The conscience is a conservation of the knowledge of the Law of God, and Nature
to know good and evil; The conscience is that which approves good or evil,
justifying or condemning our actions.

The greatest bliss on earth is a pure conscience. Nil conscire sibi nulla
palescere culpa.

There is no sin but vexes him in whom it is; the first revenge is, that no
man is quit from his own guilty conscience: There is least danger and most
safety, when men's consciences do make conclusions for and against themselves.

No man can wash his hands of that sin, to which his will has consented;
bodily violence may be in-offensive in the patient, voluntary inclination
(through fear) to evil, can never be excusable.

Sin is the offspring of the will, not of the body; where consent is not,
there is no sin.

A constitution is a gathering and uniting of the people together, both in one
Commonweal and Church, into a civil or divine Polity; the form of which
polity is, Order.

In Anno 682: Agathus commanded that the constitutions of the chief Bishop
should be holden for Apostollicall.

The church of St. Savior in the reign of Crathlint, founded in the Isle of
Man, was the first Bishops-See that was erected in Scotland, and three-upon is
esteemed the mother church; churces are not now constituted but repaired.

If the church cast not out the knownunworthy, the sin is hirs; but if a man
will come unworthily, the sin is his: No Element but through its mixture has
departed from its first simplicity; so there is no church but has some error
or sin in it.

The natural sicknesses, that have ever troubled, and been the decay of all
churches since the beginning of the World, changing the Candlestick from one to
another, have been pride, ambition, and avarice.

We must be directed by the Church; but then the Church must be directed by the
right rule, the Scripture; But if any Church (as Rome) shall tell the rest any
thing, that will notly even, to that rule, we may lawfully dissent.

The fittest place for prayer is the church, and among the congregation,
especially if the petition be for public graces, and benefits, and not in
places of separation, or faction in private conventicles.

The church keeps a feast on no Saints birth day, except the birth day of Saint
John the Baptist.

The church is but one body, yet the several members of it rest in diverse
places, and are dispersed into several congregations, which of themselves are
called churches, though they be altogether indeed but one church, as Saint John
in the Revelation writes to the seaen churches, yet they were all but one
church in seven parts.

Lingering is a kind of constancy; suddenness argues fear.

Consultation is concerning things that vary and alter, and medleth not with
those things that be firm and stable.

The Bread and Wine by consecration, cease to be common Bread and Wine, being
dedicated to a sacred use, and so the Bread and Wine are made holy ceasing to
be common; such a change as this understood, the fathers to be made in the
Bread and Wine, but not as touching the substance and being; but as touching
the qualities, this change the reformed allow, and by such a change confess,
that the Bread and Wine are made Sacraments, which effectually by the virtue of
the holy spirit, do signify, present, seal, and give unto us as touching the
soul, by the means of faith, the body and blood of the Lord.

Occasion of contention may be given to those that will contend, when he
concerning whom it is, himself is not contentions.

Continency in Clergy men, is not of the substance of their order, nor
appointed by the law of God: Continency is when reason rules concupisence.

Content lies not in the things we possess, but in the mind that values them.

Content is a rare blessing, because it arises either from a fruition of all
comforts, or a not-desireing of some which we have not.

God knows how to disperse his favors so, that every man may have cause both
of thankfullness and humiliation; while there is no one that has al, no one
but has some; if envy and contempt were not thus equally tempered, some would
be over-haughty, and others too miserable; but now every man sees in himself
that which is worthy of contempt, and matter of emulation in others, and
contrarily sees what to pity and mislike in the most eminent, and what to
applaud in himself, and out of this contrariety arises a sweet mean of
contentation.

Mis-observancy differs from contempt; the one reflects upon the institution,
the other upon the institutor; he who covertly transgresses the Laws, leaves
the reputation of him that made them untoucht; he who openly offends against
them, aims more to weaken the Prince then the Laws; errors which are
occasioned by whatsoever other affection, may be great or little; those which
are occasioned by contempt, are Gyant-like.

Frandulent conventions bind not.

Seven or eight persons assembled together, made a conventicle, and were
prohibited first by act of Parliament in the fifth year of Richard the second.

The partial conversion of men to God, is but hateful hypocrisy.

There are some men that take no heed what happens to others by bad
conversation, and therefore overthrow themselves in the same manner through the
same fault, not foreseeing dangers manifest.

The direction and correction of a fault ought to be in secret.

It must be strong evidence, that will make a sinner convict himself; Nature
has so many shifts to cosen it self in a spiritual verdict, that unless it be
taken in the manner it will hardly yield to a truth, either she will deny the
fact or the fault, or the measure.

Henry the sixth in the tenth year of his Reign, was Crowned the 17th. day of
December King of France, in the City of Paris.

Our natural courage cannot bear us out against spiritual objects; There is
nothing more easy then to be valiant when no peril appears, but when evils
assail us upon unequal terms, it is hard and commendable not to be dismayed.

Much is in a man's courage and discreat carriage of himself.

All private considerations, must be extinguished when the question is of the
good of a man's Country.

The covetous man in all things does affect secrecy, and propriety.

Govetousness and riot, dissolve the bonds of all respect, our will ever
carrying us from our selves, from all awefulness and fear of laws:
covetousness and pride are impatient of loss.

Cruelty is seldom without avarice, by which if it be not caused, it causes it.

In the 4. year of William the Conqueror, he instituted the courts of Chancery
and Exchequer, and appointed the Jury of r2. men to go upon causes criminal,
and to deside controversies. At the same time he appointed four terms to be
kept in the year, at such places as he should nominate; also he constituted
Sheriffs over every County.

In the 19th year of Henry the seventh, the Court of Star Chamber was erected,
to punish such as offended against penal laws; which Court made informers and
promoters to swarm and abound.

In the reign of Henry the third, one William of York Rishop of Salisbury, was
he that caused the custom to be received for a law, whereby the tenants of
every Lord-ship are bound to do suit and service to their Lord on whom they
hold their land.

The Star Chamber, Chancery, and court of Request, have power in criminal
cases to give oaths to the Defendant.

Princes ears and eyes are in every place, courts being full of spies and
nothing is hid from emulation. Courtcarriages are riddles; which though seen
cannot be resolved without exceeding patience, and judging experience.

The Court is a common Inn for flatterers, time-servers and polititions, and
the Courtiers life is a Gally-maufry of pride, lust, ambition, fraud,
imposture, dissimulation, distraction, and envy.

A common counsel in Henry the sixth his time, at first in London consisted of
180 persons.

Counsel ought not to be held holly but secret also; therefore the Alter of the
God Consus who was God of counsels was hidden in the earth.

Counsel given shows what we should do, and not what we can do.

General Councils may err, and have erred.

Against grief it is as hard to choose the season to give counsel, as to give
it; the season should be after the first disgestion of sorrow, and before the
last.

All councils us well in public, as private deliberations; require a reposed
spirit free from wrath, and fear; all perturbations, or particular interest,
for as a troubled mind is more apt to err then to advise justly, and has more
need of proper medicines for it self, then it has in it self to apply any
comfort to others, and is fitter to receive, then to give counsel; from which
as from a great and violent current are carried al those errors and disorders,
which are brought upon mature deliberations, the which have commonly long
repentances, and disasters; but he that can restrain himself from being
transported by intemperate appetites, and can rule his passions, and give a
just rule to himself and to his desires, does give the best time to all
deliberations by mitigating heat and fury, so alters all counsel from that
nature which is received from an unquiet and troubled mind.

No wise men can hold good counsel disparaged by the means of the Author; if we
be glad to receive any treasure from a servant, why not precious admonitions?

Those that can least act, are often times best to give counsel.

Particular discontents and greivances, are either of the mind, the body, or
fortune, which as they wound the soul of man, produce many inconveniences; but
Drunkenness utterly subverteth the same, and astonisheth the body.

The perpetual custom of Drinking, grows by using it into a perpetual pleasure,
stirring up the desire of the palate, which is ever afterward either
overflown, or thirsty.

The Drunkards style begins in lawlesness, proceeds in unprofitableness, ends
in misery, and all shuts up in the denomination of this Pedigree, A Son of
Belial.

Drunkenness is a communicative Vice, and requires the emulation of Companions,
wherein they strive for victory.

In Drink men discover their Dispositions, which they dissemble being sober.

In the sixth year of Richard the second, Dunkirk was taken and spoiled by the
English, Hugh Spencer Bishop of Norwich, being General.

All Duels are unlawful, in that they (as it were) commit the quarrel to the
^ot, for the use of which, there is no warrant since the abrogating of the old
Law, but it is most especially unlawful in the person of a King, who being a
public person, has no power therefore to dispose of himself, in respect that
his preservation or fall, the safety or wrack of the whole Commonwealth, is
necessarily coupled, as the body to the head. He that enters a Duel, loses as
much the opinion of Wisdom, as he gains the opinion of Daring.

Great is the force of Duty once conceived, even to the most unworthy.

The Eye and the Ear, are the minds Receivers; and the Tongue and the Hand, the
Minds Expenditors.

Earthly things proffer themselves with importunity; Heavenly things must with
importunity be sued for.

The Earth is our Mother that brought us forth, our Stage that bears us, and
our Grave wherein we are entombed. So she gives us our Original, our Harbor,
and our Sepulcher.

Gods Elect have three Suits of Appares viz. Black, (Mourning) Red,
(Persecution) White, (Glorious.)

Natural respects are the most dangerous corrupters of all Elections; What hope
can there be of worthy Superiors in any free people, where nearness of blood
carries it from fitness of Disposition?

In the year 885. Adrian the third being Pope, the Emperors of Germany, who
formerly elected to the Popedom, lost their Prerogative.

In the year 998. (in Pope Gregory the fifth's time) it was agreed that the
Emperors of Germany should be elected by three Bishops, viz. Mentz, Tryers, and
Cullein; and by three Princes, viz. The County Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke
of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh; and in case the said six cannot
agree, then the King of Bohemia to have an umpiering Voice.

The reason why we pray Eastward, is because Paradise was there planted, from
whence we were cast out: which is the reason also, that we build our Churches
East and West; yet the Jews had their Priests, that in their Sacrifices always
turned their faces toward the West.

Education is another Nature, altering the Mind and Wit.

The beginning, midst, and end of man's life, lies only in virtuous and
honest Education, which is the very means that is opperative, and powerful for
the attaining of Virtue and true Happiness.

There is none in the World so wickedly inclined, but a religious Instruction
and Education may fashion anew, and reform them; nor any so well disposed,
(the Reins being let loose) whom the continual fellowship and familiarity, and
the examples of dissolute men, may not corrupt and deform.

No Element, but through mixture, has separated from its first simplicity.

When the Ancients contended against each other, to persuade people to this, or
that action, Eloquence had then her original.

Fame with Posterity, is the fairest reward of Eloquence.

Commonly the enmities of nearest Kinsfolks, if once they fall out, are most
despiteful and deadly.

The difference between Enmity and Emulation, is thus; Enmity hunteth after
destruction, and only rejoiceth in that which brings our Adversary to ^uine
and utter destruction; but Emulation (which is a spur to Virtue) contendeth
only by well-deserving, to gain the advantage of another man's Fame, that uses
the same means to attain the like ends, and is always mixed with love, in
regard of the affinity of their affections, and the sympathy of their desires,
not suffering the overthrow of their Competitor, but succouring him in time of
danger and calamity, that he may still continue to show the greatness of his
worth, by the opposition of inferior actions, which are as a lesser scantling
of desert, to measure the estimation of the other humor.

The causes of the Roman Empire, were the Domestic Wars, the immoderate
greatness of the Princes of the Empire, and the Dignity of the Emperor, being
Elective, and not Hereditary.

It is the dissolution of an Empire if the Revenues be diminished by which it
is maintained, and if Customs be taken away, the abolishing of Tribute will be
demanded.

In the second year of Henry the 4th the Emperor of Constantinople came into
England, to request aid against the Turk.

In the fifth year of Henry the eighth, the Emperor of Germany, Maximilian,
served under the Kings Banner, and did take pay.

Boniface the third, was the first that was called Pope, and he obtained of
Phocas the Emperor, That the Roman Seat should be called the Head of all
Churches. At that time three remarkable things happened, The decay of the Roman
Empire; The rising of the Popedom; and, The springing up of Mahometism; Of the
ruin of the Empire, these two Beasts arose, which have much harmed the Church;
and as the Empire has decreased, these have increased.

All Philosophy teaches us, That man desires an end, and that there is some
end which every man tends to, beyond which he cannot think or hope.

In the 7th. year of Henry the fifth, by a General Council holden at Constance,
it was decreed, That England should have the Title of the English Nation, and
to be taken and reputed one of the five Nations that obeyed the Roman See.

Common Enemies must first be opposed, Domestic more at leisure.

That which open Enemies dare not attempt, they work by false Brethren, and are
so much the more dangerous, as they are more entire.

A man ought to be jealous of whatsoever an Enemy either by speech or action
shall cast upon him, however colorable the reasons may be which are alleged
to induce him thereunto; for it is improbable that an Enemy (whose chiefest
care is to weaken the Adversary, and to bring him to ruin) should advise him
to any thing that should concern his good, unless the profit which he himself
shall thereby gather, do far exceed that which the contrary part may expect.

When a man's enemy offers him that which has appearance of good, let him
refuse it.

God has created nothing in this World; either man or Beast, without an Enemy
to hold it in fear and humility.

He that would undertake great Enterprises, had of Wisdom and Courage; Wisdom
to contrive, and Courage to execute; Wisdom to guide his Courage, and Courage
to second his Wisdom; both which if they meet with a good cause, it cannot but
succeed.

Princes that desire to continue friendship, ought not to meet and have
interviews, to avoid suspicion; but to hold correspondency by wise Counselors.

Envy has this good in it, that it afflicts those extremely that use it.

Envy proceeds from a base mind; Glory follows good deserts; Envy follows Glory.

The envious man feeds upon others evils, and has no other Disease but his
Neighbors welfare.

It is the nature of man, and a deeply rooted quality in us, straightly to look
into the prosperity of others with an envious eye, and to require a moderation
of Fortune no where so much, as in those we have seen in equal degree with our
selves.

It is a thing incident, and almost certain to all men's natures, to behold with
sore eyes the new grown felicity of others, and to exact a sharp account of
their Fortunes, especially whom they have seen inferior to, or equal with
themselves.

Envy is curious, and out of the best person or act, will raise something to
caval at.

It is a hard thing for a man willingly and gladly to see his Equals lifted
over his head.

Nothing can more try a man's Grace, then question of Emulation.

That man has true light, that can be content to be a Candle before the
Lanthorn of others.

Any Superiority is a mark of Envy.

Nature in every man is both envious and disdainful, and never loves to honor
another, but where it may be an honor to it self.

Envy, though it take advantages of our weaknesses, yet is ever raised upon
some grounds of happiness in them whom it emulateth; it is ever an ill effect
of a good cause.

The malignity of Envy is thus well answered, When it is made the evil Effect
of a good Cause.

Envy when it is once conceived in a malicious heart, is like fire in Billets
of Juniper, which is said to continue more years then one.

Envy is nothing else, but sorrow for other men's good, be it present, past, or
to come; and joy at other men's harms; opposite to mercy, which grieves at other
men's mischances; and mis-affects the body in another kind.

Every other sin has some pleasure annexed to it, or will admit of an excuse,
Envy alone wants both. Other sins last but a while; the gut may be satisfied,
anger remits, hatred has anend, but envy never cease.

That man is wife, and well advised, that incurreth the envy of men, for
matters of greatest weight and importance.

Envy is nothing else, but grief for another man's good, and joy for his ill,
and has his root from malice.

Envy (like poison) works not where it finds no hurt.

He whose Fortune or Valor has made him higher then others, let him not
repose himself to eyes, if he will shun hands; otherwise he causes envy in
those who ought to be his Equals, because he has outstript them; fear in him
who should be his Superior, because he equals him; Equality is the producer of
Envy.

The mixture of greater and less is good; but that of Equals, stark naught.

The continuance of Error, does ingraft depraved Opinions in the hearts of men.

Error is more tolerable in a Poet, then in a Historographer.

The Errors of one man is a slippery place to cause others to fall.

Error is commonly joined with Cruelty.

If Errors of practice should be stood upon, there could be no true Church upon
Earth.

Every Error does not pollute all Truths; No Truth can sanctify all Errors.

Errors of judgment are more dangerous then Errors of practice; but none so
deadly as their's that were once in the Truth.

Errors are never the elder for their patching; Corruption can do the same that
age would do; We may make age as well as suffer it.

The best may err, but not persist in it. When good Natures have offended, they
are never quiet till they have hastened a satisfaction.

There be two main defects of Wit, Error and Ignorance, to which all others are
reduced. By ignorance we know not things necessary; by Error we know them
falsely. Ignorance is a privation, Error is a positive act; from Ignorance comes
Vice, from Error, Heresy.

No man now adays shows an Error, and leaves it, mankind is not so wise.

The Errors of sloathfulness are best discerned when all diligence is bootless.

They neglect their own Wisdom who without any judgment approve the invention
of those that fore-went them, and suffer themselves (after the manner of brute
Beasts) to be led by them.

It often times happens, that an Error being once rashly committed through
despair of remission, admits no true penitence, but either draws on more
grievous crimes, (Scelere scillus luendum est) or maintains his Error by
wilful obstinacy.

It is an old Rule among Soldiers, that a great negligent Error committed by an
Enemy, is to be suspected as a pretense to Treachery.

There is no Error but has some appearance of resembling Truth, which when men
find out, they then publish to the World matter of contention and jangling, not
doubting but in the variable deformities of men's minds, to find out some
Protectors or Spectators, the better by their help to nurse and cherrish such
Libels as their own inventions have begot.

Pride and Luxury are the attendants of prosperous Estates.

The smallest Estates are to be governed with the greatest skill, as small
Barks in the midst of the wide Ocean.

There is no Estate so pure or ignoble, as can keep a man from Fame.

An Estate gotten by lend means, cannot be retained at first with sudden
modesty, and ancient gravity.

The worst Estate out of Hell, has either some comfort, or at least some
mittigation.

The best Estate requires careful menaging at home.

To the overthrow of an Estate, oftentimes the inconveniences concur,
unthankful Friends, decayed Friends, bad Neighbors, negligent Servants,
Casualties, Taxes, Mults, Losses of Stock, Enmities, Emulations, frequent
Mutations, Losses, Surety-ship, Sickness, Death of Friends, and that which is
the worst of all, Improvidence, ill Husbandry, Disorder, and Confusion, by
which means we are drenched on sudden in our Estates, and unawares precipitated
insensibly into an inextrecable Labyrinth of Cares, Woes, Wants, Grief,
Discontent, and Meiancholly.

Essence is derived, ab ipso esse, to have a being.

All things have their value from our own estimation^

The most precious things that are, lose of their worth, if they be not suited
with our correspondent Natures, whose sympathy adds much more excellence then
is discerned, when they approve by themselves without such assistance, as in
the Diamond, the Foil, and Gold.

It is never safe to measure Events by the power of the Instrument, nor in the
Causes of God, to measure others by our selves.

In matters of judgment to be guided only by the Event, is the way to Error;
so Falsehood may be Truth.

We commonly measure and censure all actions by the Event.

One is crowned for that which another man is tormented for, as Caesar and
Gracchus.

In future Events men look for help from Time and Fortune.

It oftentimes happens, that a prosperous Event makes foolish Counsel seem
wiser then it was.

The Evil that is ever in motion, is not fearful.

That which both Time and Eternity finds standing where it was, is worthy of
terror.

It is a rare Evil that has not something in it, to sweeten it either in sense
or in hope

Evils and Sicknesses come on Horseback, and go away on foot.

The best things ill used, become evil; and the worst things used well, prove
good.

Good and Evil in the Government of men, has this difference betweeen
themselves, That Good, though it be brought forth by time, and though by our
studies and industries it be maintained, corrupts notwithstanding, by degrees
of it self, and of it self also extinguisheth, as we may read and see in the
succession and proceedings of all States, and of all Sects; the contrary of
which appears in Evil, since it does not waste by little and little, through
the wearing of time, as good does, but rather increases to a more powerful
validity, and by easy passages rises to the extremity of declination.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Book.
The first Chapter.
HOw Wit disguised himself in the habit of a Lawyer, and how by diverse
reasons he persuaded two Countrymen to desist, and leave off going to law with
their Landlords: also how they gave Wit half a piece for his counsel, and
how at last when the two Countrymen were drunk, Wit stole away from them and
left them, so that the Countrymen having lost Wits company, were carried to
the Counter, where Wit next morning came to them again, and so after they
were released from thence, Wit parted from them. Also Wits description of a
Tavern and a Countryman.

The second Chapter.
HOw Wit having left off his Lawyers Gown, disguises himself in the habit of
a Citizen, and so keeping company with all sorts of people, he observed and
noted the natures and qualities of these professions, namely of a Carpenter, a
Bricklayer, etc.

The Third Chapter.
HOw Wit in the habit of a Citizen kept company still with Taylers, Bakers,
Cooks, Smiths, Chandelers, Ioyners, Ostlers, Watermen and the like, of whose
qualities and properties he makes certain brief Descriptions.

Wits Term.
YOU two stand feeding of your Lawyer with fees, like two hedge sparrowes that
feed the Cuckoo, and pine your selves; Wits descri^tion of the Law.
For I will descrive the Law unto you briefly and faithfully: yet so that I
will not detract from the dignity of so honorable a study. The Law is good in
it self, and becomes evil only, when it is inherent in an evil man, Lex est
Reg^plumbea.
as good wine may be corrupted by the vessel that contains it. It is like a
young twigge, or a leaden ruler, which may be wrythed or bent any way: It is
sharp and severe, and considers only what is just, without regard of equity.
The cases of the Law are infinite, and do daily increase, for they are matters
that have been adjudged, and are now as it were the examples of the Law. A
Bill in Law is a tedious narration or declaration of the clients cases, which
is written in wide spreading hand to enlarge the Clerks fees. That Action and
Passion are two Predicaments of the law. That the motions are without motion,
and as flow as the revolution of the Planet Saturn, ^nnus Plato^cus or Pla^es
year.
for Plato told his Scholars that when this Planet had performed his natural
and retrograde motion, that he and they should meet again, and he should
read unto them in that manner as he did then. Besides, though this planet is
now, yet still he goes forward; but there are many ways to delay and protract
the Courts and proceeding of the Law, as Injunctions, Bills of Reveiw and the
like. That the blame is laid upon the Lawyers, when the fault is in the
Clients, for if they would unfold their cases faithfully, the Lawyers would end
their suits more speedily. That Aturneyes are like Andirons that hold up their
Clients as the other does the Billetts, until they have consumed and wasted
one another: In a word, the law is good in it self, for it makes badd men
good, though sometime as I said by accident it make good men badd. And to
conclude the Law is like a Laborinth, you may enter in, but it is hard to find
the way out again; And therefore good friends having given you a brief view
or prospect into the Law, I would desire you to change your purpose and
intention, Wit persvv^deth the tvv^ Countryme^ to live at Peace
and not to go to law, for it is better to live securely at home, and to spend
your time quietly among your neighbors, than to come up every Term to London
with a great bag or Box of writings at your girdle, when your selves do
understand near a letter in the Hornebooke but Ho and O, or rather O Ho; and
though I speak against my self being a Lawyer (for the world does falsely
immagine that Lawyers do strive to nourish the flame of contention) yet I will
discharge a good conscience, and rather persuade men to live in amity and
frienship, than to contend in Law, and I doubt not but I shall get both love
and money by it, and while I make them friends, and reconcile them one to
another, I hope they will prove my friends, howsoever Conscientia est mill
testes: the contentment and happiness of a good conscience is far more
precious then the friendship of men: And therefore honest Countrymen, ^itt
plays ^e honest avvyer.
you see that I have played the honest Lawyer, and laid open unto you the
inconveniences of going to law, so that I would advise you to agree with your
Landlord, submit your self unto him, live quietly among your neighbors, keep
good houses, look to your husbandry, sear God, honor the King, and do good
in your Country, so you shall live contentedly, and dye happily, for those that
love peace, shall live in peace, toy, and felicity after this life is ended.

When the Country men had heard Wits discourse, truth like a thorn pricked
them so to the heart, that they both confessed that he had told them more then
ever they heard before; that one of them who had baene Constable of the Town,
and therefore could speak with some indiscretion began thus:

Sir, you have made such a rescription of going to law, and how unfit it is for
us Ingrant men to follow the law, so that we intend to leave it off and follow
the Plough, for our stomachs are now reasonably well allayd, and therefore we
desire you accept of this half piece for your fee, for your counsel shall
save us many a pound, and besides we have a quart of wine for you if you
please to go to the Tavern. Wit thanked them, and told them that albeit it
was not his usual custom to be seen in Tavernes, especially not to tarry
there long, yet he would dispense with other affairs, to give them content,
Wit and (...) two Count^^men go to t^^ Tavern.
and so Wit and the two Countrymen went to the Tavern together, but as soon
as the drawer spide Wit, he presently gave him the biene venu or welcome, and
straightway brought him to one of the best rooms, and then he told him, that
the night before there was like to have been a bloody fray for lack of your
worshippes company, for as soon as you were gone, some began to commend you,
and to say, that master Wit was as fine a merry a companion as any in Europe:
others again replied that you were a foul companion, that would give distaste
in all companies, and had rather loose your friend than your jest; and this was
maintained and argued pro and con, so that at length they had proved it by
breaking one another heads with quart potts, if my Master had not moderated
the matter, for as soon as you left them, they were quite gone. It is no wonder
says Wit that they were gone in drink as soon as I was gone from them, for I
do always stay with my friends as long as I can, but when I perceive that the
strength of the drink begins to work upon their brains, then I steal from
them, so that I stay not until the reckoning comes to be paid, whereupon they
being in drink, and wanting me to make the reckoning, do often fall out and
quarrel, either about that, or some other occasion. But to leave off this
discourse, prithee drawer bring us a quart of rich canarie, for my self and my
friends, such as I and the Wits drink, if thou can draw us a ruppe of
Nectar, lets have it. Sir, says the drawer, you shall have of the best; for I
should prove my self an ignoramus if I should bring you any but the best. Well
(says Wit) fly then like a winged spirit to the bottom of the Seller and
fetch it, and so exit drawer and draws the curtain leaving Wit and the
Countrymen together, who began to discourse thus unto them: Ingeniumest
pacisicum. Wit is a Peacemake^
you see (honest friends that I endeavor to make peace wheresoever I come, for
there is never any quarrelling in Tavernes or Alehouses if I be there, but
as soon as I go, then they fall out about the Arithmeticke of their reckoning,
or the wrong apprehension of some word, so that the mistaking of a word is many
times taken amiss, and then they are so far enraged, that in stead of other
complements, The deseri^^tion of a drunken qua^^ rell.
they salute one another heads with quart pots, the glasses are broken, the
tables overthrown, the candles are extinguished, and the Tobaccopipes are
thrown in one another faces, and thus their kindness (as soon as I forsake
their company) ends in a drunken quarrel. By this time they might hear the
echo of the drawers voice, who cried, score a quart of canary in the half
moon, and no sooner had he spoke those words but he came flying in, and
having filled a glass and delivered it to Wit, he heard them knock in
another room, so that he vanished and left them. Wit drink a health to friends.
And now being alone, Wit first drank to the Countrymen with a complement,
telling them that he would commemorate all his and their friends in the
Country, both Gentlemen, Yeomen, and merry Vicars, and also his kind friends
in the four Innes of Court, and also in the two Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, and in general to all his friends vbicunque, or whersoever. The
Countrymen replied that they would pledge his worship with all their hearts.
Nay (says Wit) I beseech you not to worship me, for it is a title which I
neither deserve, nor desire, though I have been borne and brought up as a
Gentleman, ^^tt respect^^ by Gentle^^ and ^^ights. (...) habet in^^ium inimi^^
nisi igno^^tem. ^itt has no ^^emy but ig^^rance.
and am respected both by Gentlemen and Knights, for I was well acquainted with
Sir Phillip Sidney when he writ his Arcadia, and sir John Harrington when he
composed his merry Epigrams; and indeed there is none accomplished Gentleman
that does not desire my company, you must pardon me if I praise my self, for
it is given to us that are the family of the Wits to be self conceited, and
to set too high a price on our gifts, but to set a period to my speech, I
drink to you both most kind and honest countrymen, for to discover the truth
unto you, I am no Lawyer; Law is too obtuse, and blunt a study for me, for
though I dissembled the matter my name is Wit, and I am as ioviall a companion
as the best of them all, There is n^^ good socie^ unless Wit^ be in compa^ny.
for indeed there is no good society or mirth without I be in company. Your
Gallants will never visit a Tavern but they will carry me with them, though
they can not bring me back again, so that they are feign at night to go to
their Lodging without me, but the next morning I visit them again with an
early salutation; and then they give me my mornings draught according to the
time and season of the years. But I will not be tedious in my discourse for I
affect brevity, and is not this harmless mirth far better than to go to Law,
had not we better drink our selves, than to make the Lawyers and their
Clerks drink wine upon our cost, and therefore good Countrymen I do commend
my love unto you in this glass of wine. They both thanked him, and thus they
continued drinking, but as Mercury with the sweetness of his pipe did enchant
Argus his hundred eyes, so Wit with pleasant discourses drew on the Countrymen
into such a kind and laving humor, that they began to drink to Wit with
such rural Complements, Vinum, ^nollit meres ^o sinit esse ^^ors. ^ine
softmeth ^^r nature ^^d condition ^^nd gives us ^gentle dispo^ion.
and dunstable behavior, so that Wit could not choose but smile to see how the
wine did mollisie and soften their rude nature, insomuch that with great store
of nonsense and country complements, they began to be so over-kind to Wit,
that they would needs drink his mistresses health, but Wit told them that
he honored no Mistresses but virtue, ^o eat some ^^de modi^^m when ^^u are
drin^^ag is the ^^y to make ^tt stay in ^ur company
and desired them not to profane her name by any idle health, but Wits
persuasions could not restrain them from their troublesome kindness, so that
in hope they should persuade Wit to stay with them, they would needs have a
Vice or two of a Gammon of Bacon, which was straight brought them with all
expedition, and Wit stayed with them a while, but when they had done, ^^o much
^nking ^ds Wit ^^king.
one of the Countrymen would needs have a quart of Sack to drive down their
bacon, but this quart sent Wit packing, so that he slipped away from them,
neither could they discern how he went away from them, for they were so
blind, that they immagined that Wit was still in their company, and the
Drawer could not persuade them he was gone, so that after Wit had left them
he was much troubled with these two country fellows, for one of them by
chance brake a venice glass and would by no me anes be persuaded to pay for
it, and the others stomach began to recoyle, so that he cast up his reckonings
in the chimney; but at last with much a do, having got what they would of one
of them for breaking the glass, they thrust out these two Annimales out of the
Tavern door, where one of them reeled against the other, and both of them a
last fell in the Kennell, but getting up again they thought to go to Wits
lodging to en quite of him what was the sign of the June where they lay, To
two C^^ try men tal^^ by the Wat^^
but they were so drunk that they could not find his chamber; so that they
fell into the Constables hands, and because they gave him tude words and
churlish answers, he carried them both to the Counter, Wit visite^ them next
morning in the Count^
where they lay that night, but in the morning as soon as Wit understood that
his friends were in the Counter he came again to them very early in the
morning, and began to excuse himself for leaving them overnight: for says
he, when I see men begin to grow idle in their drink, and to call for more
than will do them good, then I cannot endure to stay with them any longer. And
therefore because I have other affairs, so that I keep you company any
longer, I will give you some friendly advice. ^ts advise ^^he Coun^men at ^^ing.
First, beware of geing to Law, least you pay for your expense when it is too
late: shun idle company, beware of Dice, Drabs, and Drunkenness: Enter not
into Bond, make not your wives your masters, in company be merry and wise,
consider of every action before hand what will follow afterward, cut your coat
according to your cloth, esteem not all offers of friendship, but mistrust
fair words, keep money and make it your servant not your master, let not your
friend know all your mind, but reserve a piece to thy self, for a friend may
become a foe, moderate thy passions, govern thy self and then thou shall be
able to govern thy household and family: this is my counsel, and now I hope
Wit has proved himself no pettifegger, but an honest lawyer, for I have given
you my free opinion concerning the Law, yet not disgracing that study in any
kind, and I have showed you the inconveniences which arise by contentions,
suites, and have given you some brtefe notes of instruction. In a word I wish
you both as well as my self, and if you love me I wish you to leave of
drunkenness, for I cannot endure it, it spoils my brains, for albeit I can and
do keep company with all sorts of men, yet I never stay with them till they
are drunk, and (though I speak it in my own behalf) yet I can prove that I
endeavor to restrain men from vains and idle courses, whereunto they do
often run through their own folly, I will therefore go along with you from
the Counter to the Justices, and after he has discharged you, I will take my
leave of you and commit you to the protection of your own good fortunes: And
so after the Justice had released them, Wit directed them the readiest way to
their Inn, and so left them: And thus you see how Wit got a fee of these two
Country fellows, and in slead of pleading for them, he persuaded them to live
at peace, and leave off going to Law, which shows that if more had wit they
would not be contentious: ^itt and good ^ellowship are ^^iends, but ^^itt and
drun^iennesse are ^^es.
and lastly you may behold how Wit and drunkenesse cannot agree, for they are
contraries, and contrara se mutuo expellunt, contraries do one expel the
other; for as water quenches fire, so drinks downs and extinguishes the wit.
And Wits council which he gavo the countrymen shows, that want of a
fore-Witt brings woe; for ante cuvere debet, qui non dolebit, he that would
not fall into miserfe or want, must be wise beforehand: and so much concerning
Wits first practice, his second practice follows, but to refresh the reader I
will insert some verses, which Wit made by way of observation on a Tavern,
and the nature and disposition of a Countryman, which may serve as
Charactericall discriptions of them both.

A Tavern.
A Tavern is a place which Bacchus trayne^
Frequent, and drink till wine do them inflame^
It is a place where ancient friends do show
Their love; on this stage you may clearly view
Diverse conceited humors which are played
By serveral companies, or it is the mint
Where Wit does coin his fancies, for a print
Of wine more readily inspires the brain
Then water though from Hellicon it came.
Some talk of foreign matters and wonders
Of a deep apprehension, who have been
Perhaps at Callis, while on a fair day
Their ships through the calm seas did cut her w^^
The Channells always burn in stead of paper
To light Tobacco which is a rich vapor.
Here loving friends with weeping eyes do part
While they express the affection of their heart
In a full cup, and with kind words commend
Themselves unto their loving absent friend.
It is a Chapel, where diverse every day
At Bachus Alter pay, but do not pray.
I do not hate a Tavern nor the wine
Yet I Will shun expense, and wasting of my time.
In such a place, I do allow the use
Of both, but disapprove their foul abuse.
Drink in a Tavern for thy recreation
^ut dwell not there, nor makt thy habitation.
^^r a Tavern is a place where men nere cease
(...) keep a Leaguer in the times of peace.
A Countryman.
A Countryman is blunt in spaech and action
Yet he is given much to suites and faction.
^^e does not cheat his friend with the smoth art
^f flattering words, but speaks even from his heart.
^is countenance is cheerful; and his clothes
^laine like his meaning, nor with swaggering oaths
^oth pay his debts, nor make his trembling host
Glad to write down his reckoning on a post.
^is conscience is free, and he does wonder
^hy guilty men do fear a clap of thunder.
^^s bloody Nero who would hide his head
^hen it did thunder underneath a bed.
Content is, his chief riches and his wealth;
^hile the fresh air does keep him in good health.
His life is harmless, striving not to gain
Ambitious honor, or to purchase fame.
^he sight of a milch cow or a green field
Do please him highly, and much solace yield.
Into his mind, while he does plodding go
^lad in course russet, which does plainly show
How little he esteems of pride, or fashions
Which are brought over out of foreign nations:
And when pale death commands him to resign
His life, then does his resolution shine
Even like the Sun, whose glistering beams a pea^
When it is going down most bright, and clear.
He does repose small trust in the Physician
In his sickness, for it is his chief ambition
To prefer his soul, that it may mount the ksies^
And have a place in heaven when he dies.
Chap. 2. How Wit having put off his Lawyers Gown, disguised himself in the
habit of a Citizen, and so keeping company with all sorts of people, he
observed and noted their Persons, their humors, qualities, and fashions, of
which he makes certain brief discriptions.
WHen Wit was delivered from the company of those two country fellows, Wit
disgu^ himself (...) a Citizen.
who^ he persuaded before to live in peace and amity with their neighbors and
Landlord, he left off playing Ignoramus in his Lawyers Gown, and disguised
himself in the habit of a Citizen, that thereby he might without suspicion
converse, and keep company with all sorts of people, and observe their
humors, and fashions. And in stead of being togatus a gowned man, he became
civis penulatus, a cloaked Citizen, yet not like one of the supertour rank of
Citizens, but one of the inferior sort, being thus very neately apparelled in a
cloak, and stockings and shwes, sometimes Wit wonld wear a Ruler by his
side, and then he was supposed to be a Carpenter, Bricklayer, or Plasterer,
sometimes he would have a hammer under his girdle, and then he was taken for a
Smith or Vpholsterer, or a Peuterer, or some other Hammer man, sometimes he
would have a Parchment measure in his pocket, or some pattern to cut out by,
and then he went for a Tailor, sometimes he would put on a green wastcoate
and sprinckle his face with meal, and then he was supposed to be a Miller, a
Mealeman, or a Baker: sometimes he would black his fingers with shoomakers
war, and wear a Shoomakers thimble ou his finger, and then he was thought to
be a Shoemaker or a Cobbler. Sometimes he would get on a frock, and then he
was a Porter. And sometimes he would put on a Watermans Iacket, and then he
was a Sculler. And to conclude Wit by the help of his friend the broaker
would shift and change himself into all shapes and habits, and so conversing
and keeping company with all sorts of people, he could not choose but have
matter enough for his observation, which was that which he destr'd, for the
end and scope of his intention was to observe and take notise of the fashions
and carriages of the city, especially in the Term time, for he knew that
the body politic was then most full of humors, whereupon Wit being thus
disguised in the habit of a Citizen, and having a Carpenters Ruler by his side,
he went forth into the City, to see whethe blind Fortune would conduct him,
intending as I said in a merry manner to practice on the ignorance, Wits
secopractise.
and weakness of the People, and so walking through the City as Diogenes
did through Athens with Candle and lantern, he changed at last to pass by
the red lattice of an Alehouse, where it seems the strong drink began to work
in their brains, so that they were singing merry catches, and roaring like
Bulls of Basan, so that Wit looking up, and perceiving it was the sign of
the Anchor, he thought to cast Ankor here a while. And so coming in he
found these were the Alehouse quiristers, whose voyers he had heard, namely,
two Carp^nters, a stone cutter, a bricklayer and the host of the house,
whereupon Wit calling for a full pot or double pot of Ale presently insinuated
himself into their company, and having a ruler under his girdle, one of them
asked him of what profession he was: Wit answered that he was aedificiorum
vel domuum Fabricator, that is in b^iefe, he was a Carpenter: whereupon the
two other Carpenters told him that he was the more welcome, and likewise the
stone-cutter, the bricklayer and the host, did all bid him welcome, and having
drank to him with some drunken complement, one of them who had got the
hickocke would needs tell him a very serious story, but Wit put him out by
drinking unto him, so that he as soon as he had pledged him, was feign to go
forth and utter his mind in the yard, The humou^ of a Drunk^ard.
where he had no audience, but a few old tubbes and other rubbigge which stood
there. But at last he comes in again, like a drunken Penitent, while sin
and drunkenness did even enforce him to weep for sin, for his eyes were
full of water, which he wiped with his handkercher, and then he set himself
freshly to drinking and began a catch, while some of the rest boar their
parts; so that Wit thought it a hellish harmony, for he could not relish such
vulgar stuff, and therefore he busied himself with taking a pipe of Tobacco,
which he thought was a more gentile music than their rude voices. Wits
meditation on a^ Alehouse.
And while he was taking his Tobacco he drew these meditations which he kept
in memory until he had opportunity to write them down in his table-booke.
His first meditation was, that these Alehouses were the Chappells of ease, and
idleness, whether those de media and in fima plebe, that is, those of the middle
and lowest rank of common people do frequent. That their mirth here, is
divided into two sorts, either scoffing, ieering jests, or obscene bawdy jests.
That the host loves money without your company, but he loves not your company
without money. That singing is there musticke whereas they keep no eyme, for
when their heads are full of Crotchetts, they will sit up u^till twelve a
clock singing catches. That the drinking rooms are Cupids closets, where they
conspire, and agree about midnight matches. That drunkenness becomes a
Carpenter or a Ioyner better then a Gentleman, who should not only know
virtue, but live virtuously, or else he deserves to be degraded of that title.
That drink is a strange disguise, for it makes a man so blind that he does
not know himself, nor where he is, nor what he does. That Alehouses shotts
among the common people never wound the purse much, for the thorte scatters
among the whole company. That drunkards when they have least Wit, think
themselve most wise. That it is no good place to choose a friend, for they will
be kind in their drink, and the next day be ready to cut your throat. That
they will swear here like freeholders, that is as long as they are freeholders
of the Alehouse. That they will talk nonsense ex tempore, and quarrel about
any ocasion, and for one word they will give you a hundred words. That here is
great puffing and blowing, especially, when the Tobacco pipes are lighted, and
then their actions may be divided into sour sorts, Drinking, discoursesing,
smoking, spitting, and their passions are divided into four more, quarrelling,
complementing, singing, and paying the reckening, the last whereof, namely, the
passion of paying the reckoning is the worst, for it is accompanied always
with a Delerium or swimming of the head. That men commonly loose four things,
and sometimes a fifth, by frequenting Alehouses, viz. They loose their time,
their money, their credit, and their senses, and I fear their souls. That it
is a house that has many Inmates, and yet the Statute takes no hold of them,
for they are but Tennants at will, so that when they have paid their rent,
(which is too dear a rent for a drinking room, they may leabe it to the host,
who straight letts it out to the next company that comes, and thus several
reckonings do pay the Hosts rent, who might be a Lord of a Town for he has
more Tenants than the best of them, but his rent is not paid quarterly or
yearly, but daily and hourly, and if a man be too long a Tenant to any of his
rooms, and spend little, he will put him out by a Habeas corpus, and desire
him to give place to some company that desire that room, when indeed he
desires to have his room in stead of his company. In a word, an Alehouse is a
place where much time, much money, many words, much Tobacco, much paper, much
drink are spent, and cast away, and in stead thereof there is nothing gotten,
or lent, but loss of time, poverty and beggary, a profane custom of swearing,
idle tobacco taking, The description of a Carpenter.
and a head full of drink. And that Carpenters are honest fellows, which
though they live by the square, the rule, and the compass, yet they neither
live within rule, squre, or compass. That they know how to fashion the Timber
for the fabric of a building, and they cannot endure brick-building because
it has little timber-worke. That their children are Chipps of the old Block.
That in sawing of Timber he that stands above is like the Client, and he that
stands below is like the Lawyer, for the dust falls down to him. That
Bricklayers are morterfied men, The description of a Brick layer.
though they are sometimes troubled with their stones before they can tell how
to lay them. That their pendicular line or plummet line, keeps their work
even and straight, and by the help of this weak line, they make strong work.
That they are honest plain dealing men, and yet they have cunning in dawbing.
That some times they climb too high that they catch a fall, and so many times
do put their bost ionts to the hazard. That they may keep a good table at
home, but when they are abroad their mortar is served up to them in Trayes.
They place brickes in the wall, as Poets do words in their verses, that is in
a smooth and even manner. Their work is the Emblem of Hppocrisie, for they can
white over a mudd wall and make it seem very fair outwardly, when underneath
it is nothing but rotten lathes and loame. That when the Tower of Babell was
built, there was surely a great company of Bricklayers. That an Host is an
under Landlord, The description of an Host.
or petty Landlord of some Alehouse. That his nose is richer than the Rocks in
China, and is full of carbuncles and redd Rubies, so that he may go to bed by
the light of it, for if he follow his Nose it will guide him to his Chamber.
That he it every man's companion, but no man's friend. That his discourse is
frothie as his drink. That he is Baccus Standardbearer, and carries his
culloures in his face, lastly he may be an honest man, but yet he must needs
wincke at Sin and drunkenness, though he take a nap for the time, or else
he will dye a Beggar. Wit having frained these meditations in his brain,
purposed afterward to collect them into some form, and set them down in
writing, so that perceiving that the company was very far spent in drink, so
that the two Carpenters sung very woddenly, and the Bricklayer laid up his
mind there before them all; and the stone cutter was cut in the leg, and the
Host had got the foxes skin over his head in stead of a nightcap: When Wit
I say perceived that they were all gone in drink, then Wit was presently gone
too, Wit leaves and loathes the company of drunkenness
for he slunke away, and as soon as Wit was gone, the Carpenters fell to
quarrelling about their trades, and one of them pretended that he was more
skillful than the other, so that they fell to hot arguing and disppuation about
the making of a pair of Gemetricall stayres; the stone-cutter who had got the
Hickock endeavored to reconcise them, wishing them to leave of that discourse,
and the host thinking to have fetched another Judge of bear, fell over a Join
stool, and broke his shinnes very sorely, and afterward he fell asseepe with
the tappe in his hand, while all the drink ran about the seller, for as long
as Wit is in company men do carry themselves with some discretion, but
as soon as he leaves them, then diverse sorts of follies are committed, After
folly is committed, Wit returns in the morning, and brings Repentance with
him.
and sundry mischefes do ensue, But next morning Wit came to them again,
(for his custom is, that though he forsake his friends for a time yet he will
come again) so I say Wit next morning came to them, and brought with him one
of his dear companions called repentance, and they two so far prevailed over
these drunkards by their persuasions, that at last they resolved to forsake
that detestable vice; And Wit upon that occasion made a song called, I will
never be drunk again, etc. And this was Wits first practice in the habit of
a Citizen. His second practice was in another victualling house or Alehouse
where he lighted into the company of a Miller, a Tinker, a Cobbler, a Porter, a
Butcher, and the Tapster of the house, who sat and drank with them, and
as soon as Wit came in he bad him welcome, and because he was alone the other
ioviall blades who were drinking hard, and smoking their noses with Tobacco,
desired him to sit down, for if it pleased him they should be glad of his
company, whereupon Wit opening his cloak which before he had cast over his
shoulders. as soon as the company saw that he had a leather apron before him,
and a hammer under his girdle, they supposed him to be a hammer man, and one
asking him of what profession he was, he answered that he patient fellows
that could hear any burden. That albeit they were city Asses and bear the
Luggage of the City on their backs, yet they have understanding enough if
you put them to trial. That they wear two shirts when others do scarcely
were one. That they may say as the Post said, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo
est, that is, all misfortune may be overcome by sufferance and patient bearing
of them. Lastly, a Porter is a Letterman, though he know never a Letter, in
company or out of company he is a fellow of good carriage. Wits descr^^tion of
^ Bucher.
Also Wit observed, That a Butcher though he kill and sell meat, yet he is
many times no great meateman. That his killing of meat is but a kind of
sacrificing to gluttony. That he sells all his Calves heads, except it be one
which he keeps for his own use. That he cuttes out his meat with great
discretion, and bumbasts it with trunching-like skivers to make it seem fair
and fat. Lastly, he is a good^ellow, and he loves Essex very well, because
that shire sends up many fatt calves and hogs to London: But at last death
knockes him down with a stroke just between the horns, and so this bloody.
^itts descrip^^n of a Tap^^r.
Nero ends his reign. Lastly, Wit noted that a Tapster was a frothy fellow,
that was servile to every man's humor, and subject to every man's call. That he
is the Master Gunner in Bacchus his Leaguer, and gives fire to the Tobacco
pipes. That Quid est persolvendum? or what is to pay? is a question that is
often put unto him, which he answers and resolves by a distinction, that
partialiter, there is a penny bread, six pence drink, and two pence Tobacco,
etc. and totaliter that there is in all nine-pence to pay. In a word his Art is
to bring in a total reckoning, and then divide it into parts, or else to bring
in the particulars, and then to reduce them to a total. In a word a Tapster is
an honest good fellow, and hence he is called a Tapster, because he stirs
the tappe often, with pulling it out, and wringing it in, and at length he many
times sets up for himself, and becomes an Host. Wit observed many other
persons, and made and writ many other discriptions of them, for when he had
transformed himself into a new shape, he would go into fresh company, and
converse and keep company with Tailors, Bakers, Cooks, Smiths, Chandelers,
Ioyners, Ostlers, Watermen and the like, the discriptions of whose Persons and
humors do follow in the next Chapter.

The third Chapter. How Wit in the habit of a Citizen kept company still with
Taylers, Bakers, Cooks, Smiths, Chandlers, Ioyners, Ostlers, Watermen and the
like, and made certain descriptions of their persons and humors, which do
briefly follow.
Wit being still disguised in the habit of a Citizen, thought to persist and
go forward still in the describing and discovering the persons and humors of
all sorts of people, and so going forth into the City, it began to rain so
violently, that he was compelled to save himself from the injury of the
weather he went into an Alehouse, where he found a mess or medley of boon
companions, and good fellows, who because it was a rainy day thought it better
to wett themselves within, and keep themselves dry without. The ioviall lads
that were thus tied together in a true-lovers knot of good fellowship were
those: namely, a Tailor, a Baker, a Cook, a Smith, a Chandler, a Ioyner, an
Ostler, and a Waterman. Wit being admitted into their company, (for there is
no company but will desire and admit of Wits company) drew these discriptions
of their Persons, and Humors, viz. That a Tailor without any skill in Geometry
takes the dimentions of your body. Wits descri^tion of a Ta^ler.
That his wife has authority to go fine by her husbands coppie. That he is
never without two geese, the one is always rosting, and yet is ever raw; the
other is always raw and is never roasted. That he loves new fashions as well as
Amsterdam brethren love Factions. That an ill conscience is a hell, but his
hell is under or about his shopbord, where he casts all his stolen remnants,
and so keeps hell out of his conscience. That he and the Mercer do make a
gallant, but he spoils them both, especially the Tailor, who must be glad to
petition his worship for his dew. That a long bill is a shrewd weapon, and no
man handles it better then a Tailor. That there are many fashions which have
come up and gone down since Adam made himself breeches of fig leaves. That
wealth is a kind of stiffening to the Tailor, and makes him think himself a
fine fellow. That his discourse is either fustian or humbast. That he wears
good linings in his breeches, for his wife is Churched oftener than any woman in
the Parish. Lastly, when he dies he winds up his bottom and so makes an end.

Also Wit noted that a Baker is a dry crustie fellow, ^itts descrip^n of a Baker
because for the most part he deals upon vantage. That he is drunk with
bread, for the taking in of half a dozen setts him going at any time. That he
is sometimes enfor'st to look out of a wodden window. His bread is divided into
three sorts, according to the three divisions of the people, his white bread is
for the best sort, his wheaten bread for the middle ranckt, and his brown
bread for the vulgar sort. That a Tailor loves a Baker, because he loves
bread. That he never gives any thing to the poor, though sometimes his bread
is taken from him and given to the poor. That a Bakers widow is a brown less,
and brings a man both bread and flesh. In a word his bread is finer than
himself, for he is but the branne of the world.

Besides Wit observed that a Cook was a greasy sweating profession, Wits
description of a Cook.
that does almost wast himself while his meat is roasting. That his chiefest
ambition is to raise paste well, and season meat discreetely. He makes great
store of Porrige or broth, which he selles by halfepenyworths, or else you pay
for your broth in your meat. That if you anger him you shall find him a hott
hasty fellow, and the summer times melts his grease within him. That when his
wife and he fall out, then all the fatt's in the fire.

He noted also that a Smith was one that had many heates, Wits description of
a Smith.
and yet took no coldes. That Vulcans fortune and his are on. That he is never
endited of forgerie, though he is always forging for though he pawn all his
tools, yet he keeps his vice. That he loves the Iron age, because it is
likely there were than many Smiths. Lastly, though he be a very smug fellow,
^its descrip^^on of a Chandler.
yet his wife seldom loves him.

Moreover, Wit noted that a Chandler was a light braind fellow that sold
candles and other small commodities by retaile. That he is a wooden scholar,
for he keeps his reckonings in wooden Books. That he cuts out pennyworths of
cheese by the length of his Nose, and makes the proverb true, I will see your
nose cheese first. That he sells little quantities, and many times there are
as little good qualities in his commodities. He should be a wise man, for he
weighes every thing: ^its descrip^ion of a Ioy^^er.
And lastly, if he uses good weights he may be an honest man.

Wit also noted that a Ioyner could not choose but be a good companion by his
Profession, for all good fellows are Ioyners, and Ioyners are good fellows.
That in all wood work they are excellent, and do make Bedsteads and Cubbords,
and would keep no table at all, if he could sell off those he has. That if
you take him for a join stool you do him much wrong, for he will sitten on
or take any Injury. He is a nimble shaver, and he deals most with deal wood,
which being of a softly nature he can make an ass of it, and cut it and
carve it into any fashion.

And besides Wit conceived that an Ostler was a Rubber of Irrational Animals
or Creatures. Wits descripion of an Ostler.
That he speaks notherne speeth, and will cosen a southerman with his fair
speech. If you trust the Ostler to meat your horse, he will enjoin him some
penance and keep him fasting, that so he may abate the pride of his flesh,
though you desire to have him lusty. That when he is abroad he will stay
three or four days drinking, and lie at rack and manger, and yet he will
get it again out of the rack and manger. That on the road he will pull off
your boots with great derterity, and having set him to his meat, he rubbs
him down, and afterward having made his bed, goes homely to a worse bedfellow,
than the horse, namely, the old trott his wife. And thus an Ostler is a
horseman that does not serve in the wars, but serves horses.

Lastly, Wits description of a Wa^erman.
Wit noted that a Waterman was one that lived by water, and yet he drinks
the best bear he can get. His blew coat and cognizance agrees as well as a
Pot of Ale and a Toast. That he cares not if London Bridge were quite
demolisht, for it hinders him. The Globe Playhouse on the banckeside, is like a
bladder under one Arm, and Westminster is like a Bladder under the other Arm,
for if it were not for these two he would sincke. Lastly, he would live on the
water, but desires to die on the land.

Wit having thus drawn forth the descriptions of these several persons, when
he perceived that the Tailor had wound up his bottom so long that now he could
not take his cups in any measure neither half ones nor whole ones, and that
the Baker had took in so many half dozens that now he is forced to cast them
up again with vantage, when Wit perceived that they were all gone in drink,
than Wit was gone too: and so winding home to his ledging he drew these
descriptions of the persons and humors which as they made him merry in writing,
so he hopes they will make you merry in reading, for no man can show any
discretion or Wit in disliking that which was written By Wit.

The Readers are Wits Clients, and if he discern,
That you kind Readers do like of his Term:
And that his Hillarie Term do cheer your heart,
You may expect from Wit a second part.
FINIS.

