THE PROTESTANT SCHOOL OR, A Method, Containing several Forms of Prayer,
Psalms, Lessons, Thanksgivings, and Graces, for the Bringing up, and well
Grounding Children and Elder Persons in the Protestant Religion, By the most
Reverend and Learned BISHOP USHER: Also a Catalogue of all the English Words,
BEGINNING With one Syllable, and proceeding by degrees to Eight, Divided and
not Divided; the readiest way for teaching Children and Elder Persons to Spell,
Pronounce, Read and Write true English.

To which is Added, An Historical Account of several Plots and remarkable
Passages, from Queen Elizabeth to this present Time, Lively Represented in
Copper Plates; with an Explanation to every Figure, with Copies of several
Hands which are used in England, and many other things which are Useful for so
necessary a Work.

Fitted to the Common Use of all English Schools; having a Thousand Words more
than any yet Extant.

By Moses Lane, Schoolmaster in London.

LONDON, Printed for Langly Curtiss on Ludgate Hill near Fleet Bridge, 1681.

To all True English PROTESTANTS.
I Do here Present you with a piece of True Orthography, more Complete than any
yet Extant; and more delightful and pleasant to the Reader and Writer, by those
Imbellishments which I thought necessary: and as there is a Method and Order to
be observed in all ^rts, for the Practitioners more facile attaining the
ef^^cts of his Endeavors; so is there no less an (...) to be propounded, in
aiming at the true Course of (...) and Religion, which Rules and Methods are
here laid (...) by the most Reverend and Pious Bishop Usher, those delight was
in laying down the Principles and ^oundation of Christian Religion, imitating
the Blessed ^postle, St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.10. According to the ^race of God,
which is given unto me, as a wise ^aster-Builder I have laid the Foundation:
Which ^round-Work he laid so firm, that like a Rock it will (...) to Future
Ages.

If what I have done, makes an Improvement upon the ^earner, Reader, or Writer,
I have my ends; and ^holly crave Gods Blessing upon my Endeavors, and ^ave it
to your Candid Acceptance.

Yours, MOSES LANE
^^ndon, December. 2. 1680.
The Great English Letters.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S ^ U W X Y Z.

The Small English Letters.

^ b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t v u w x y z and.

The Great Roman Letters.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U ^ X Y Z.

The Small Roman Letters.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z

The Great Italick Letters.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U ^ X Y Z.

The Small Italick Letters.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z.

The Six Vowels.

a e i o u y

The Consonants.

b c d f g h k l m n p q r s t w x z.

Double Consonants.

ct ff fl sl ss sh st

Easy Syllables for young Learners.

ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud af of if of uf ag eg ig og ug ah
eh ih oh uh ak ek ik ok uk al el il ol ul am em im om um an en in on un ap ep
ip op up ar er ir or ur as es is os us at et it ot ut ax ex ix ox ux
ba be by bo bu by ca ce ci co cu cy da de di do du die fa fe fi fo fu fie ga ge
gi go gu gy ha he hi ho hu hy ka ke ki ko ku ky la le li lo lu ly ma me mi mo
mu my na ne ni no nu ny pa pe pi po pu py ra re ri to ru ry sa se si so su sy
ta te ti to tu ty wa we wi woe wu wy
A Method Composed for Children, for the well Grounding them in the True
Protestant Religion: By the most Reverend and Learned Bishop Usher, Archbishop
of Armagh.
Ejaculations at Uprising.
I. O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon me a miserable Sinner: Thou
Commandedst in the beginning, Let there be light and, there was light, Lighten
mine eyes that I sleep not in death, lest at any time my enemy say I have
prevailed against him.

II. O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon me a miserable
Sinner, who art Light of Light, the great and truest light, from whence this
light both of Sun and Day arises, thou Light shining in Darkness, and
illuminating every one that comes into this world, drive from me all darkness
of Ignorance; and give me understanding, that in thee and by thee I may know
the Father; to know whom is to live, and to serve whom is to Reign.

III. O God the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, have
mercy upon me a miserable Sinner.

O thou holy Fire both Illuminating and Warming, kindle in me thy Light, that I
may discern the deceitful Delights of this World, from the true Joys of Heaven.

Grant that I may only see those things which are thine, and be blind to the
rest, infuse also into my Mind the gift of thy Charity, that forsaking those
transitory things, I may with a continual Desire endeavor to attain those
things which are Eternal.

IV. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, have
mercy upon me a miserable Sinner.

Defend me this day from all the Assaults of the Devil and the Malice of Men,
keep me this day from all Sin, and preserve me from sudden and unexpected Death.

Be unto me a Comfort in Tribulation, Assistance in Temptation, and in Death a
pleasant Refuge.

V. Thou have raised my Body, O Lord, which was drowned in Sleep, I beseech
thee that thou will deliver my Soul likewise from the Sleep of Sins, and the
Darkness of this World, and that which thou have recalled from Sleep unto
Waking, may it please thee after Death to restore to the same Life: and to be
with thee, who neither slumbrest nor sleep.

To thee alone be Praise for evermore.
A Prayer for the Morning.
I. O Almighty Lord God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I praise ^hee, I
bless thee, I glorify thee, and with my whole Heart, give thee humble and
hearty Thanks, that according to thy unmeasurable Goodness, thou have by thy
fatherly Providence, preserved me this Night. Thy tender Care watched over me,
else had Satan Assaulted me, who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may Devour.

II. And O Father of Mercies, and God of all Consolation, I beseech thee to
take me this Day into thy Protection, let thy Paternal Care watch over me, and
behold me with thy all-Merciful Eyes, direct me in the ways of thy Holy
Commandments, and endue me with the Gifts and Graces of thy Blessed Spirit, By
which means I may begin, continue and end this day likewise to the Praise and
Glory of thy Holy Name, and to the Profit and Salvation of my Soul.

III. Direct O Lord, this day my Heart, my Body and Senses, my Works and
Actions, and grant that I always may Thirst and Hunger after Righteousness, and
follow after those things which belong to my Peace, lest by any Neglect of mine
they be hid from my Eyes; and I entreat thee O Father to walk along with me
this day, guide my going out and my coming in, prosper whatsoever I shall take
in hand, and always furnish me with a thankful, a reverential, and obedient
Heart, that I may praise thee, reverence thee, and be obedient to thy heavenly
Will in all things, which I beg for thy Son Jesus Christ his Sake, my only
Savior and Redeemer, in whose Name I put up this imperfect Prayer, but
conclude with the most perfect form of Prayer, which he has taught in his holy
Gospel.

The Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come; thy
Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, give us this Day our daily Bread; and
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us; and
lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from Evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, Power and Glory, for ever and ever, amen.

O Lord open thou my Lips,
And my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise:
O God make speed to save me
O Lord make have to help me.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end

Psalms appointed to be read in the Morning, Collected by him from several
Psalms.

1st. Psalm.
Psalm. 25. Unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my Soul.

Let the Words of my Mouth, and the Meditations of my heart, be acceptable in
thy Sight, O Lord my Strength, and my Redeemer.

Hearken unto the Voice of my Cry, my King and my God, for unto thee will I
make my Prayer.

For thou art the God that have no Pleasure in Wickedness: neither shall any
Evil dwell with thee.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O Lord who may abide
it.

But there is forgiveness with thee, therefore thou shall be feared.

For thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in Mercy unto all
them that call upon thee.

O God thou know my Foolishness, and my Sins are not hid from thee.

I have gone astray like a lost Sheep, seek thy Servant, for I do not forget thy
Commandments.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy sight.

Cast me not away from thy Presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

Restore to me the Joy of thy Salvation; and uphold me with thy free Spirit.

2d. Psalm.
Hear me O Lord, for thy loving Kindness is good, turn unto me according to the
multitude of thy tender Mercies.

Be Merciful unto me O Lord, for I cry unto thee daily.

Show me thy Ways O Lord, and teach me thy Paths.

Lead me in thy Truth and teach me, for thou art the God of my Salvation, on
thee do I wait all the Day long.

Order my Steps in thy Word, and let not any Iniquity have Dominion.

O send out thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me; let them bring me unto
thy holy Hill, and thy Tabernacle.

Cause me to hear thy loving Kindness in the Morning, for in thee do I trust:
Cause me to know the Way wherein I should Walk, for I lift up my Soul unto thee.

Teach me to do thy Will for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good: lead me into
the Land of Uprightness.

Withold not thy tender Mercies from me O Lord; let thy loving Kindness, and
thy Truth continually preserve me.

Teach me thy Way O Lord, I will walk in thy Truth, unite my Heart to fear thy
Name.

Lord make me to know my End, and the measure of my Days, that I may know how
frail I am.

For in thee is the Well of Life: and in thy Light, shall we see Light.

3d. Psalm.
Let my Cry come before thee O Lord, give me understanding according to thy
Word.

I have declared my Ways, and thou heardest me; teach me thy Statutes.

Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous
Works.

Open thou my Eyes that I may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law.

Thy Hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding that I may
learn thy Commandments.

Let thy Mercies come also unto me O Lord, even thy Salvation according unto
thy Word.

Let thy tender Mercies come unto me, that I may live; for thy Law is my
Delight.

Let my Soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy Judgments help me.

Great are thy tender Mercies O Lord, quicken me according to thy Judgments.

The Righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting; give me understanding and
I shall live.

Thy Word is Truth from the beginning; and every one of thy righteous Judgments
endures for ever.

For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with Favor will thou compass him as
with a Shield.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be World without end, Amen.

The first Lesson taken out of several Places in the old Testament.
Ye shall make you no Idols, nor Graven Image, neither rear you up a standing
Image, neither shall you set up any Image of Stone in your Land to bow down
unto it, for I am the Lord your God.

Thou shall not make thee any Graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that
is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that i^ in the Waters
beneath the Earth.

Thou shall not bow down thy self unto them, nor serve them.

To whom will you liken God? or what likeness will you compare unto him?

Ye saw no Similitude on the Day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of
the midst of the Fire.

Ye heard the Voice of the Words, but saw no Similitude, only ye heard a Voice.

And he declared unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even
ten Commandments; and he wrote them upon two Tables of Stone.

I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give unto another,
neither my Praise to Graven Images.

Every Founder is confounded by the Graven Image, for his Moulten Image is
Falsehood, and there is no Breath in them.

They are Vanity, and the Work of Errors, in the time of their Visitation they
shall perish. The Stock is a Doctrine of Vanities, and their Molten Images are
Wind and Confusion.

They that make a Graven Image are all of them Vanity, and their delectable
things shall not Profit, and they are their own Witnesses, they see not, nor
know, that they may be ashamed.

They shall be Ashamed and also Confounded all of them; they shall go to
Confusion together that are makers of Idols.

Take heed unto your Selves, lest you forget the Covenant of the Lord your God
which he made with you, and make you a Graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing which the Lord thy God has forbidden thee.

Woe unto him that says to the Wood awake; to the dumb Stone arise, it shall
teach; behold it is laid over with Gold, and Silver, and there is no Breath at
all in the midst of it.

Your Eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal Peor; for all the men
that followed Baal Peor the Lord thy God bath destroyed them from among you.

Ye shall drive out all the Inhabitants of the Land from before you, and
destroy all their Pictures, and destroy all their Moulten Images, and quite
pluck down all their high Places.

Ye shall destroy their Altars, and break down their Images, and cut down their
Groves, and burn their Graven Images with Fire.

If ye do return unto the Lord with all your Hearts; then put away the strange
Gods, and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your Hearts unto the Lord, and
serve him only.

The Children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the Lord
only.

The Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King; at
his Wrath the Earth shall Tremble, and the Nations shall no^ be able to abide
his Indignation.

Thus ends the first Lesson for this morning Prayer.

We praise thee (O God,) We acknowledge thee to be the Lord,

All the Earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud, the Heavens and all the Powers therein.

To thee Cherubim, and Seraphim, continually do cry,

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.

The glorious Company of the Apostles praise thee.

The goodly Fellowship of the Prophets praise thee,

The noble Army of Martyrs praise thee,

The Holy Church throughout all the World, does acknowledge thee,

The Father of an Infinite Majesty,

Thine Honorable true and only Son,

Also the Holy Ghost the Comforter.

Thou art the King of Glory, O Christ!

Thou art the Everlasting Son of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou did not abhor the Virgins
Womb.

When thou had overcome the Sharpness of Death, thou did open the Kingdom
of Heaven to all Believers.

Thou Sit at the right Hand of God, in the Glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee, help thy Servants whom thou have Redeemed with thy
most precious Blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints in Glory everlasting.

O Lord Save thy People, and Bless thine Heritage.

Govern them, and lift them up for ever.

Day by day we magnify thee.

And we worship thy Name, ever World without end.

Vouchsafe O Lord, to keep us this day without Sin.

O Lord, have Mercy upon us, have Mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy Mercy lighten upon us, as our Trust is in thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded, Amen.

The second Lesson appointed for this morning Prayer, is the thirteenth Chapter
of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans.
1. Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers: for there is no Power but
of God, the Powers that be, are Ordained of God.

2. Whosoever therefore Resists the Power, Resists the Ordinance of God:
and they that Resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

3. For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the Evil, will thou then
not be afraid of the Power? do that which is good, and thou shall have Praise
of the Same.

4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for Good: but if thou do that which
is Evil, be af^aid: for he bears not the Sword in Vain: for he is the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil.

5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience Sake.

6. For, for this Cause pay you Tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

7. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom
to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor.

8. Owe no man any thing but to Love one another: for he that loves another,
has fulfilled the Law.

9. For this: thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not Kill, thou shall
not Steal, thou shall not bear false Witness, thou shall not Covet, and if
there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
namely thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self.

10. Love works no ill to his Neighbor, therefore Love is the fulfilling of
the Law.

11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of Sleep:
for now is our Salvation, nearer then when we Believed.

12. The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the
Works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor of Light.

13. Let us walk honestly as in the Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness: not in Strife and Envying:

14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh,
to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Thus ends the Second Lesson for this Morning Prayer, being the thirteenth
Chapter of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans.
Then say this.

O be Joyful in the Lord, all ye Lands: serve the Lord with gladness and come
before his Presence with a Song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves, we are his People and the Sheep of his Pasture, O go your way into his
Gates with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise: be thankful unto him,
and speak good of his Name.

For the Lord is Gracious, his Mercy is everlasting: and his Truth endures
from Generation to Generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning is now and ever shall be, World without end: Amen.

O Lord Increase my Faith.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty; maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified Dead and Buried; he
descended into Hell, the third Day he arose again from the Dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the right Hand of God the Father Almighty, from
thence he shall come to Judge both the Quick and the Dead; I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness
of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body and the Life Everlasting, Amen.

Then Say the Collect for Grace.
O Lord our Heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought me to the beginning of this Day, defend me in the same by thy mighty
Power, and grant that this Day I fall into no Sin, neither run into any kind of
Danger: but that all my Doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do always
that which is Righteous in thy Sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

The ten Commandments.
The Preface:
And God spoke all these Words and said, I am the Lord thy God which brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

1. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Lord have Mercy upon me, and Incline my Heart to keep this Law.

II. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing which is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a Jealous God, and Visi^ the Sins of the Fathers upon the Children
unto the third and fourth Generation, of them that hate me, and show Mercy
unto thousands in them that love me and keep my Commandments.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in Vain, for the Lord
will not hold him Guiltless, that takes his Name in Vain.

Lord have Mercy upon me etc.

IV. Remember that thou keep Holy the Sabbath Day, six Days shall thou Labor
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of Work, thou and thy Son, and thy
Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, thy Cattle, and the Stranger
that is within thy Gates, for in six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea and all that in them is and rested the seventh Day: wherefore the Lord
Blessed the seventh Day and Hollowed it.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother that thy Days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Lord, have Mercy upon me, etc.

VI. Thou shall do no Murder.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

IX. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Servant; nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Lord have Mercy upon me, and Write all these thy Laws in my Heart, I beseech
thee.

The Creed of Gregory Nazienzen, commonly called the Nicene Creed.
I Believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things Visible and Invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
Begotten Son of God, Begotten of his Father before all Worlds, God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God, Begotten not Made, being of one Substance
with the Father, by whom all things were made, who for us Men, and for our
Salvation came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the
Virgin Mary, and was made Man, and was Crucified also for us under Pontius
Pilate, he Suffered and was Buried, and the third Day he rose again according
to the Scriptures, and Ascended into Heaven, and Sits on the right Hand of
the Father, and he shall come again with Glory to Judge both the Quick and the
Dead; whose Kingdom shall have no end: and I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with
the Father and the Son together is Worshipped and Glorified, who spoke by the
Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church, I acknowledge one
Baptism for the Remission of Sins, and I look for the Resurrection of the Dead,
and the Life of the World to come, Amen.

A Brief Prayer upon the Lords Prayer.
Our Father.
By the Benefit of Creation, raising us from nothing, through thine
Omnipotency; and assistance of Preservation, through thy Providence; Gift of
Adoption, thy Grace and Communication of Eternity, through thy Christ who is
sweet in Love, and rich in Mercy.

Which art in Heaven.
Over-reigning by thy Power; inlightning by thy Spirit; forgiving, by thy
Mercy, and Ruling by thy Majesty; thou art the Glass of Eternity, the Crown of
Jucundity, and the Treasure of Felicity, thou art all things both in Heaven and
in Earth, by thy Essential Presence.

Hallowed be thy Name.
Of us, by an honest Conversation in us, by a clear Conscience from us, by an
honest Report; above us, by the representation of Angels, that it may be Honey
to the Mouth, Music to the Ear, and a Fire to the Heart, for according to thy
Name, so is thy Praise unto the Worlds End.

Thy Kingdom Come.
In thy Holy Church, by the Sanctification of the Spirit in thy Faithful Souls,
by Justification of Faith, in thy Holy Scriptures by Instruction of Ministers,
and in thy Celestial Paradise, by Assimulation to Angels; thy Kingdom is
pleasant without Mixture, safe without Annoyance, and sure without Loss.

Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
In singleness of Heart, by Humility; Chastity of Body, by Abstinence; Holiness
of Will, by Custom; and Truth of Action, by Discretion, Willingly without
Murmuring, Speedily without Delaying, Constantly without Ceasing, and
Universally without Omitting, that we may Fly that, thou Hate, Love that,
thou Love, and by thee, do what thou Command, Willingly, Readily, and
Faithfully.

Give us this Day, our daily Bread.
For humane Necessity, to cover our Shame; future Prosperity to maintain our
Calling; present Liberality to do good to others; and Eternal Glory to lay up
in Heaven; give us O Lord, that which is necessary for this Life, not
Superfluous for our Delights, nor wanting to our Necessities, but feed us with
that Food which is Convenient for us.

Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us.
Of Omission in things Commanded, Commission in things forbidden; ^f the first
Table against thy self, and the second Table against my ^eighbour, that we may
forgive heartily in Purity, cheerfully in Cur^^sie, continually in
Christianity, and forgetful in not requiting Evil for ^vil, against any who
has wronged us, either in our Body, Goods, or Name.

And Lead us not into Temptation:
Either Importunate, which Wearieth, or Sudden, which Discourageth, ^rauduleut,
which Deceives, or Violent, which Overcomes; and from ^he World, the Flesh
and the Devil; and we beseech thee O Father As^ist us so by thy Divine Grace,
that when we are led away with our own ^usts, and Tempted, O leave us not then
to our Destruction.

But Deliver us from Evil.
Of Mundane Adversity, which will disquiet us; Satan's subtilty, which will
destroy us; humane Cruelty, which will overthrow us; and eter^al Misery, which
may torment us; from all Evil, past, present, to come; Spiritual, Temporal, and
Eternal; and this we ask that what ever Evil shall happen unto us, let us not
sin against thee.

For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
(Thy Kingdom,) is Powerful in itself, Comfortable to us, Terrible to thine
Enemies, and Eternal in Heaven, for thou rulest and governest all: (thy Power,)
great in our Creation, mighty in our Pres^rvation, merciful in our
Justification, and wonderful in our Glorification; for ^hou can do all things
(and Glory,) for which thou did make all Things, to which we refer all
Things: in which all Things do remain on Earth, and by which all thy Saints
shall rejoice in Heaven: (for ever and ever) in themselves by continuance, in
thy Saints by Practice; in thy Creatures by Proof, and in the Wicked by
Torment: (Amen.) so be it by Intention of the Mind, serious Invocation of thy
Name, diligent Execution of thy Commandments, and continual Communication of
all thy Mercies prayed for; thou sav^st Ame^ by commanding our Amen, by
performing we say Amen, by believing and hoping; say but the Word, and we shall
be cured.

Ejaculations on several Occasions.
Going from Home.
O Lord I beseech thee favor the present harmeless Intent and Purpose of thy
Servant, be unto me in my Journey a Comfort, in the heat a shadow, in storms a
shelter, and in adversity my protection that having finished my intended
course, I may return in Peace, full o thy Praises and Mercies, who art near to
all that call upon thee.

When the Clock Strikes.
Happy be the Hour in which my Savior was Born, and the Ho^^ in which he died!
O Lord Remember me at the Hour of Death.

Upon any disorderly Thoughts.
Make me a clean Heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within m^

When thou do any good Work.
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the Prais^

Upon any Deliverance.
The Lord is my Shepherd I shall not want, he makes me to ly down i^ green
Pastures, he leads me besides the still Waters, surely Goodne^^ and Mercy
shall follow me all the Days of my Life, and I will Dwell i^ the House of my
God for ever.

when thou hear the Bell toll.
Teach me O Lord to number my Days, that I may apply my Hear^ to Wisdom.

Upon Thought of thy Sins.
Turn away thy Face from my Sins O Lord, and blot out all my Offenses*

Upon the weariness of the World.
O who will give me the Wings of a Dove, that I may fly away, and be at Rest!

Ejaculations for the Evening.
He will give his Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my Ways, and his
Covenant he will not break nor alter the thing that is gone out of his Lips,
for all the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Eternal and ever living Lord God, I the unworthiest of all thy Servants, do
prostrate my self before the Face of thy Divine Majesty, imploring thy Pardon
and Forgiveness, for the Offenses against thee this da^ Committed, and
throughout the course of my whole Life, which has been extreme Vile and B^se
in thy sight; keep me I most humbly beseech thee from the Hours, and Powers of
Darkness; Watch over me this Night in thy almighty Providence, and scatter all
the Rebellions and Devices of my Adversaries.

II.
Inlighten O Lord my Soul, sanctify my Body, govern my Affections, and guide
my Thoughts, that in the fastest closure of my Eyelids, my Spirit may see
thee, and in the depth of sleep may be conversant with thee; suffer me not to
forget thee my great Creator, but to remember thee in the days of my Youth,
before the evil day comes nigh unto me.

III.
Beget in me a godly sorrow which works to repentance never to be repented
of, that I may be heartily grieved for my sins, not so much because of the
danger of Hellfire, as because I have offended thee, stretch out the wings of
thy protection and mercy over me this night; though sleep seize upon the eyes
of my body, yet let not security oppress my Soul: Keep me from idle Fancies,
and from vain Dreams, give me a sober and sanctified use of all outward
refreshing, that I may always in all things aim at this one thing, namely, how
I may be the better fitted to serve thee faithfully in my place and Calling,
and that for his sake, my only Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for the Deliverance from the Hellish Powder Plot, by Bishop
Usher.
I.
Almighty Lord God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our most
gracious and merciful Father, many are thy mercies toward us, and that our
Souls know right well, and as we cannot be ignorant of them, unless we be
senceless, so we cannot be forgetful unless we be thankless: by thee our Lot is
fallen into a good ground, yea we have a goodly Heritage, by thee are our Bodies
delivered from sickness, and by thee our Souls are delivered from Sin, by thee
our Names are not a reproach unto our Enemies, and by thee our Estates are not
a prey unto the Idolatrous.

II.
Thou have done great things in our Land, and thy right hand has brought
mighty things to pass; O Lord thou have done great things unto this Vine of thy
English Israel, and what could thou have done more for it than thou have?
thou have planted it by thy hand, placed it in thy Vineyard, hedged it by thy
Providence, guarded it by thine Angels, watered it by thy Spirit, pruned it by
thy Rods, supported it by thy Power, committed it to thy Husbandmen, beautified
it by thy mercies, and fructified it by thine abundance, not of sower but sweet
Grapes, the wild Boar of the Wood can never root it up, the Beasts of the
Forest shall never devour it.

III.
What shall we render unto thee for all these Favors, or what can we render
unto thee for all these Mercies? O our Souls praise the Lord, and all that is
within us praise his Holy Name. O our Souls praise the Lord; and let us never
forget his Benefits. We Lord had been blown up by the Powder of Rebellion, had
not the Power of thy Providence watched over us. We therefore, our Princes,
Nobles, Clergy, Commons, our Wives, Children, Servants and all, are here
before thy Majesty this day, and now render unto thee, the Sacrifice of Praise,
the Calves of our Lips, for this wonderful D^liverance showed unto our most
Gracious King and Country; Lord teach us thereby to be thankful unto thee,
obedient to our Governors, frequent in Prayer, fervent in the Spirit, and
zealous in good Works, lest a worse thing hereafter happen unto us.

IV.
Make us to detest Popery the Poison of Authority, Jesuits the Bellows of
Sedition, Papists the Plotters of Rebellion, and to esteem better, this not new
but most ancient Religion of ours, by which we are taught Piety to God, Loyalty
to Governors, P^ace to the Church, Reverence of Superiority, Charity to our
Inferiors, Amity to our Equals, Love to our Enemies, Patience in Tribulation,
Thankfulness in Prosperity, Faithfulness in our Calling, and Honesty to all,
and seeing of late thou have delivered our Backs from whipping, our Liberty
from serving, our Souls from dying, our Country from consuming, and our King
and State from a sudden blowing up; Lord we pray thee that the Meditation of
this Mercy may never depart out of our Minds, but that we may be thankful unto
thee for Mercies received, and fearful of thee for Judgments escaped.

V.
Teach us to Pray unto thee alone, who can hear and grant our Requests, to
keep our Country from Invasion, our Church from Dissension, our Houses from
Inf^ction* our State from Alteration, and People from the cruel Mercies of the
Italian Popedom, whose Faith is Fancy, whose Force is Fraud, whose Trust is
Treason, whose Obedience is Hypocrisy, whose Laws are Traditions, whose
Pardoners are Priests, whose Savior is the Pope, whose God is an Idol, whose
Service is Foppery, whose Glory is their Shame, and whose End is Damnation
except they Repent; Thus we thy People and Sheep of thy Pasture, have just
Occasion to praise thy great Name, for this and all thy wonderful Deliverances,
and Blessed be the Lord God of our Salvation for ever and ever, and let all the
People say, Amen, Amen.

An Historical Account of the First Plate.
I. William Parry, a Doctor of the Civil Law, contrives Queen Elizabeth's
Death. II. At his Trial he acknowledges the Fact; and confesses himself guilty.
III. At his Execution he denies it, and is as innocent as the Child unborn. IV.
Queen Elizabeth at Tilbury to view her Army and Camp there, where she showed an
undaunted courage and resolution. V. Spaniards Landing in England, brought
Knives, Torches, Wires and other Instruments to torture the Protestants. VI.
The Spanish Invasion, their Navy consisted of 130 Ships, whereof Galeases and
Galleons 72, goodly Ships like to floting Towers, Soldiers 19290, Mariners
8350, Galley Slaves 2080, great Ordnance 2630, 12 of their Ships were called
the 12 Apostles, this invincible Armado was 3 years a preparing, and in a
months time was put to confusion; the Banners taken from them were placed in
St. Paul's Church, and a solemn Thanksgiving returned to Almighty God for that
great deliverance. VII. The Gunpowder Treason a hatching, by Catesby, Fawkes,
Garnet, Piercy, and Winter, etc. VIII. The taking of the House where there was
a Cellar under the Parliament House fit for their hellish purpose, and there
was laid in it 36 Barrels of Gunpowder, with store of Faggots to cover them.
IX. A Letter is sent to the Lord Mounteagle, the Contents were these. My Lord,
Out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
preservation, therefore I would wish you as you tender your life, to forbear
your attendance at this Parliament, for God and Man have concurred to punish
the wickedness of this time; and think not slightly of this Advertisement, for
though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say, they shall receive a
terrible blow this Parliament, and yet shall not see who hurts them: This
Counsel is not be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no
harm; for the danger is past as soon as you have burnt this Letter, and I hope
you will make good use of it. X. The Letter is read in Council, where King
James considering it more deeply than any of his Nobles, apprehended some
violent motion, and danger of blowing up by powder, and thereupon commanded
diligent search to be made about the Parliament House, where the Powder and
Faggots at last was found, and Guido Fawx booted and spurred, with his Match
ready for the purpose hard by, whom they apprehended as a suspicious Person.
XI. Fawx being examined before the King and Council, is so audacious as to
express his horrid Treason that he was sorry it did not take effect; not long
afterward he with the rest of the bloody Conspirators were executed. XII.
Bonefires made all over England, for the preservation from that horrid Powder
Treason, and i^ kept Annually on November the Fifth.
Parry: confults: Q: E: Do.

His Trial:

His Execution.

Queen: Elizab: at^^lbury

weapons: to torture ye: Englis

Spanish: Invasion:

Powd: Treason: hatching

Taking of the house

a Let: to: ye ^: Nonteagle

Read: in: Council:

Faux: Examined:

Bonefires: Made:



Massacre: in: Ireland:

King: Charles: Nurth

King: Charles: Return

The: Pestilence: 1665

The Dutch: war

Fire: of London: 1666

Somersett house

Consult at wild: house

white horse: Tavern

Resolve to kill ye: king

Pickerin: in S James: part

Coleman: Writing a let:



An Historical Account of the Second Plate.
I. Anno 1641. In October the Irish Rebellion broke out, where was 2000
Protestants, of Men, women, and Children barbarously murdered. II. January 30,
1648. King Charles the First of Blessed Memory, was most barbarously murdered
at his own Door, about Two of the Clock in the Afterno^^ by Oliver Cromwell,
Bradshaw, and Ireton, and the rest of that damned Crew. III. May 29, 1660. His
Majesty King Charles the Second, (whom God gra^^ long to Reign) made his
magnificent Entry through his City of London to his P^^lace at Whitehal, to the
rejoicing of all his loving Subjects. IV. 1665. A great Plague began in London,
in which year died 97306 whereof of the Plague 68596. V. The War between his
Majesty and the States of Holland, wherein many bra^^ Persons lost their Lives
in that Sea Fight. VI. September. 2. 1666. Happened that dreadful and never to be
forgotten (...) of London, which continued burning three days, and destroyed
373 Acres within and 63 Acres and 3 Roods without the Walls of the City. VII.
The Consult at Somerset House, where Whitebread and others were co^triving to
make away Dr. Oats, but he unknown to them overheard their D^signs. VIII. The
Consult at Wild House, where Sir George Wakeman gave his (...) in the Entry
Book for 5000 Pounds. IX. Several Meetings was held by Coleman and others, at
the White Hor^^ Tavern near St. Clements Church in the Strand, about the Popish
Plot. X. Signing the Writings to resolve to kill the King. XI. Pickering
attempting to shoot the King in St. James's Park, for which was to receive
30000 Masses, which amounts to 1500 Pounds at 12 Pence (...) Mass. XII. Coleman
writing Letters to La Chaise, and the Jesuits beyond Sea, relation to the
horrid Popish Plot.
An Historical Account of the Third Plate.
I. The Consult at the Plough Alehouse near Somerset House, about the
Mur^hering of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. II. He is dogged by some of the
Murderers by St. Clements Church, till he ^omes to Somerset House. III. At the
Water Gate Hill steps to him, and desires him for Gods sake to walk down, for
two Men were quarreling and he was afraid there would be blood shed, which
after persuasion Sir Edmondbury Godfrey go^^ down. IV. No sooner was he got
down, but Green threw a large twisted Handkerchi^f about his Neck, Girald and
Kelly secured his Sword, threw him down and throtled him, Green punching him
with his Knee, and with all his force wrung his Neck quite round. V. Then they
carried up the Body into a little Room in Dr. Goddin's Lodgings, where Hill
lived, there the Body lay all Saturday night, Sunday all day and night, till
Monday at night. VI. Then they carried it into another Room cross the Court of
Somerset House, there it lay and was showed to Bedlow and others, in a dark
Room by a dark Lanthorn. VII. The Body carried out in a Sedan from Somerset
House, as far as the Grecian Church near Soho. VIII. Where having a Horse thy
forced open his Legs and mounted him astride, setting up one behind to hold him
up steady, so conveyed the Body to a Field near Primrose Hill, where they laid
it in a ditch, run him through with his own Sword, and left his Scabbard and
Gloves at a distance from him. IX. After the Jury had given in their Verdict,
the Corpse was carried home, and afterward solemnly buried in the Parish Church
of St. Martins in the Fields, his Funeral Sermon being preached by The Reverend
Dr. Lloyd, Dean of Bangor. X. The Consult at the Queen's Head Tavern at Bow,
and making merry after this bloody Murder. XI. Mr. Miles Prance Goldsmith,
discovers to the King and Council the whole Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.
XII. Justice Arnold is Assassinated near the upper end of Bell Yard by three or
four Persons, whereof one Giles afterward was apprehended for the Fact, and
received his Trial at the Old Baily, and stood three tim^s on the Pillory, and
Fined five hundred Pounds.
Consult at the Plow:

S:E:B:G: Dogged: by: S. Clem.

Is: Persuaded to: go: down

Is: Strangled: There

Carried: in a Sedan.

Carried: on: horse back:

Carried up: to Room

Showed: to: Bedlow:

S:E:B:G: Funeral:

Consult at Bow:

Prances Discovery:

Justice Arnold Assassinated



Coleman giving: a guiny

Ruffians: going: to: windsor

Longhorn: giving Com^ssi:

(...) Oats: Discovery etc

Seizing: Conspirators

Coleman: in: Newgate

E^s: ^xecution at Tyburn

Maid: hired to fir^ly (...)

Trial o^ ye Traitors

^xecution of 5: Jesuits

The ^eal: Tub:

Listing: the: Boys:



An Historical Account of the Fourth Plate.
I. Coleman gives the four Ruffians a Guiney to encourage them to Expedite
business at Windsor. II. The four Ruffians going to Windsor to kill his
Majesty. III. Langhorn giving out several Commissions at his Chamber in the
Tem^^^ in Writing, transmitted to him by an Authority from the Sea of Rome. IV.
Dr. Oats Discovery to the King and Council of the horrid Popish Plot against
his sacred Majesty. V. The seizing several conspirators, whereof some were sent
to the Tower, (...) to Newgate, to the Gatehouse, and the Marshalsea. VI.
Coleman examined in Newgate by several Lords of the Privy Coun^^^ but being
obstinate confessed nothing of the Plot. VII. He is drawn from Newgate to
Tyburn, there Hanged and Quartered, Corpse put in a Coffin and buried. VIII. A
Maid was hired to fire her Masters House, by one Stubbs, but she ^^ceiving her
Trial was found guilty, and hanged. IX. The Trials at the Old Baily of several
T^aitors, as Grove, Ireland, Pic^ring, Green, Bury, and Hill, and several
others. X. The Execution of the Five Jesuits at Tyburn, which were Whitebre^^
Harcourt, Fenwick, Gawen, and Turner. XI. The Sham Plot of the Meal Tub, which
was to throw the Plot of the Pap^^^ in the Presbyterians, contrived by the
Lords in the Tower, and several (...) Persons. XII. The Listing of the
Apprentice Boys, pretending to burn the Rump on (...) Twenty Ninth Day of May,
in Hide-Park and Moor-Fields, whereof Captain (...) ^he Ringleader was sent to
Newgate.
WORDS OF ONE SYLLABLE.
A.
Ab ace ach ^ct ^dd ^dz ^ge ^h ^id ^il ^im ^ir ^ke ^le ^ll (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) art as ash ask asp ass at aunt awe awl axe
aye
B.
Baal babe back bad bade badge bag bails bait bake baked bald ball balm band
bane banes bann bang bank bar bard bare barge bark barn base bast bath bats
baud baulk bawl bay b^yl be beads beak beam beans bear beard bearn beast beat
beck bed be beef been beer beeves beg bell belch belt bench bend bent best
bett bid bide bier big bile bilk bill bin bind birch bird birth bit bitch bite
black blade blain blame blanch blast blaze bleak blear bleat bled bleed blend
bless blessed blew blind blink bliss blithe block blood bloom blot blouz blow
blown blue blunt blush boar board boast boat bog boil bold bolt bond bone book
boot booth booze bore born bost botch both bots bough bought bounce bound bow
bows bowl box boxt boy boil brace brack brade brads brag brain brake branch
brann brand brass brawn bray braze breach bread breadth break bream breast
breath bred breed breez brag bribe brick bride bridge brief bright brim brine
brink bri^k brawl breath broad broach broak brock broil brood brook broom broth
brought brow brown bruise brunt brute buck bud budg build built bulk bull bum
bump bunch bung buoy burn burnt burrs burse burst bush busk buss but buy by
C.
Cage cake cale ^^lf call calm calve came camp can cane can cant cap cape
capt cards care cark carp cart case cask cast cat catch cave caught caul cause
cease chaff chain chair chalk champ chance change chant chaps chapt charge
charm chase chist chat chaunt chaw chawl cheap cheat cheer check cheek cheer
cheese chess cheft chew chick chide chief child chile chime chin chine chink
chip chipt chit choke choice choir chop chopped chose choose chough christ church
churl churn choose cid clack clad claim clap clapped clark clash clasp clave
clause claw clawd clay clean cleanse clear cleft clench clew clift climb cling
clink clip cloak clothes clock clod clog cloth close cloud clout clown clunch
clo^ coach coal coast coat cob cock coif coin cokes cold colt comb come con
cook cool cope cord core cork corn corns corpse cost cot couch cough could count
coupe course court cow crab crack cracked craft crag cram cramp crane crape
crave crawl craze creak cream creed creek creep crept crest crew crib cries
crime cringe cry croak crop cropped cross crossed crouch crowd crow crown crum
crump crude cruse crush cruise crust crutch cub cud cuff cufft cup cur curb
curd cure curl curse cursed cut
D.
Dab dace dad dale dam damn damp dance dane dare dark dart dash date dates
daunt dawb dawn day dead deaf deal deals dealt dean dear dearn dearth death
debt deck decked deed deem deep deer delve den dent depth desk dew did did die
dice dig dike dill dim dimp dine dip dipped dirt dish ditch do dock do dog done
doom door dose dote does dots doubt dove dough douse down drab draft drag drake
drain dram drank draught draw drawn dray dread dream dregs drench dress dressed
drew drift drill drink drive droll drole drone drop dross drove drough^ drouse
drow^ drud^ drun^ drun^ dry dub duck due dug duke dull dumb dump dun dunce dung
durst dust dwarf dwell dwelt
E.
Each ear earl earth ease east eat eaves ebb edg eel egg eight eighth elk elm
else end ere err erst ewe eye
F.
Face fact fade fadg fagg fail fain faint fair faith fall false fame famed fan
fand fare farm far fart fast fat fate fault fear feast feat fed feed feel fees
feet feign fell felt fence fetch feud few field fife fifth fiend fierce fig
fight file fill film filth find fine fins fir fire firk firm first fish fisk
fisque fit five flab flag flail flakes flam flame flank flap flapt flash
flasque fiat flaw flax flay flea fled fledg fledst flee fleece fleer fleet
flesh flew flies flight flint flip flocks flog flood floor flop flopt flote
flush flute foal foam fob foes foh foil fold folk fond food fool foot fop for
force ford forge fork form fort forth fought foul found four fourth fowl foy
foyl foyst fox foxt freight frail frame france frank fraud fray freak free
freed freez french fresh fret friend fringe frize frog fro from frop frost
froth frown fruit fry full fund fur
G.
Gad gagg gage gain gale gall game gap gape gasp gat gate gave gaws gay gaze
geer gem gent get ghess ghest ghost gift gill gin gimp gird girl girts give
glad glance glare glass glaze gleab glean glear glede gleek glove gnash gnat
gnaw go goad goal goat god goff gold gone good gore got gourd gout gown grace
graff graft grain grant grape grasp grass grape grave gray graze grease great
greaves greaze greek green greet grew grief grieve grig grin grind gripe grist
groan groat groom grope gross grove groul ground grow grown growth groyn grub
grudge grunt guard gub guest guide guild guile guilt guise gulf gum gun gush
gust guts
H.
Ha hack had had have hagg hail hair hale half hall halt ham hand hang hap
hard hare hark harm harp heart have hatch hate has hat have haunt hawes hawk
hay hayes he head heal health heap hear heard hearse heart hearth heat heath
heave hedge heed heel height heir held hell helm help helve hem hemp hen hence
her herb herd here hew hewn hid hide high hill him hind hip^ hi^e his hiss hitt
ho hoarse hock hodge hog hoh hokes hold hole home hood hoof hook hope hops horn
horse horst hose host hot hough hour house hout how howl hue huff huft hug huge
hum huncks hunt hurl hurt husk hymn
I.
Jack jade jail jakes jarr jaw jay ice ides jeer jest jet jew if i will ill in
ink inn jole joque jot joy join joint is isles itch judge jug juice just
K.
Keck keel keen keep kept ketch key kick kicked kid kill kiln kind kine kin king
kiss kite knack knave knead knee kneel knel knew knick knife knight knit knives
knob knock knot know known
L.
Lace lack lad lade lagg laid lake lamb lame lamp lance lanch land lane lank
lap lard large lark lash lask lass last latch late laud laugh law lay lead leaf
league leak lean leap leapt learn least leave led leek leer lees leese left leg
lend length lent less lest let lewd lice lick lid lie life list light like limb
lieu lime limn limp line ling link lint lip lipt list live loaf loan loath
loaves lock lodge lo loft logg loll long look loom loon loop loose lop lord
lose loss lost lot loud love louse low low^ loins luce luck lug lump lurk lust
lie lyre
M.
Mab mad made madg mag maid main make male mall malt man map mar march mark
marl mars mart mass mast maul maw may maze me mead meal mean meant meat meek
mien mere meet melt men mend mess met mice mid midst might milch mild mile milk
mill milled milt mind mine mint mire mirth miss mist mite mixed mock mocked mode
moist mole monk month moon moor moot mop more moss most mote moth move mount
mourn mouse mouth mow moyl much muck mud muff mug mule mum mump muse musk must
mute my myrrh
N.
Nab nag nail name nape nap naught nay near neat neck need near nest net news
new^ next nick nickt nice niece nigh night nine ninth nip nits no noaks node
noise nonce none nook noon nore north nose not notch note noate naught now
nurse noun nuts
O.
Oak oar oath oats odd of often oh old on once one orb ore ought our out owl own
ox oil ouze
P.
Pace pack pad page paid pail pain paint pair pale pall palm pan pangs pant
paps parcht pare park part pass past paste pat patch pate path St. Paul's pave
paw paw'd pawn pawned pay pea peace peach peak peal pear pearl perch peart
peck peel peep peg pelf pen pence pent pick pic piece pierce pig pike pile pill
pimp pin pinch pine pink pip pipe piss pit pitch pique place plague plain plane
plank plant plat plate play plea plead please pleat pledge plot plough plow
pluck plug plumb plume plush plunge poinct point poize poke pole poll pomp pond
pool poor pop pope pores porch pork port pose post pot pounce pound pour praise
prance prate pray prawns preach press prey price prick pride priest prig prince
prink print prize probe prog proof prone prop proud prong prove prune prunes
psalm puff puffed pug pugh puke pull pulp pulse pump punk pure purr purge purl
purse push pusht puss put punch pun pyde pie
Q.
Quack quaff quag quail quake qualm quart queen quench quest quick quill quince
quit quite quote quire
R.
Race rack raff rags rage rail rain raise rake rain ramp ran range rang rank
rant rap rape rapt rare raze rash rat rate raw reach read realm ream reap reak
rear red reed reel reez reign reins rend rent rest rice rich rid ride ridg
riffe rigg right rim ring rip ripe ripped rise risque rites road roan roar roast
rob robes rock rod rode roe roll rood roof rogue rook room rome root rope rose
rot rote rough roll round rouse rout row rows rub rude rue ruff rug rule rum
rump run runt rush rust rynd rye
S.
Sack sad safe sage said sail saint says sake sale salt same sand sang sank
sap sash sat sauce save saw sawn say scales scald scalp scant scan escape
scarce scare scarf scene scent schism school scoff scold sconce scope scorch
scorn score scot scoul scour scourge scout scrap scrape scrach screen scribe
scrip scrol scud scull scum scurf sea seal seam s^ar search seat sect sedg see
seed seek seem seen seer seize self sell selves send sense sent serve set sew
sex shield shine shins ship shriek shrimp shirk shock shod shab shad shade
shaft shag shake shall sham shame shank shape share shark sharp shave sheaf
shear sheard sheath sheaves shed she sheep sheers sheets shell show shole
shone shoe shook shoot shop shore shorn short shot should shout show shown
shower shrank shread shreek shrew shrill shrink shrine shroud shrub scrub shrug
shut sick side siege sieve sift sigh sight sign silk sim since sing sink sip
sipt sir sit sire six sixth sixth size sky skill skim skin skink skip skipt skirt
skull slab slack slade slain slang slap slash slate slave slay sledge sleek
sleep sleer slight slept sleeve slew slick slid slide slight slim slime sling
slip slipped slop sloth slough sloes slow slut sly smack small smart smeer smell
smelt smite smirk smith smoke smooth smote smug smut snail snake snare snarl
snarch sneak sneeze snot snout snow so soak snuff sob sock sod soft soil sold
soles snug some son song soon sooth sop soap sore sort souce sought soul sound
source south sow sow sown sour space spade spoke span spare spark spawl spawn
speak spear speck sped speech speed spell spelt spend spent spew spice spy
spike spill spilt spin spire spirt spit spite splaid splay split spoil spoke
spoon sport spot spouse spout sprang sprawl sprain spread sprig spring sprout
spruce sprung spue spun sponge spur spurt spy square squat squawl squeak squeal
squeez squint squirt stab stack staff stag stage stain stake stale stall stalk
stamp stanch stand stank starch stare stark star start state stave stay stays
stead steak steal stealth steel steed steep steer stem stench step stern stew
stick stiff still sting stink stir stitch stock stole stolen stone stood stool
stoop stop store stork storm stout straight strain strait strakes strand
strange strap straw streak stream street str^ngth stretch strew stride strickt
strife strike string strip stripe stripped strive stroke strole struck strong
st^ove strut stuck studs stuff stuffed stum stump stund stung stunk sty style
such suck suds sue suit sum sun sung sunk sup supt sure suit swab swag swan
swap swear swa^m swear sweat sweep sweet swell swept swift swig swim swine
switch swill swollen swoond swore sword sworn
T.
Tack tag tail take tale talk tall tame tand tang tann tap tapt tard tare tarr
tart task taste taught taunt teach teal tears teat teem teeth tell tempt ten
tend tenth tent terms thames than thanks that thaw the thee theft theirs them
then thence there these they thick theif thieves thigh thin thine thing think
third thirst this thong thorn those thou though thought thrall thrash thread
three thresh threw thrice thrift thrive throat throb throne throng through
throw thrown thrum thrust thumb thus thwart tib tick tide tie tierce tike tile
till tilt time tinn tip tipped tire tith to toad toast tod toe toil told toll
tomb tome tone tongs tongue too took tool tooth top tope torch tore torn toss
tossed touch touched tough tow town towze trace track trade trail train tram trip
tripe trance trap tray tread tree trench trent tribe trick try trim trod troop
trough trout trow trowl troy truce truck true trump trunk trust truss truth try
tub tuck tuff tuft tug tough tune tun turf turk turn twain twice twelfth twelve
twigg twine twins two tide tie tyne type tire
V.
Vail vain vale vamp vast vault vaunt veal veil vein vend vent verge verse vest
vexed vice view vile vine voice void vow vows vowed up urge us use
W.
Wade waft wage wagg wail wain wait wake walk wall wand wann want ward ware
warm warmth warn warned warp war wart was wash washed wast waste wasp watch
wave wax way wayle weak weal wealth wean wear weave web wed wedg we weed week
weep weight welsh well welt wem wenn wench went wept were were west wet whale
wharf what wheat wheel wheez whelm whelp when whence where whet which while
whilst whim whine w^ip whirl whisk whist whit white who whole whom whoop whore
whose why wick wide wife wight wigg wield wild wile will wilt win winch wind
wine wing wink wipe wire wise wish wisp wist wit witch with wives woe woes woke
woolf wolves womb wonn wont wood wool word work world worm worn worse worst
worth wot wove would wound wrap wrapped wrasp wrath wreak wreath wren wrench
wrest wright wring wrinsh write wrong wrote wroth wrough wrung wyths
Y.
Yard yarn yatch yaul y^e yea ye year yeast yawn yell yelk yern yes yet yeo yew
yield yolk you you will yours young youth
Z.
Zeal zone
WORDS OF TWO SYLLABLES.
A-bact abact a-base abase a-bate abate ab-ba abba ab-hor abhor a-bide abide
ab-ject abject ab-jure abjure a-ble able a-board aboard a-bode abode a-bove
above a-bound abound a-bout about a-broad abroad ab-sence absence ab-sent
absent ab-stain abstain ab-solve absolve ab-stract abstract ab-surd absurd
a-buse abuse ac-cept accept ac-cess access a-ches aches a-bysse abyss ac-cord
accord a-corn acorn ac-count account ac-compts accounts ac-cuse accuse ac-curst
accursed ac-quaint acquaint ac-quit acquit a-cree acree act-ing acting ac-tive
active ac-tor actor ad-ded added ad-der adder ad-here adhere ad-jure adjure
ad-just adjust ad-journ adjourn ad-judg adjudg ad-joyn adjoyn ad-dress address
ad-dict addict a-dieu adieu ad-mit admit ad-vance advance ad-vice advice
ad-vise advise a-dopt adopt ad-vent advent ad-verb adverb a-doe ado a-dorn
adorn a-dore adore a-far afar af-fairs affairs af-fect affect af-firm affirm
af-flict afflict af-fright affright a-foot afoot a-fore before a-fraid afraid
a-fresh afresh af-ter after af-ford afford a-gain again a-gainst against a-ged
aged a-ges ages a-go ago a-gone agone a-gree agree ag-gates aggates a-ground
aground a-gue ague a-ha aha aid-ed aided ail-ed ailed ail-^th aileth aim-ed
aimed air-ed aired a-lack alack a-larm alarm a-las alas al-lay allay al-ledge
allege a-like alike a-live alive al-low allow al-lure allure al-mond almond
al-most almost a-loft aloft a-lone alone a-long along a-loof aloof a-loud aloud
al-lude allude al-pha alpha al-so also al-tar altar al-ter alter al-though
although al-ways always am-ber amber am-ble amble am-bush ambush a-maze amaze
a-men amen a-mend amend a-merce amerce a-miss amiss a-mong among a-mongst
amongst a-mours amors an-cle ancle an-chor anchor an-gel angel an-gels angels
an-ger anger an-gle angle an-gred angered an-gry angry an-guish anguish an-nise
annise a-noint anoint a-non anon an-nex annex anew anew an-noy annoy an-swer
answer an-vil anvil a-ny any a-pace apace apart apart a-piece apiece ap-peal
appeal ap-pear appear ap-pease appease ap-ple apple ap-ply apply ap-point
appoint ap-plaud applaud ap-plause applause ap-proach approach ap-prove approve
a-pril april a-pron apron a-ray array ar-cher archer ar-chees archees ar-bour
arbor ar-gue argue a-right aright a-rise arise a-rose arose arm-ed armed
arm-holes armholes arm-strong armstrong ar-my army ar-mies armies ar-mour
armor ar-rears arrears ar-rest arrest ar-rive arrive ar-row arrow as-cend
ascend ar-raign arraign as-cent ascent a-scribe ascribe a-side aside a-sleep
asleep ask-ed asked ask-ing asking as-sault assault as-sail assail as-say assay
as-sent assent as-sess assess as-ses asses as-sign assign as-pect aspect
as-perse asperse as-sist assist ash-es ashes as-soon as soon a-stray astray
as-sure assure as-swage assuage as-well as well at-tack attack at-tain attain
at-taint attaint at-tend attend at-tent attent at-tempt attempt at-tach attach
a-theist atheist a-thirst athirst at-tire attire a-venge avenge a-verse averse
aug-ment augment a-vail avail a-void avoid au-gust august a-vow avow a-vouch
avouch au-stere austere au-tumn autumn ^u-thor author a-wake awake a-ward award
awk-ward awkward a-ware aware a-way away a-woke awoke a-wry awry ax-es axes
axe-yard axe-yard
B. B.
Bab-ble Babble bab-ler babbler bab-ling babbling back-bite backbite backbone
backbone back-parts backpar^s backside backside back-slide backslide back-ward
backward ba-con bacon bad-ger badger bad-ness badness ba-dest badest bag-gage
baggage baf-fle baffle bai-liff bailiff bake-meats bakemeats ba-ker baker
ba-king baking bal-lance balance bal-last ballast bald-ness baldness bal-som
balsom ban-ded banded ban-dy bandy ba-nish banish ban-ner banner ban-ning
banning bank-rupt bankrupt ban-quet banquet bap-tize baptize bap-tism baptizm
bap-tist baptist bar-bed barbed bar-ber barber barefoot barefoot b^re-leg
bareleg bare-n^ck bareneck bare-ness bareness bar-gain bargain bark-ing barking
bar-ley barley bar-red barred bar-rel barrel bar-ren barren bar-row barrow
bar-ter barter base-ness baseness bash-ful bashful ba-ser baser ba-ses bases
bas-ket basket ba-son basin bas-tard bastard bath-ed bathed bath-ing bathing
bat-tel battle bat-ter batter bay-leaf bayleaf bay tree baytree bay salt
baysalt bawl-ing bawling bea-con beacon bea-dle beadle b^a-gle beagle bear-er
bearer bear-ing bearing beak-er beaker beat-en beaten beat-ing beating bea-ver
beaver beau-ty beauty be-came be-came be-cause because bec-kon beckon beck-ned
beckned be-come become bed-stead bedstead bee-tle beetle be-fall befall be-fell
befell be-fore before be-foul befoul be-gan began be-gat begat be-get beget
beg-gar beggar beg-ging begging be-got begot be-gin begin be-guile beguile
be-gun begun be-gir^ begirt be-half behalf be-halves behalves be-have behave
be-hag'd behag'd be-head behead be-held beheld be-hight behight be-hind behind
be-hold behold be-hoove behoov^ be-ing being be-lieve believe be-lief belief
be-lie belie bel-low bellow bel-lows bellows bel-ly belly be-long belong be-low
below be-moan be-moa^ bench-es benches bend-ing bending be-neath beneath
be-queath bequeat^ be-reave bereave be-reft bereft be-ril beril ber-ries
berries be-seech beseech be-siege besiege be-seem beseem be-set beset be-sides
besides be-som besom be-shrew beshrew be-sot besot be-sought besought be-stead
bestead be-stir bestir be-stow bestow be-take betake be-think bethink be-times
betimes be-tray betray ^e-troth betroth bet-ter better bet-ting betting
be-tween between be-twixt betwixt be-wail bewail be-ware beware be-witch
bewitch be-wray bewray be-yond beyond bib-ber bibber bi-ble bible bid-den
bidden bid-ding bidding bilk-ing bilking bil-lows billows bil-lets billets
bil-boe bilboe bind-er binder bind-ing binding birch-en birchen birthday
birthday birthright birthright bi-shop bishop bis-ket biscuit bi-teth biteth
bit-ten bitten bit-ter bitter bit-tern bittern black-box blackbox black-ness
blackness black-guard blackguard bla-med blamed blame-less blameless blanch-ed
blanched blan-ket blanket blad-der bladder blas-pheme blaspheme blast-ed
blasted blast-ing blasting bla-zon blazon bla-zing blazing blear-ing blearing
bleat-ing bleating ble-mish blemish blend-ing blending bles-sed blessed
bles-sing blessing blind-ed blinded blind-ness blindness blind-ly blindly
blindfold blindfold blis-ter blister block-head blockhead bloo-dy bloody
blood-ed blooded bloom-ed bloomed bloom-ing blooming blos-soms blossoms
blot-ting blotting blot-ted blotted blow-eth blows blow-ing blowing blush-ing
blushing boar-ish boarish boast-ed boasted boast-ing boasting bo-dy body
bo-dice bodice bod-kin bodkin boil-ed boiled boil-ing boiling bold-ly boldly
bold-ness boldness bol-ling bolling bol-led bolled bol-ster bolster bo-lus
bolus bon-dage bondage bondman bondsman bondmen bondmen bond-slave bondslave
bone-fire bonefire bon-grace bongrace bon-net bonnet bon-ny bonny boo-ty booty
boot-ed booted boo-by booby bor-der border bo-rough borough bor-row borrow
bo-red bored bo-rage borage bos-ses bosses bo-som bosom bot-tle bottle bot-tom
bottom bound-ed bounded bound-less boundless boun-ty bounty bow-ed bowed bow-er
bower bow-els bowels bow-man bowman bow-shoot bowshoot bow-ler bowler bow-ling
bowling box-ing boxing box-tree boxtree boy-ish boyish brack-et bracket
brace-let bracelet brag-ging bragging bran-dy brandy bran-disht brandisht
brang-ling brangling bram-ble bramble branch-es branches branch-ing branching
braw-ler brawler braw-ling brawling bray-ed brayed braw-ny brawny bra-zen
brazen breach-es breaches break-er breaker breakfast breakfast break-neck
breakneck break-up breakup breast bone breastbone breast plate breastplate
breath-ing breathing breath-less breathless breech-es breeches breed-er breeder
breed-ing breeding breez-es breezes bre-thren brethren brew-er brewer bri-ars
briars brick-kiln brickkiln bride-cake bridecake bridegroom bridegroom bri-dle
bridle bri-dling bridling brief-er briefer brief-ly briefly bright-er brighter
bright-ness brightness brim-full brimfull brim-m^r brimmer brim-stone brimstone
bring-er bringer bring-ing bringing bri-nish brinish brit-tle brittle brit-ler
britler broad-er broader broad-est broadest broil-ed broiled broil-ing broiling
bro-ken broken bro-ker broker bro-ther brother brought-est broughtest
brought-up broughtup brow-beat browbeat brown-er browner brui-sed bruised
brui-ses bruises brui-tish brutish bub-ble bubble buck-et bucket buck-le
buckle buck-ler buckler bud-ding budding buf-fet buffet buf-foon buffoon
buf-fler buffler bu-gle bugle bugbear bugbear build-er builder build-ing
building bul-lock bullock bul-rush bulrush bul-wark bulwark bump-er bumper
bump-kin bumpkin bunch-es bunches bun-dle bundle bur-den burden burn-ed burned
burn-ing burning bur-gess burgess burg-lers burglers bur-nish burnish bur-rough
borough burst-ed bursted burst-en bursten bu-ry bury bush-es bushes bush-el
bushel bush-y bushy bu-sie busy butch-er butcher but-ler butler but-ter butter
but-ting butting but-tocks buttocks but-ton button buy-er buyer buy-ing buying
by-blow byblow by-ways byways by-ward byward byword byword
C. C.
Cab-bage Cabbage cab-bin cabin ca-ges cages cake-bread cakebread cal-dron
caldron cal-kers calkers cal-led called cal-ling calling cal-veth calveth
cal-ving calving cam-brick cambrick ca-mel camel ca-mest came camp-ed camped
cam-phire camphire can-cel cancel can-non cannon can-dle candle can-ker canker
cank-red cankred can-not cannot ca-pon capon cap-tain captain cap-tious
captious cap-tive captive car-cass carcass card-ing carding care-ful careful
care-less careless ca-ress caress ca-rouse carouse car-man carman car-reer
carreer cam-pagn campagn car-ter carter car-nal carnal car-ry carry cart-rope
cartrope cart-wheel cartwheel cart-horse carthorse car-ver carver car-ving
carving case-ment casement ca-ses cases cast-ing casting cast-er caster cas-tle
castle catch-ing catching cat-tel cattle cau-dle caudle cau-ses causes cau-sing
causing cau-sey causey ca-reer career ca-vel cavel cea-sing ceasing ce-dar
cedar cel-ler celler ce-ment cement cen-ser censer cen-sure censure cer-tain
certain cha-fing chafing chain-ing chaining chain-work chainwork chalk-ed
chalked chalk-stone chalkstone chal-lenge challenge cham-bers chambers
cham-pagn champagn chan-cel chancel chan-gers changers chand-ler chandler
chan-ceth chances chang-ling changling chan-ter chanter chap-lets chaplets
chap-man chapman chap-pel chapel chap-ter chapter chan-nel channel charg-ing
charging chap-lain chaplain char-ming charming char-ter charter cha-stise
chastise chat-tle chattle chat-ter chatter cha-ses chases cha-sing chasing
chas-ten chasten check-er checker check-mate checkmate cheek-bone cheekbone
cheek-teeth cheekteeth chea-pen cheapen chea-per cheaper cheer-eth cheereth
cheer-ful cheerful chee-ses cheeses cher-bet cherbet che-rish cherish cher-ry
cherry cheat-ing cheating ches-nut chestnut chew-ed chewed chew-ing chewing
chick-en chicken chick-weed chickweed chi^ding chiding chief-est chiefest
chief-ly chiefly childhood childhood child-ish childish child-less childless
chil-dren children chim-ney chimney chim-ming chimming chink-ing chinking
choak-ed choked choi-cest choicest cho-ler choler choo-ser chooser choo-sing
choosing cho-sen chosen christ-mass christmas chris-ten christen chrys-tal
crystal chri-somes chrisomes church-es churches church-ing churching
church^porch churchporc^ churchyard chur^hyard chur-lish churlish churn-ing
churning ciel-ing cieling cir-cle circle cir-cuit circuit chu-sing choosing
cis-tern cistern cit-ty city ci-vet civet ci^vil civil clack-ing clacking
cla-mour clamor clam-my clammy claim-ing claiming clap-ped clapped clap-per
clapper cla-ret claret cla-ry clary clasp-ing clasping claw-ing clawing
clean-ly cleanly clean-ness cleanness clean^ser cleanser clean-seth cleanses
clear-ly clearly clear-ness clearness clear-sight clearsight clea-ved cleaved
cl^a-ver cleaver climb-ing climbing cloath-ed clothed cloath-ing clothing
clock-weights clockweigh^^ clod-pate clodpate clog-ging clogging clo-ses closes
clo-set closet clo-ser closer clou-dy cloudy clo-ven cloven clout-ed clouted
clow-nish clownish clus-ter cluster cly-ster clyster coach-es coaches coach-ing
coaching coachman coachman coat-ed coated cob-ler cobbler cock-les cockles
cof-fee coffee cod-lings codlings cof-fer coffer cog-ging cogging cof-fin
coffin col-lar collar col-ledge college coheirs coheirs cold-ness coldness
col-lops collops coin-ing coining co-lour color col-league colleague col-logue
collogue col-lumn collumn come-ly comely com-merse commerse co-meth comes
come-at comeat com-bine combine com-fort comfort co-ming coming com-mand
command com-mence commence com-mend commend com-merce commerce com-mit commit
com-mode commode com-mune commune com-mon common com^bat combat com^pact
compact com-pare compare com-part compart com-pass compass comb-ing combing
com-pel compel com-plain complain com-plaint complaint com-pleat complete
com-pose compose com-pound compound com-pute compute con-ceal conceal con-ceit
conceit con-cave concave con-ceive conceive con-cern concern con-clude conclude
con-cise concise con-cord concord con-course concourse con-coct concoct
con-demn condemn con-dole condole con-dign condign con-duce conduce con-duct
conduct con-duit conduit co-nies conies con-fess confess con-firm confirm
con-flict conflict con-fer confer con-fide confide con-found confound con-fute
confute con-firm confirm con-fuse confuse con-form conform con-geal congeal
con-gy congy con-joyn conjoyn con-jure conjure con-nex connex con-nive connive
con-front confront con-quer conquer con-quest conquest con-sent consent
con-sist consist con-serve conserve con-sort consort con-stant constant
con-spire conspire con-sult consult con-sume consume con-strain constrain
con-strue construe con-spute conspute con-tain contain con-temn contemn
con-tempt contempt con-tend contend con-tent content con-test contest con-tract
contract con-trite contrite con-trive contrive con-vent convent con-vert
convert con-verse converse con-vey convey con-vince convince con-vict convict
cook-ing cooking cool-ing cooling cool-ness coolness coop-er cooper co-py copy
co-ping coping cop-per copper cop-pice coppice co-ral coral cor-net cornet
cor-ner corner corp-ses corpses cor-rect correct cor-rode corrode cor-rupt
corrupt cost-ly costly cot-tage cottage couch-ing couching couch-es couches
couch-ant couchant co-ver cover co-vert covert co-vet covet could-est could
coul-ter coulter coun-sel counsel cough-ing coughing coun-cil council coun-ter
counter count-ing counting coun-tess countess coun-ty county coun-try country
cou-ple couple cou-pled coupled cou-rage courage cour-ses courses cou-sin
cousin cow-ard coward cow-itch cowitch cow-turd cowturd co-zen cozen crack-ling
crackling crack-nels cracknels craf-ty crafty crafts-man craftsman crafts-men
craftsmen cramp-ed cramped crash-ing crashing cra-sy crasy cra-ving craving
cre-ate create cre-dit credit crea-ture creature cree-pers creepers creep-ing
creeping cree-ple creeple cri-ed cried cry-ing crying crim-son crimson crip-ple
cripple crisp-ing crisping cra-dle cradle crack-ers crackers crookt-back
crooktback crook-ed crooked cros-bow crosbow cros-bite crosbite cros-ness
crosness crost-let crostlet cros-way crosway crouch-ing crouching croud-ing
crouding crow-ing crowing crown-ed crowned crut-ches crutches crud-led crudled
cru-el cruel crush-ed crushed cu-bit cubit cuc-kow cuckoo cud-gel cudgel
cum-brance cumbrance cuf-fing cuffing cum-breth cumbreth cum-min cummin
cun-ning cunning cup-board cupboard cu-red cured cur-led curled cur-rent
current cur-rence currence cur-ry curry cur-ses curses cur-sing cursing
cur-tain curtain cu-rate curate cus-tom custom cus-tard custard cut-ler cutler
cut-ting cutting cy-clops cyclops cy-der cider cym-bal cymbal cyn-der cynder
cu-pid cupid cy-press cypress
D. D.
Dab-ble Dabble dag-ger dagger dal-ly dally dain-ty dainty dai-ry dairy da-mask
damask dam-mage damage dam-ming damming dam-ned damned dam-sen damsen dan-ces
dances dan-cing dancing dan-dle dandle dan-ger danger dark-ness darkness
dar-ling darling dash-ing dashing daugh-ter daughter dau-ber dauber daub-ing
daubing daunt-ed daunted dawn-ing dawning dai-ly daily daylight daylight
daybreak daybreak dayspring dayspring day star daystar dea-con deacon dead-ly
deadly dead-ness deadness deaf-ness deafness deal-er dealer dearn-ing dearning
deal-ing dealing dear-ly dearly de-base debase de-bate debate debt-or debtor
de-cay decay de-cease decease de-ceit deceit de-ceive deceive deck-ed decked
de-clare declare de-cline d^cline de-coct decoct de-cent decent de-crease
decrease de-cree decree de-creed decreed deem-ed deemed deep-ness deepness
de-fame defame de-feat defeat de-face deface de-fend defend de-fence defense
de-feat defeat de-fer defer de-file defile de-form deform de-fray defray
de-fraud defraud ^e-fye defye de-gree degree ^e-grade degrade ^e-ject deject
^e-lay delay ^e-light delight ^e-lude delude ^^-luge deluge ^^-mand demand
^^-mean demean ^^-mise demise ^^-murr demurr ^^-mure demure ^^-nounce denounce
^^-ny deny ^^-pute depute ^^-part depart ^^-prive deprive ^^-pend depend
^^-pose depose ^^-ride deride ^^-plore deplore ^^-prave deprave ^^-press
depress de-sart desert de-scend descend de-sign design de-scent descent
de-scribe describe de-scry descry de-sert desert de-serve deserve de-sire
desire de-sist desist de-spair despair de-spise despise de-spite despite
de-stroy destroy de-tain detain de-ter deter de-test detest de-vice device
de-vil devil de-vise devise de-vote devote de-voir devoir de-vour devour de-out
devout di-al dial di-ed died dy-ing dying dif-fer differ dig-ged dug
dim-ness dimness di-ned dined din-ner dinner di-et diet dip-per dipper dip-ped
dipped dip-thong dipthong di-rect direct dis-arm disarm dis-cern discern
dis-charge discharge dis-claim disclaim dis-close disclose dis-course discourse
dis-cord discord dis-count discount dis-creet discreet dis-dain disdain
di-sease disease dis-grace disgrace dis-guise disguise dis-joyn disjoyn dish-es
dishes dis-may dismay dis-miss dismiss dis-pair despair dis-patch dispatch
dis-perse disperse dis-pense dispense dis-prove disprove dis-please displease
dis-play display dis-praise dispraise dis-pute dispute dis-pose dispose
dis-solve dissolve dis-sent dissent dis-taffe distaffe dis-tract distract
dis-tance distance dis-tant distant dis-tinct distinct dis-til distill dis-tast
distaste dis-tress distress dis-train distrain dis-trust distrust ditch-er
ditcher ditch-es ditches di-vers diverse di-vide divide di-vine divine di-vorce
divorce di-vulge divulge doc-tor doctor doc-trine doctrine do-^r doer do-ing
doing dole-ful doleful doomsday doomsday door-post doorpost do-tage dotage
do-ting doting dou-ble double doubt-ful doubtful dove-house dovehouse
dou^^-less doubtless down-bed downbed down-wards downwards do-zen dozen dow-ry
dowry dough-tub doughtub drag-ged dragged drain-ing draining dra-gon dragon
draw-er drawer dra-per draper draw-ing drawing dread-ful dreadful dream-ed
dreamed dream-er dreamer dread-ing dreading dres-ser dresser dres-sing dressing
drew-est drewest dri-er drier dry-ing drying drink-er drinker drink-ing
drinking dril-ling drilling dri-ven driven dri-ver driver dri-ving driving
drop-ping dropping droop-ing drooping drop-sie dropsy dros-sy drossy drown-ing
drowning drow-sy drowsy drun-kard drunkard drudg-ing drudging drun-ken drunken
dung-ing dunging dry-boots dryboots dry-shod dryshod dung-boat dungboat
dung-cart dungcart dung-ground dungground dung-hil dunghill dung-port dungport
du-ring during du-ty duty du-ties duties duke-dom dukedom dwel-ler dweller
dwel-ling dwelling duel duel dullness dullness
E. E.
Each-ed Eached ea-ger eager ea-gle eagle ear-ed eared ear-ing earing earl-dom
earldom ear-ly early earrings earrings ear-ned earned ear-nest earnest
earth-en earthen earth-ly earthly earthquake earthquake ea-sed eased eas-ter
easter eastward eastward ea-sy easy eat-en eaten eat-er eater eat-ing eating
ec-cho echo e-clypse eclypse edg-ed edged edg-ing edging edg-es edges e-dict
edict ef-fect effect eigh-teen eighteen eigh-teenth eighteenth eigh-ty eighty
e-gypt egypt ei-ther either el-bow elbow el-der elder el-dest eldest e-ject
eject e-lect elect em-balm embalm em-pire empire em-ploy employ emp-ty empty
en-camp encamp en-chant enchant en-close enclose en-crease increase end-ed
ended end-ing ending end-less endless en-croach encroach en-dear endear en-dow
endow en-due endue en-dure endure en-force enforce en-flame inflame en-gage
engage en-gine engine en-gland england en-glish english en-grave engrave
en-hance enhance en-joy enjoy en-joyn enjoin en-large enlarge en-light enlight
e-nough enough en-quire enquire en-rich enrich en-sign ensign en-snare ensnare
en-sue ensue en-sure ensure en-ter enter en-tice entice en-trance entrance
en-stall enstall en-tail entail en-try entry en-vy envy e-phod ephod e-qual
equal er-rand errand er-rant errant e-rect erect er-rour error en-throne
enthrone en-tire entire e-squire esquire e-spouse espouse e-scape escape es-say
essay e-schew eschew e-spy espy e-state estate e-strange estrange es-sence
essence e-steem esteem en-thral enthral etch-ing etching en-tomb entomb
en-treat entreat en-trust entrust e-ven even e-vent event e-ver ever eu-nuch
eunuch ew-er ewer ex-act exact ex-alt exalt ex-ceed exceed ex-cel excel ex-cept
except ex-cess excess ex-cise excise ex-change exchange ex-claim exclaim
ex-clude exclude ex-cluse excluse ex-cuse excuse ex-empt exempt ex-hort exhort
ex-haust exhaust ex-ile exile ex-pect expect ex-pel expel ex-pence expense
ex-pert expert ex-plain explain ex-ploit exploit ex-pose expose ex-pound
expound ex-port export ex-press express ex-pire expire ex-tend extend ex-tant
extant ex-tinct extinct ex-tol extol ex-tract extract ex-tream extreme
eye balls eyeballs eyebrows eye^rows eyelids eyelids ey-ed eyed eyebright
eyebright eye salve eyesalve eyesight eyesight eye-strings eyestrings eyesore
eyesore eye-teeth eyeteeth
F. F.
Fa-bles Fables fa-ces faces face-ing facing fa-cil facil fac-tor factor
fa-deth fades fa-ding fading fadg-eth fadgeth fail-ed failed fail-ing failing
fa-got faggot fa-mous famous faint-ed fainted faint-ness faintness faint-heart
faintheart fair-er fairer fayr-ing fayring faith-ful faithf^l faith-less
faithless fal-len fallen fal-ling falling fal-low fallow fals-hood falsehood
false-ly falsely false-ness falseness false-oath falseoath fa-mine famine
fa-misht famisht fan-cy fancy fare-wel farewell farr-of farrof far-ther farther
far-thing farthing fan-ner fanner fast-ing fasting fast-er faster fast-en
fasten fast-ned fastened fa-ther father fa-thom fathom fat-lings fatlings
fat-ted fatted fat-ning fatning fat-ness fatness faul-ty fault-less faultless
fa-vour favor fear-ing fearing fear-ful fearful feast day feastday feast-ed
feasted feast-ing feasting fea-thers feathers fee-ble feeble feed-ing feeding
feel-ing feeling feign-ed feigned fel-led felled fel-low fellow fe-lon felon
fe-male female fen-ced fenced fer-ret ferret fer-ry ferry fer-vent fervent
fetch-ing fetching fet-ters fetters fe-ver fever few-el fuel few-er fewer
fie^-cer fiercer fierce-ness fierceness fif-teen fifteen fif-teenth fifteenth
fif-ty fifty fig tree figtree fig leaves figleaves fight-ing fighting fi-gures
figures fil-led filled fil-let fillet fil-ling filling fi-ling filing fil-thy
filthy fi-nal final find-ing finding fi-ner finer fi-nest finest fin-ger finger
fi-nish finish firebrand firebrand fire-hearth firehearth fire-pan firepan
fir-kin firkin first-ling firstling fir tree fi^^^ee firstborn f^^^^born
first day firstday first fruits firstfruits first-month firstmonth first-year
firstyear fish-gate fishgate fish-hook fishhook fish-pool fishpool fish pond
fishpond fish-spear fishspear fish-er fisher fish-es fishes fish-ing fishing
fitch-es fitches fit-ly fitly fit-ted fitted fit-ting fitting fix-ed fixed
fix-ing fixing fla-gon flagon flag-staff flagstaff fla-ming flaming flash-ing
flashing flat-ter flatter flay-ed flayed fle-eth flees fleer-ing fleering
flesh-hook fleshhook flesh-ly fleshly flesh-y fleshy fleshpots fleshpots
fli-eth flies fly-blow flyblow fly-ing flying flint-glass flintglass flin-ty
flinty flout-ing flouting flou-rish flourish float-ing floating flow-ing
flowing flock-ing flocking floor-ing flooring flut-ter flutter flow-er flower
flush-ing flushing fod-der fodder floodgates floodgates foy-ling foyling
fold-ing folding fo-ling foling fol-low follow fol-ly folly fond-ness fondness
fo-ming foming fo-ment foment fop-ling fopling foo-lish foolish fool-ing
fooling foot-ing footing foot-cloth footcloth foot-board footboard footman
footman foot-pad footpad footsteps footsteps footstool footstool foot-way
footway for-bad forbad for-bear forbear for-bid forbid for-born forborne for-ced
forced for-ces forces fore-arm forearm forecast forecast for-ging forging
forefront forefront fore-go forego forehead forehead fore-horse forehorse
foreknow foreknow foreman foreman fore-most foremost for-lorn forlorn for-mal
formal forepart forepart foresaw foresaw fore-ship foreship foreskin
foreskin fore-tel foretell foretold foretold fore-warn forewarn for-gat forgot
for-gave forgave for-ged forged for-gers forgers for-get forget for-give
forgive for-got forgot form-ed formed form-ing forming form-er former for-rest
forest for-rain foreign for-sake forsake for-sook forsook for-sooth forsooth
for-swear forswear for-sworn forsworn forthwith forthwith for-ty forty
for-ward forward foul-ed fouled foul-er fouler found-ed founded foun-der
founder found-red foundred foun-tain fountain fourfold fourfold apiece
foursquare four-score fourscore four-teen fourteen four-teenth fourteenth
fow-ler fowler fowl-ing fowling fox-es foxes frag-ments fragments fra-med
framed frank-ly frankly freck^led freckled freck-les freckles fre-ed freed
free grace freegrace free-dom freedom free-leave freeleave free-ly freely
freeman freeman free-gift freegift fre-quent frequent free will freewill
freez-ing freezing fresh-er fresher fret-ful fretful fret-ting fretting
friend-ly friendly friend-ship friendship frin-ges fringes fri-day friday
front-lets frontlets fro-ward froward frown-ing frowning fro-zen frozen
frost-work frostwork fruit-ful fruitful frus-trate frustrate fry-ed fried
ful-fil fulfill ful-ler fuller ful-ness fullness fur-bish furbish fur-bush
furbush fu-ry fury fur-long furlong fur-nace furnace fur-nish furnish fur-row
furrow fur-ther further fu-ture future ful-some fulsome
G. G.
Gad-dest Gaddest gain-ed gained gainsay g^insay gal-lant g^llant gal-ley
g^lley gal-lows gallows gal-led galled ga-ped gaped gar-den garden gam-ster
gamster gar-land garland gar-lick garlic gar-ment garm^nt gar-ner garner
gar-nish garnish ga-ther gather ga-ved gaved ga-vest gave ga-zer gazer
ga-zing gazing gan-grene gangrene geld-er gelder geld-ing gelding gen-der
gender gen-tile gentile gen-tle gentle gent-ly gently gen-try gentry ges-ture
gesture get-ting getting gew-gaws gewgaws gi-ants giants ghes-sing ghessing
ghost-ly ghostly gild-er gilder gild-ing gilding gid-dy giddy gift-ed gifted
gim-cracks gimcracks gin-ger ginger gird-ing girding gird-le girdle gi-ven
given gi-ver giver gi-ving giving gla-ber glaber glad-ly gladly glad-ness
gladness glan-dles glandles glass-man glassman glas-ses g^asses gleab-land
gleabland glean-ed gleaned glean-ings gleanings glib-ly glibly gli-ding gliding
glis-sen glissen glis-ter glister glit-ter glitter gloo-my gloomy glo-ry glory
glo-ver glover glos-sy glossy gloz-ing glozing glu-ing gluing glue-pot gluepot
glue-brush gluebrush glut-ton glutton gnash-ing gnashing gnaw-ing gnawing
goad-ing goading goats-hair goatshair goat-ish goatish goats-milk goatsmilk
goats-skin goatsskin gob-lets goblets gob-ling gobling god-dess goddess
godhead godhead god-ly godly godward godward go-ings goings gol-den golden
goldsmiths goldsmith gold-watch goldwatch good-ness goodness go-red gored
gor-get gorget gos-hawk goshawk gos-ling gosling gos-pel gospel gos-sip gossip
got-ten gotten go-tam gotam go-vern govern gou-ty gouty grace-less graceless
graf-ted grafted gram-mer gram-mer grandchild grandchild gran-num grannum
grant-ed granted grap-ple grapple grass-plat grassplat gra-ter grater gra-ven
graven gra-ver graver gra-ving graving gra-vy gravy gravel gravel grea-ter
greater great-ness greatness gree-dy greedy grea-zy greazy green-ish greenish
green-ness greenness greet-ing greeting grie-vance grievance grie-ving grieving
grie-vous grievous grind-ers grinders grind-ing grinding greyhound greyhound
grin-ning grinning gri-ping griping grit-ty gritty griz-led grizled groan-ing
groaning gro-cer grocer gro-ping groping grose-ly grosely grot-to grotto
ground-ing grounding ground-less groundless ground-room groundroom grow-ing
growing grub-ing grubing grudg-ing grudging gui-ded guided guild-ing guilding
guilt-less guiltless guil-ty guilty gul-led gulled gul-let gullet gum-med
gummed gun-ner gunner gun-room gunroom gush-ing gushing gut-ter gutter gut-ting
gutting
H. H.
Ha-bit Habit hack-ing hacking hack-ney hackney hag-gard haggard hag-ling
hagling hag-ler hagler hail-ed hailed hailstones hailstones hai-ry hairy
hair-lace hairlace ha-ling haling hal-low hallow halt-ing halting hamb-lets
hamblets ham-mer hammer hamp-er hamper ham-strung hamstrung ham-mock hammock
han-dy handy hand-ful handful han-dle handle hand-ling handling handmaid
handmaid hand-saw handsaw hand-som handsome hand-staff handstaff hang-ed hanged
hang-ings hangings hangman hangman hand-spit handspit han-sel hansel hap-pen
happen hap-py happy har-bour harbor har-den harden hard-ned hardened hard-er
harder hard-ly hardly hard-ness hardness har-lot harlot harm-less harmless
har-ness harness har-per harper harp-ing harping har-rase harrase har-rangue
harrangue har-row harrow hars-let harslet har-vest harvest ha-sel hasel has-ten
hasten hast-ned hastened has-ty hasty hatch-ing hatching ha-ted hated hate-ful
hateful ha-ter hater ha-ting hating ha-tred hatred hat-ter hatter hat-band
hatband ha-ving having ha-ven haven haugh-ty haughty ha-vock havoc hawk-er
hawker hawk-ing hawking hay-cock haycock hay-rick hayrick hay-stack haystack
hay-mow haymow headache headache headlong headlong headpiece headpiece
headstrong headstrong hea-dy heady heal-ing healing heal-er healer heap-ing
heaping heard-est heardest hear-er hearer hear-ing hearing heark-en hearken
heark-ned hearkened hear-ty hearty heat-ing heating hea-then heathen hea-thy
heathy hea-ved heaved hea-ven heaven hea-vy heavy he-brew hebrew hedg-es hedges
hedg-ing hedging hei-fer heifer hei-nous heinous hel-met helmet help-ed helped
help-er helper help-ful helpful help-ing helping hem-lock hemlock hem-ming
hemming hen-^ane henbane henceforth henceforth he-rauld herald her-ring
herring he-roe hero heads-man headsman herds-man herdsman here-by hereby
here-in herein here-of hereof here-with herewith hew-ing hewing hic-cough
hiccough hid-den hidden hi-ding hiding high-er higher high-ness highness
hil-lock hillock him-self himself hin-der hinder hind-leg hindleg hind-most
hindmost hind-part hindpart hind-red hindered hin-ges hinges hint-ed hinted
hip-ped hipped hi-red hired hire-ling hireling his-sing hissing hi-ther hither
highway highway hoard-ing hoarding hoa-ry hoary hob-ble hobble ho-cus hocus
hock-more hockmore hod-dy hoddy hog-ish hogish hoi-sed hoised hold-ing holding
hol-low hollow hol-pen helped ho-ly holy ho-mage homage home-born homeborn
homebred homebred home-ly homely homespun homespun ho-nest honest ho-nour
honor ho-ney honey hood-winkt hoodwinkt hook-ing hooking hoop-ing hooping
hoot-ing hooting ho-ping hoping hope-less hopeless hop-ping hopping hope-ful
hopeful horn-book hornbook hor-net hornet hor-rour horror horseback horseback
horseman horseman horse-leech horseleech hor-ses horses ho-sen hosen hot-ter
hotter hourglass hourglass hour-ly hourly household household hou-ses houses
house-wife housewife how-ling howling hu-man human hum-ble humble hum-bled
humbled hum-bly humbly hum-ming humming hu-mour humor hump-ish humpish
hun-dred hundred hundredth hundredth hun-ger hunger hun-gry hungry hun-ter
hunter hunt-ing hunting hunts-man huntsman hur-dle hurdle hur-ling hurling
hur-ry hurry hurt-ing hurting hurt-ful hurtful hus-band husband hus-sy hussy
hus-tings hustings hy-dra hydra hy-men hymen hy-phen hyphen hy-sop hyssop
I. I.
Jab-ber Jabber ja-cint jacint jack-daw jackdaw jack-line jackline jack-straw
jackstraw jack-weight jackweight ja-ded jaded jag-ged jagged jang-ling jangling
jar-ring jarring jave-ling javeling jaw bone jawbone jaw-teeth jawteeth jay-lor
jailer i-bid ibid i-dle idle i-dol idol jea-lous jealous jeer-ing jeering
jel-ly jelly jep-ped jepped jest-ing jesting je-sus jesus jet-ting jetting
jew-el jewel jew-ish jewish jews-ears jewsears ill-ness illness im-balm imbalm
im-barque imbarque im-brace embrace im-mense immense im-part impart i-mage
image im-pede impede im-plead implead im-plore implore im-ploy employ im-pose
impose im-pute impute im-port import im-post im^ost im-prove improve in-fect
infect in-camp incamp in-cense incense in-cest incest in-cert incert in-course
incourse in-crease increase in-croach incroach in-dear indear in-debt indebt
in-^ent indent in-dorse indorse in-dow indow in-duce induce in-dulge indulge
in-due indue endure endure in-deed indeed in-cline incline in-close enclose
in-come income in-chant inchant in-clude include in-fant infant in-fear infear
in-fer infer in-fine infine in-flame inflame in-form inform in-force enforce
in-gage engage in-hance inhance in-joyn enjoin in-fringe infringe inlet inlet
in-mates inmates in-ner inner in-quire inquire in-rage inrage in-roll inroll
in-sense insense in-short inshort inside inside in-spect inspect in-spite
inspite in-spire inspire in-stant instant in-struct instruct in-tend intend
in-tent intent in-treat intr^at in-thral inthral in-trench entrench in-vade
invade in-voke invoke in-volve involve in-vent invent in-vite invite in-ward
inward job-ber jobber job-ling jobling jock-ey jockey jog-ging jogging joke-ing
jokeing jolt-head jolthead jol-ly jolly jour-ney journey jour-nal journal
jour-ney journey i-ris iris joyn-ed joined joy-ed joyed joy-ful joyful joy-ner
joyner joynt-heirs joyntheirs joynt-stool joyntstool joyn-ture jointure joy-ous
joyous i-ron iron is-land island is-sue issue i-tem item ju-daism judaism
jud-ges judges itch-ing itching judg-ing judging judg-ment judgment ju-gal
jugal jui-cy juicy jug-ler jugler jug-ling juggling ju-ly july jump-ing jumping
junk-et junket jus-tle justle just-ly justly ju-ry jury
K. K.
Keen-er Keener keep-er keeper keep-ing keeping ker-seys kerseys ken-tish
kentish ket-tle kettle ker-chief kerchief ker-nel kernel ker-tle kertle ki-bed
kibed kick-ing kicking kid-ney kidney kll-ling killing kin-dle kindle kind-ness
kindness kind-ly kindly kind-red kindred king-dom kingdom king-like kinglike
king-ly kingly kins-folk kinsfolk kins-man kinsman kins-men kinsmen kis-ses
kisses kis-sing kissing kit-ling kitling kna-vish knavish kneading kneading
kneedeep kneedeep kneeling kneeling kneestrings kneestrings knew-est knew
knight-ed knighted knit-ing kniting knock-ed knocked knot-ty knotty know-ing
knowing know-ledge knowledge knuck-le knuckle
L. L.
La-bour Labor la-ced laced lace-man laceman lack-ing lacking lad-der ladder
la-den laden la-ding lading la-dy lady la-dies ladies la-dle ladle lack-er
lacker lag-ging lagging lamb-pye lambpye la-ment lament lamb-stones lambstones
lambs-head lambshead lan-ces lances lan-cing lancing lanch-ing lanching
lame-ness lameness land-ed landed land-ing landing landlord landlord landmark
landmark lan-guage language lan-guish languish lan-tern lantern lap-dog lapdog
lap-ped lapped lap-ping lapping lap-wing lapwing lap-sed lapsed lan-dress
landress larg-er larger large-ly largely large-ness largeness lash-ing lashing
las-ses lasses las-ting lasting latch-es latches la-ter later late-ly lately
la-tin latin lat-ter latter lat-tice lattice la-ver laver laugh-ing laughing
laugh-ter laughter la-vish lavish law-ful lawful law-less lawless law-terms
lawterms law-yer lawyer lay-ing lay-ing layman layman la-zie lazy lead-er
leader lead-ing leading lead-mine leadmine leaf-gold leafgold leak-ing leaking
lean-ing leaning lean-ness leanness leap-ing leaping lea-per leaper lear-ned
learned learn-ing learning lea-sing leasing lea-sure leisure lea-ther leather
lea-thern leathern lea-ved leaved lea-ving leaving lec-ture lecture led-dest
leddest led-ges ledges left-est leftest left hand lefthand left-leg leftleg
lend-er lender lend-ing lending length-en lengthen le-gat legate le-mon lemon
len-tiles lentiles leo-pard leopard le-per leper le-prous leprous les-sen
lessen les-son lesson let-ter letter let-ting letting le-vite levite le-vy levy
lewd-ly lewdly lewd-ness lewdness li-bel libel let-tice lettice le-vel level
li-cense license li-cens'd licensed lick-ed licked lick-ing licking li-ars
liars li-eth lies lifeguard lifeguard lift-ed lifted lift-ing lifting
light-en lighten light-ness lightness light-ning lightning light-some lightsome
like-ness likeness like-ing likeing like-wise likewise like-ly likely lil-lies
lillies lim-mit limmit li-neage lineage li-ning lining ling-ring lingering
lin-nen linen lim-ner limner lin-tel lintel li-on lion li-quors liquors
list-ed listed list-ner listner list-ning listening lit-tle little li-ved lived
li-ving living li-ver liver live-ly lively load-en laden loath-ing loathing
loath-some loathsome lob-cock lobcock lob-by lobby lob-ster lobster lobs-pound
lobspound lo-cal local lo-cust locust lock-ed locked lod-ger lodger lodg-ing
lodging lof-ty lofty log-wood logwood lol-ling lolling lon-ger longer long-ing
longing long-bow longbow long-gun longgun long-legs longlegs long-meg longmeg
long-pike longpike long-sword longsword long-staff longstaff look-ed looked
look-ing looking loos-ed loosed lo-ser loser lo-sing losing loud-er louder
lo-ving loving lo-ver lover love-ly lovely lord-ship lordship lord-ly lordly
low-er lower low-ing lowing low-ly lowly lowr-ing lowering lukewarm lukewarm
lurk-ing lurking lust-ing lusting lus-ty lusty lute-string lutestring lush-ious
lushious ly-ar liar ly-ing lying ly-zard lyzard
M. M.
Mack-rel Mackrel ma-dam madam ma-dest made mad-der madder madman madman
mad-ness madness mag-got maggot mag-pie magpie ma-gick magic maid-child
maidchild mai-den maiden maim-ed maimed main-prize mainprize main-tain maintain
mai-or mayor ma-ker maker ma-king making makebate makebate make-strife
makestrife ma-lice malice mal-lows mallows mal-lard mallard mal-let mallet
malt-ster maltster mam-mon mammon man-child manchild man-drake mandrake man-ger
manger man-gie mangie mankind mankind man-ly manly man-na manna man-ned manned
man-ners manners man-nour manor man-nage manage man-tle mantle mant-ling
mantling ma-ny many mar-ble marble mar-bling marbling march-ed marched
march-ing marching march-on marchon march-pain marchpain mark-ed marked mark-et
market mar-red marred manhood manhood ma-lign malign ma-nure manure mar-gin
margin ma-rine marine mar-ring marring mar-row marrow mar-ry marry mar-quess
marquess mar-shal marshal mar-tyn martyn mar-tyr martyr mar-vel marvel mat-tock
mattock ma-son mason mas-sy massy mas-ter master ma-trix matrix mat-ter matter
ma-ture mature ma-tron matron may day mayday may game maygame may-est may
mea-dow meadow meak-ing meaking meal-tub mealtub mea-ly mealy mean-ing meaning
mea-sure measure med-dal meddal med-dle meddle med-lar medlar med-ling meddling
meek-ness meekness meer-ly merely mee-ting meeting mel-lon mellon mel-low
mellow melt-ing melting mee-ter meeter me-grim megrim mem-ber member mem-brain
membrain mend-ing mending mer-cer mercer mer-chant merchant mer-cy mercy
mer-cies mercies mer-maid mermaid mer-ry merry mes-sage message mes-ses messes
met-tal metal mew-ing mewing midday midday mid-dle middle mid-lent midlent
midnight midnight midwife midwife mid-wives midwives migh-ty mighty mil-dew
mildew milch-asse milchasse milch-cow milchcow mild-ness mildness milk-pail
milkpail milk-sop milksop mil-ler miller mil-led milled mil-stone millstone
min-ced minced min-cing mincing mind-ing minding mind-ful mindful mine-ing
mineing mi-ner miner min-gle mingle ming-ling mingling mi-nor minor min-stril
minstril mi-ry miry mir-rour mirror mis-chief mischief mis-done misdone
mis-laid mislaid mis-got misgot misled misled mis-sing missing mis-tress
mistress mis-hap mishap mis-like mislike mis-pend mispend mis-trust mistrust
mis-take mistake mis-use misuse mis-word misword mit-tens mittens mix-ed mixed
mix-ing mixing mix-ture mixture mock-ers mockers mock-ing mocking mock-play
mockplay mock-song mocksong mo-dest modest mo-del model mo-dern modern mo-dish
modish mo-gul mogul moist-ning moistning mois-ture moisture mol-ten molten
mo-ment moment mole-hil molehil mon-key monkey month-ly monthly mo-ney money
mons-ter monster moan-ing moaning mon-strous monstrous mo-ping moping mo-pus
mopus mop-ey'd mopey'd mo-ral moral moor-ish moorish mor-gage morgage mor-ning
morning mor-row morrow mor-sel morsel mor-tal mortal mor-ter mortar mor-tus
mortus moo-dy moody mo-ther mother moot-ing mooting mo-ted moted mo-ved moved
mo-ving moving move-ment movement mon-day monday moul-dy moldy moul-ting
moulting moun-tain mountain mount-ed mounted mount-ing mounting mourn-ing
mourning mourn-er mourner mourn-ful mournful mouth-ing mouthing mouth-gum
mouthgum mow-ed mowed mow-er mower mow-ing mowing mud-dy muddy muf-fled muffled
muf-fler muffler muf-fling muffling muf-ty mufty mug-gets muggets mul-ler
muller mul-sack mulsack mum-my mummy mump-er mumper mump-ing mumping mum-ble
mumble mum-bling mumbling mur-der murder mur-mure murmr mur-rain murrain
mur-rey murrey mu-sing musing mu-sick music mus-tard mustard mus-ter muster
mut-ton mutton muz-zle muzzle muz-zled muzzled myr-tle myrtle my-ter myter
N. N.
Nab-bed Nabbed nags-head nagshead nail-ed nailed nail-ing nailing na-ked naked
na-med named name-ly namely nap-kin napkin nap-ping napping nar-row narrow
na-tive native na-ture nature na-val naval na-vel navel naugh-ty naughty na-vy
navy neck-lace necklace near-er nearer neat-ness neatness need-ful needful
need-less needless nee-dy needy nee-dle needle neez-ing neezing nec-tar nectar
nec-trel nectrel neg-lect neglect neigh-bour neighbor neigh-ing neighing
nei-ther neither ne-phew nephew ne-ther nether net-tles nettles net-led netled
network network ne-ver never neu-ter neuter new-er newer new-inn newinn new-ly
newly newness newness new-wine newwine nib-bling nibbling nick-ing nicking
nig-gard niggard night-hawk nighthawk nightmare nightmare nightshade
nightshade nim-ble nimble nim-ming nimming nine-days ninedays ninth-ly ninthly
nine-pence ninepence nine-pound ninepound nine-score ninescore nine-teen
nineteen nine-teenth nineteenth nine-ty ninety no-ble noble no-bler nobler
nod-dle noddle nod-ding nod-ding nod-dy nod-dy nog-gin noggin noi-som noisome
noi-sed noised nom-pril nompril nonage nonage nonsense nonsense nonsuit
nonsuit noonday noonday noon-ing nooning noontide noontide north-side
northside north-ern northern north-gate northgate north-point northpoint
north pole northpole north-wards northwards north-west northwest north wind
northwind nor-man norman nose-gay nosegay ^o-ses noses ^o-sing nosing ^os-trils
nostrils ^o-ted noted no-thing nothing no-tice notice no-ting noting no-vel
novel no-vice novice nou-rish nourish nub-bing nubbing nul-led nulled num-bers
numbers num-bring numbering nur-ses nurses nur-sing nursing nur-ture nurture
nut-meg nutmeg nut-ting nutting nut-tree nuttree
O. O.
Oa-ten Oaten oat-cake oatcake o-bey obey ob-lige oblige ob-ject object
ob-scene ob-scene ob-scure obscure ob-serve observe ob-tain obtain o-dours
odours ob-struct obstruct oc-cur occur of-fence offense of-fend of-fend of-fals
offals of-fer offer of-fice office offspring offspring of-ten often of-test
oftest oft-ner oftener old-boy oldboy old age oldage old-cole oldcole old-cuff
oldcuff old-er older old-est oldest old-ling oldling old man oldman old-ofe
oldofe old-rock oldrock old-sim oldsim old-time oldtime o-live olive o-men omen
o-mer omer oi-ly oily oint-ment ointment ois-ter oister o-mit omit on-ly only
onset onset o-nyx onyx on-wards onwards o-pen open op-pose oppose op-press
oppress op-pugn oppugn or-chard orchard or-dain ordain or-der order or-gans
organs or-phan orphan or-ris orris os-trich ostrich ot-ter otter o-ther other
o-val oval o-ven oven o-ver over ought-est ought out-eat outeat outcast
outcast outdo outdo out-go outgo out-make outmake outlaw outlaw out-lye
outlye outrun outrun outside outside out-ward outward out-went outwent
out-work outwork out-yawn outyawn ow-est owe ow-ing owing own-er owner
own-ing owning ox-en oxen oyl-tree oyltree oyl-jarr oyljarr o-range orange
P. P.
Pa-ces Paces pa-cing pacing pack-er packer pack-ing packing pack-thred
packthred pac-quet packet pad-der padder pad-ding padding pad-dling paddling
pad-lock padlock pad-nag padnag pa-ges pages pail-ful pailful pain-ed pained
pain-ful painful pain-ter painter paint-ing painting pa-ler paler pale-ness
paleness pa-lace palace pa-late palate pal-mer palmer palm tree palmtree
pal-sie palsy pal-fry palfry pam-per pamper pam-pos pampos pant-ed panted
pan-ther panther pant-ing panting pan-try pantry par-boyl parboyl par-cel
parcel parch-ed parched parch-ment parchment par-don pardon pa-rents parents
pa-rish parish pa-per paper pa-ring paring par-ley parley par-lour parlour
pars-ley parsley part-ed parted par-ties parties par-ting parting part-ners
partners par-tridge partridge pas-sage passage pas-chal paschal pas-sing
passing pas-tor pastor pas-ture pasture past-board pastboard passport passport
past-ing pasting past-boul pastboul pas-time pastime past-brush pastbrush
patch-es patches pas-ty pasty pathway pathway pat-tern pattern pat-tins
pattins pat-tent pattent pa-trole patrole pa-ving paving pave-ment pavement
pave-stones pavestones pa-ved paved paw-ing pawing paw-ned pawned pay-day
payday pay-ed paid pay-ing paying pay-ment payment pea-cock peacock pea-hen
peahen pease-cod peasecod pea-ches peaches pear-maine pearmain^ pear-plumb
pearplum^ pear tree peartree peak-ing peaking pea-sant peasant peb-bles pebbles
peck-ing pecking ped-ler peddler ped-ling pedling peel-ing peeling peep-ing
peeping peer-age peerage peer-ing peering pe-rish perish peg-ging pegging
penknife penknife pen-ny penny pe-nal penal pen-sive pensive peo-ple people
pep-per pepper per-ceive perceive per-cent percent per-chance perchance per-due
perdue per-fect perfect per-force perforce per-form perform per-fume perfume
per-haps perhaps pe-ril peril pe-rish perish per-mit permit per-pale perpale
per-plex perplex per-role perrole per-sist persist per-son person per-swade
persuade per-jur'd perjured per-vert pervert per-verse perverse per-week
perweek pes-tle pestle pet-ty petty pet-tish pettish pew-ter pewter pib-ble
pibble pick-ing picking phea-sant pheasant phra-ses phrases pick-le pickle
pick-locks picklocks pick-thank pickthank pick-straw pickstraw pick-out pickout
pic-ture picture pid-ling pidling pide-bull pidebull pid-ling pidling pie-ces
pieces pier-cer piercer pier-cing piercing pie-plate pieplate pigs-nye pigsnye
pigs-head pigshead pig-hill pighill pig-sty pigsty pil-chard pilchard pilch-ing
pilching pil-fer pilfer pil-grim pilgrim pil-lage pillage pil-lar pillar
pil-low pillow pi-lot pilot pimp-ing pimping pin-box pinbox pin-case pincase
pine tree pinetree pin-ner pinner pinch-ing pinching pi-ning pining pin-nace
pinnace ^i-ous pious ^i-ped piped pip-kin pipkin pip-pin pippin pi-ping piping
piss-clout pissclout piss-house pisshouse pis-sing pissing pis-tol pistol
pitch-ed pitched pitch-ing pitching pitch-er pitcher pit-coale pitcoale
pit-hole pithole pit-ty pity pla-ces places pla-cing placing plack-et placket
pla-gued plagued plain-case plaincase plain-er plainer plain-ness plainness
plain-ly plainly plain-terms plainterms plain-truth plaintruth plain-thing
plainthing plan-net plannet plant-ed planted plan-ter planter plant-ing
planting plait-ing plaiting plais-ter plaster plat-ted platted plat-ter
platter play-ers players play-ing playing play-well playwell play-fair playfair
play-foul playfoul play-not playnot plea-der pleader plead-ing pleading
plea-sant pleasant plea-sing pleasing plea-sure pleasure pled-ges pledges
pledg-ing pledging plen-ty plenty plod-ding plodding plot-ter plotter plot-ting
plotting plow-ed plowed plow-ing plowing plowman plowman plow-share plowshare
plowd-land plow'dland pluck-ing plucking plug-ging plugging plumb-line
plumbline plumb-tree plumbtree plum-met plummet plum-mer plummer plun-ged
plunged plush-coat plushcoat plu-ral plural pock-ets pockets pock-holes
pockholes po-et poet point-ing pointing poi-son poison poke-ing pokeing
pol-lish pollish pol-led polled pol-lute pollute pole-cat polecat po-mel pomel
pomp-kin pompkin poor-er poorer pon-der ponder pop-lar poplar pop-ring popring
pop-ping popping porch-es porches por-kit porkit por-ter porter po-sie posie
po-sing posing pos-ses posses pos-set posset post-boy postboy post-ed posted
post-horn posthorn post-horse posthorse post house posthouse post-pone postpone
post-stage poststage pot-sherd potsherd pot-tage pottage pot-ted potted pot-ter
potter pot-lid potlid pot-luck potluck pot-ting potting pos-ture posture
pouch-es pouches poul-try poultry poun-dage poundage poun-ding pounding
pounce-ing pounceing pour-ed poured pour-ing pouring pour-traict pourtraict
pour-tray pourtray pout-ing pouting pow-der powder pow-er power poy-son poison
pra-ctice practice prai-ses praises prai-sing praising pran-cing prancing
pra-ting prating pra-ter prater prate-roast prateroast pray-ers prayers
pray-ing praying preach-er preacher preach-ing preaching pre-cepts precepts
pre-cise precise pre-cede precede pre-dict predict pre-fer prefer pre-face
preface pre-late prelate pre-lude prelude pre-pare prepare pre-sage presage
pre-sence presence pre-sent present pre-scribe prescribe pre-serve preserve
pres-sed pressed press-fat pressfat pres-sing pressing pre-sume presume
pre-tence pretense pre-tend pretend pre-tor praetor pret-ty pretty pre-vail
prevail pre-vent prevent prey-ing preying prick-ers prickers prick-ing pricking
prick-louse pricklouse pride-ing prideing prig-gers priggers priesthood
priesthood prin-ces princes prin-cess princess prink-ing prinking prin-ters
printers print-ing printing pri-son prison prit-tle prittle pri-vy privy
pri-zes prizes pri-zing prizing pri-zers prizers pro-bate probate pro-bing
probing pro-ceed proceed pro-cess process pro-claim proclaim pro-cure procure
pro-duce produce pro-duct product pro-fane profane prof-fer proffer pro-fess
profess pro-fit profit pro-found profound pro-gress progress pro-ject project
pro-long prolong pro-mote pro-mote pro-mise promise pro-nounce pronounce
pro-phane profane pro-per proper pro-phet prophet pros-pect prospect pros-per
prosper pro-tect protect pro-logue prologue pro-pose propose pro-pound propound
pro-rogue prorogue pro-strate prostrate pro-test protest pro-tract protract
proud-er prouder proud-ly proudly pro-ved proved pro-ving proving pro-verb
proverb pro-vide provide pro-vince province pro-voke provoke prow-ess prowess
pru-dence prudence pru-dent prudent pru-ned pruned pru-ning pruning pry-ing
prying psal-mist psalmist psal-ter psalter pub-lick public pub-lish publish
pud-ding pudding pud-dle puddle pud-ling pudling puf-fing puffing pul-let
pullet pul-ling pulling pul-pit pulpit pu-mice pumice pump-ing pumping pun-ning
punning pun-ish punish pup-py puppy pur-blind purblind pur-chase purchase
pur-ging purging pur-ling purling pure-ly purely pure-ness pureness pur-loyn
purloyn pur-ple purple pur-port purport pur-pose purpose pur-ring purring
pur-ses purses pur-sing pursing pur-sue pursue push-ed pushed push-ing pushing
put-ting putting pul-ses puls^^ pye-meat pyemeat pye-plate pyeplate
Q. Q.
Quack-ing Quacking quaf-fing quaffing quag-mire quagmire qua-ked quaked
qua-king quaking quaint-ness quaintness quart-pot quartpot quar-tern quartern
quar-ters quarters quar-rel quarrel quar-ry quarry quash-ed quashed qua-ver
quaver quel-led quelled quench-ed quenched quench-ing quenching que-rie querie
quer-ry querry quest-ale questale qu^st-men questmen q^ib-ble quibble quick-en
quicken quick-ly quickly quic^^ness quickness quic^^sands quicksands qui-et
quiet quif-fing quiffing quil-led quilled quil-let quillet quilt-ed quilted
quin-ces quinces quit-tance quittance quit-ted quitted quit-ting quitting
quod-ling quodling qui-ver quiver quo-rum quorum quo-ted quoted
R. R.
Rab-bet Rabbet rab-ble rabble rack-ed racked rack-et racket rack-ing racking
ra-cy racy ra-dish radish raf-ters rafters raf-fling raffling ra-ged raged
ra-ging raging rag-ged ragged rag-man ragman rail-ing railing rai-ment raiment
rainbow rainbow rai-ny rainy rai-sed raised rai-sins raisins rake-hel rakehel
ral-by ralby ramb-ling rambling ram-pant rampant ram-mer rammer ran-cle rancle
ran-cour rancour ran-dan randan ran-ging ranging ran-sack ransack ran-som
ransom ra-pine rapine rare-ly rarely rash-ly rashly rash-ness rashness
rats-bane ratsbane ra-ther rather rat-tle rattle rat-tling rattling rat-tled
rattled ra-ven raven ra-vish ravish ra-zor razor raw-bone rawbone raw-ness
rawness reach-ing reaching read-er reader read-ing reading rea-dy ready re-al
real rea-per reaper reap-ing reaping rear-ing rearing rea-son reason re-bate
rebate re-beg rebeg re-bel rebel re-build rebuild rebuilt rebuilt re-buke
rebuke re-bound rebound re-ceit receipt re-ceive receive re-cal recall re-cant
recant re-cess recess re-ceipt recei^^ re-claim reclaim reck-on reckon re-cords
records re-coil recoil re-count recount re-coil recoil re-cruit recruit
red-dish reddish red-chalk redchalk red-lead redlead red-ness redness re-deem
redeem red-cow redcow red-deer reddeer re-dound redound re-dourd redourd
re-doubts redoubts re-dress redress re-fer refer re-fine refine re-flect
reflect re-frain refrain re-form reform re-fresh refresh re-fuge refuge re-fund
refund re-fuse refuse re-fute refute re-gain regain re-gard regard re-hearse
rehearse re-ject reject reign-ing reigning re-joyce rejoice rejoyne rejoyne
re-late relate re-lease release re-lief relief re-lieve relieve re-lict relict
re-lish relish re-ly rely re-main remain re-mand remand re-mind remind re-miss
remiss re-mit remit rem-nant remnant re-marks remarks re-morse remorse re-mote
remote re-move remove ren-der render ren-dring rendering ren-ding rending re-nue
renew re-new renew re-nounce renounce re-nown renown rent-er renter rent-ing
renting re-pair repair re-past repast re-pay repay re-peal repeal re-peat
repeat re-pel repel re-pent repent re-pine repine re-ply reply re-pose repose
re-port report re-proach reproach re-proof reproof re-prove reprove re-pute
repute re-quire require re-quite requite re-quest request rear-age rearage
rear-ward rearward res-cue rescue re-serve reserve re-side reside re-sist
resist re-site resite re-sign resign re-solve resolve re-sort resort re-spect
respect res-pit respit rest-ed rested rest-ing resting re-store restore
re-strain restrain re-straint restrai^^ re-sult result re-tain retain re-tard
retard re-tire retire re-tract retract re-turn return re-treat retreat re-veal
reveal re-venge revenge re-verse reverse re-view review re-vile revile re-vise
revise re-vive revive re-voke revoke re-volt revolt re-ward reward rib-bond
ribbon^ rich-es riches rich-ly richly rid-dance riddanc^ rid-den ridden rid-dle
riddle ri-der rider ri-ding riding ri-fle rifle ridg-es ridges right-ly rightly
ri-gour rigor rim-ming rimming rin-sed rinsed ri-ot riot ri-pen ripen ri-per
riper ri-sen risen ri-sing rising ri-ver river roar-ed roared roar-^^g roaring
rob-bers robbers rob-bing robbing roe-buck roebuck ro-guish roguish rol-ler
roller rol-ling rolling ro-man roman root-ed rooted ropes-end ropesend rost-ed
roasted rost-ing rosting rot-ten rotten ro-vers rovers rough-ly roughly
round-house roundhouse row-ers rowers row-ed rowed rou-zing rouzing roy-al
royal rub-bing rubbing rub-bish rubbish ru-bie rubie rud-dy ruddy ru-in ruin
ru-ler ruler ru-ling ruling rumb-ling rumbling ru-mour rumor run-nest runnest
rush-ing rushing rus-ty rusty rug-ged rugged rup-ture rupture rut-ting rutting
S. S.
Sab-bath Sabbath sack-but sackbut sackcloth sackcloth sad-dle saddle sad-dled
saddled sad-ly sadly sad-ness sadness sad-ler sadler safeguard safeguard
safe-ly safely safe-ness safeness safe-ty safety saf-fron saffron sa-ges sages
sa-cred sacred said-est saidest sail-ers sailers sail-ing sailing salt-ed
salted salt-ness saltness sa-lute salute sam-ple sample san-dals sandals san-dy
sandy sa-phire sapphire sar-dine sardine sa-tan satan sat-chel satchel sat-est
satest sa-tyr satyr sa-ved saved sa-ving saving sa-vage savage sa-vour savor
san-guine sanguine sau-sage sausage sau-cy saucy saw-ing sawing saw-yer sawyer
say-ing saying scab-bard scabbard scab-by scabby scaf-fold scaffold sca-ling
scaling scarce-ness scarceness scan-dal scandal sca-rest scarest scald-ed
scalded scar-let scarlet scat-ter scatter scant-ling scantling scar-red scarred
scep-ter scepter scho-lar scholar school-ing schooling sci-ence science
scof-fers scoffers scorch-ed scorched scorn-ing scorning scorn-ful scornful
scou-ring scouring scourg-ed scourged scram-ble scramble scra-ping scraping
scrich-owl scrichowl scrip-ture scripture scrib-ble scribble scratch-ing
scratching sco-ring scoring scold-ing scolding scoul-ing scouling scrive-ner
scrivener scrol-ling scrolling scru-ple scruple scur-vy scurvy scuf-fle scuffle
seal-ed sealed search-ers searchers search-ing searching sear-ed seared sea-son
season seat-ed seated se-cond second se-cret secret se-cure secure se-duce
seduce seam-ster seamster see-ing seeing seek-ing seeking seem-ly seemly se-er
seer seeth-ing seething sei-sed seized sel-dom seldom self-will selfwill se-lah
selah sel-ling selling sel-vedge selvedge se-nate senate send-ing sending
sense-less senseless sen-ses senses sent-est sentest sen-tence sentence
ser-pent serpent ser-vant servant ser-jant serjant ser-mon sermon ser-vice
service ser-vile servile ser-ving serving set-ter setter set-ting setting
set-tle settle set-tled settled se^ven seven se-venth seventh se-ver sever
sex-ton sexton sha-dow shadow sha-dy shady sha-king shaking sham-bles shambles
sew-ed sewed shal-low shallow sha-med shamed shame-ful shameful sham-my shammy
sha-ped shaped sha-ring sharing shar-pen sharpen sharp-ness sharpness sha-ving
shaving shear-ing shearing shed-ding shedding sheath-ed sheathed sheep-coat
sheepcoat sheepfold sheepfold sheep-gate sheepgate sheep-ish sheepish
sheepskins sheepskins she-kel shekel shel-ter shelter shep-herd shepherd
she-riffe sheriff shewbread shewbread shew-eth shows shew-ing showing
shi-ning shining shipboard shipboard ship-man shipman shipwreck shipwreck
ship-wright shipwright shield-ing shielding shil-ling shilling ship-ping
shipping shit-ten shitten shi-vers shivers shod-den shodden shoot-ing shooting
shor-ten shorten shot-ten shotten sho-vel shovel shoul-der shoulder shout-ing
shouting shun-ning shunning shut-tle shuttle shut-ting shutting shread-ing
shreading shreek-ing shreeking shrew-ish shrewish shril-ler shriller shrink-ing
shrinking shrub-ing shrubing sic-kle sickle sick-ly sickly sick-ness sickness
sides-man sidesman sie-ges sieges sif-ted sifted sigh-ing sighing sig-net
signet sign-ed signed si-lence silence si-lent silent sil-ly silly sil-ver
silver sight-ed sighted sim-ple simple sim-ply simply sin-cere sincere sin-ner
sinner si-news sinews sin-ful sinful sin-ged singed sin-ger singer sing-ing
singing sin-gle single sin-ned sinned sin-ner sinner sin-ning sinning sir-rah
sirrah sis-ter sister sit-ting sitting six-teen sixteen six-teenth sixteenth
six-score sixscore six-ty sixty skil-ful skilful skil-let skillet skip-per
skipper skip-ping skipping slack-ness slackness slan-der slander slant-ing
slanting slap-ped slapped slash-ing slashing slaugh-ter slaughter sla-vish
slavish slay-ing slaying sleep-ing sleeping sleeve-less sleeveless slew-ed
slewed sli-der sli^er slight-ness slightness sling-stones slingstones slin-ger
slinger slip-ping slipping slen-der slender slip-pers slippers sloth-ful
slothful slow-ly slowly slo-ven sloven ^lu-ces sluices ^lug-gard sluggard
^lum-ber slumber ^lum-bring slumbring ^mal-lest smallest ^mel-ling smelling
^mi-ter smiter ^mit-ten smitten smoa-ky smoaky smock-face smockface smooth-er
smoother smooth-ness smoothness smo-ther smother smo-test smotest sno-red
snored sno-ring snoring sno-wy snowy snatch-ing snatching sna-ring snaring
sneak-ing sneaking sneez-ing sneezing snuf-fers snuffers snuf-fing snuffing
soak-ed soaked sob-bing sobbing so-ber sober sock-et socket so-der soder
sod-den sodden sof-ten soften sof-ter softer soft-ly softly soft-ness softness
so-journ sojourn so-lace solace so-lar solar so-lemn solemn so-lid solid
something something sometimes sometimes somewhat somewhat song-ster songster
son-net sonnet soo-ner sooner sooth-ing soothing soar-ing soaring so-phism
sophism sop-ping sopping sor-did sordid sore-ly sorely sore-ness soreness
so-rer sorer sor-rel sorrel sor-ry sorry sor-row sorrow sot-tish sottish
sound-ing sounding sound-ness soundness soup-ing souping southward southward
south-west southwest south-ern southern south wind southwind sow-er sower
sow-ing sowing sowr-ing sowring sowr-ly sowrly spa-ding spading spa-king
spaking span-gles spangles span-ning spanning spa-nish spanish spare-rib
sparerib spa-ring sparing spark-les sparkles spark-ling sparkling spawn-ing
spawning spar-row sparrow spar-tans spartans speak-er speaker speak-ing
speaking spear-men spearmen speck-led speckled spec-tors spectors speech-es
speeches speech-less speechless spee-dy speedy spel-ling spelling spend-ing
spending spend-thrift spendthrift spew-ing spewing spi-ces spices spi-der
spider spik-nard spiknard spil-ling spilling spin-ner spinner spin-ning
spinning spin-dle spindle spin-ster spinster spi-rit spirit spite-ful spiteful
spit-ted spitted spit-ting spitting spit-tle spittle spoil-ing spoiling spo-ken
spoken sport-ing sporting spot-ted spotted spot-less spotless sprain-ing
spraining spraw-ling sprawling spread-ing spreading sprig-ging sprigging
spring-ing springing sprin-kle sprinkle sprink-ling sprinkling sprout-ing
sprouting spru-cing sprucing squab-ling squabling squan-der squander squi-ning
squining squa-ring squaring squeak-ing squeaking squash-ing squashing
squint-ing squinting squat-ting squatting squir-rel squirrel squawl-ing
squawling stab-bed stabbed sta-ble stable sta-blish stablish stag-ger stagger
stain-ing staining stalled stalled staid-ness staidness stalk-ing stalking
stam-mer stammer stamp-ed stamped stanch-ing stanching stan-dard standard
stand-ing standing state-ly stately starch-ing starching stare-ing staring
start-ing starting start-le startle star-ved starved star-ry starry starlight
starlight sta-ture stature sta-tutes statutes sta-ved staved stay-ing staying
steal-ing stealing stea-dy steady sted-dy steady step-ping stepping stee-ple
steeple steer-ing steering stew-ard steward stew-ing stewing stick-ing sticking
stiff-neckt stiffneckt stil-led stilled stil-ness stilness sting-ing stinging
stink-ing stinking stint-ed stinted sti-pend stipend stir-ring stirring
stir-rop stirrup stitch-ing stitching sti-ver stiver stock-ing stocking sto-ick
stoic sto-mach stomach sto-ned stoned sto-ny stony stool-ball stoolball
stoop-ing stooping stop-ping stopping stop-per stopper sto-ry story stor-my
stormy stout-ly stoutly stout-ness stoutness strag-ling straggling strain-ing
straining straight-est straightest straight-ly straightly straight-ness
straightness strand-ed stranded stran-ger stranger strange-ness strangeness
strang-ling strangling strap-ped strapped straw-ed strawed stray-ed strayed
stream-ers streamers strength-en strengthen stretch-ing stretching stri-king
striking strick-en stricken string-ed stringed strip-ped stripped strip-ling
stripling stri-ving striving stroak-ing stroaking stro-ling stroling strong-est
strongest strow-ings strowings strug-ling struggling strum-pet strumpet stub-ble
stubble stub-born stubborn stud-ded studded stu-dy study stuf-fing stuffing
stumb-ling stumbling stum-ming stumming stump-ing stumping stun-ned stunned
stur-dy sturdy stur-geon sturgeon sub-born subborn sub-dean subdean sub-due
subdue sub-ject subject sub-lime sublime sub-mit sumit sub-joyn subjoyn
sub-junct subjunct sub-scribe subscribe sub-sist subsist sub-stance substance
sub-stract substract sub-til subtle sub-vert subvert su-burbs suburbs suc-ceed
succeed suc-c^ss success suc-cour succor suck-ed sucked suck-ing sucking
suck-ling suckling sud-den sudden suf-fer suffer suf-fice suffice suf-frage
suffrage su-gar sugar sug-gest suggest suit-ed suited sul-phur sulphur sum-med
summed sum-mer summer sump-ter sumpter sunburned sunburnt sun-day sunday
sun-der sunder sun-ny sunny sunshine sunshine sup-per supper sup-ped supped
sup-plant supplant sup-ply supply sup-ple supple sup-port support sup-pose
suppose su-preme supreme sup-press suppress ^ure-ly surely ^ure-ness sureness
^ure-ty surety ^ur-fit surfit ^ur-ly surly ^ur-mise surmise ^ur-mount surmount
^ur-name surname sur-round surround sus-pect suspect sus-tain sustain swab-ber
swabber swad-led swadled swad-ling swaddling swag-ger swagger swal-low swallow
swap-ping swapping swarm-ing swarming swa-ring swaring swear-ing swearing
sweat-ing sweating sweep-ing sweeping sweet-er sweeter sweet-ly sweetly
sweet-ness sweetness swel-ling swelling swer-ved swerved swift-ness swiftness
swig-gen swiggen swil-ling swilling swim-ming swimming swing-ing swinging
swol-len swollen swoon-ing swooning sym-bal symbal sym-nel symnel symp-tom
symptom sy-nod synod sy-rup syrup sy-stem system
T. T.
Ta-ber Taber ta-ble table tack-ing tacking tack-ling tackling tag-ging tagging
tai-lor tailor tail-piece tailpiece ta-ken taken ta-lent talent talk-ing
talking tal-ler taller tal-low tallow tal-ly tally ta-med tamed tam-my tammy
tam-per tamper tan-gent tangent tan-kard tankard tan-ned tanned tan-sie tansie
ta-per taper tap-lash taplash tap-ping tapping tap-ster tapster tar-dy tardy
tar-get target tar-nish tarnish tar-ras tarras tar-ry tarry tast-er taster
tast-ing tasting tat-ling tatling ta-vern tavern taunt-ing taunting tax-es
taxes tax-ing taxing teach-ing teaching teach-er teacher tear-ing tearing
teem-ing teeming tel-ling telling tem-per temper tem-pler templer temp-ter
tempter temp-ting tempting tem-pest tempest ten-der tender tend-ing tending
ten-nor tennor te-nour tenor ten-pence tenpence tenth-part tenthpart term-ed
termed ter-rour terror thank-ed thanked thankful thankful thatch-er thatcher
thatch-ing thatching them-selves themselves thence-forth thenceforth there-by
thereby there-fore therefore therefrom therefrom there-in therein thereof
thereof there-on thereon there-out thereout therewith therewith thie-ving
thieving thick-et thicket thick-ness thickness thigh-ing thighing thim-ble
thimble think-ing thinking third-ly thirdly thirs-ty thirsty thir-teen thirteen
thir-teenth thirteenth thir-ty thirty this-tle thistle thi-ther thither thor-ny
thorny tho-row through thought-est thoughtest thou-sand thousand threat-ning
threatening threefold threefold threescore threescore thresh-ing threshing
thresh-er thresher thre-shold threshold threw-est threwest thrif-ty thrifty
throb-bing throbbing throng-ing throng-ing through-ly thoroughly thros-ter
throster through-ly thoroughly through-out throughout throw-ing throwing
thrust-ing thrusting thum-mim thummim thum-ming thumming thun-der thunder
thurs-day thursday thwart-ing thwarting tick-ing ticking ti-dings tidings
til-lage tillage ti-ling tiling til-ling tilling tilt-ing tilting tim-ber
timber tim-brel timbrel time-ly timely tin-der tinder tinc-ture tincture
tin-gle tingle tin-ned tinned tink-ling tinkling tin-sel tinsel tip-ling
tippling tip-staffe tipstaffe ti-ring tiring ti-thing tithing ti-tle title
tit-tle tittle ti-vy tivy toast-ing toasting toi-ling toiling toil-some
toilsome to-ken token tol-ling tolling tom-boy tomboy tombstone tombstone
ton-cer toncer took-est tookest top-ping topping to-ping toping torch-es
torches tor-ment torment tor-toise tortoise tor-ture torture tor-rent torrent
to-ryes toryes toss-pot tosspot tos-sed tossed tos-sing tossing touch-ing
touching to-ward toward tow-el towel to-tal total tough-ness toughness tow-er
tower tow-ed towed town clerk townclerk town-bull townbull townhouse townhouse
tra-ded traded tra-ding trading track-ing tracking traf-fick traffic train-ing
training trai-tor traitor tram-mel trammel tram-ple trample trans-act transact
tran-scend transcend trans-form transform trans-fer transfer trans-gress
transgress trans-pose transpose tran-slate translate trans-verse transverse
trap-ball trap-ball trap-stick trapstick tra-pan trapan trap-pings trappings
trap-door trap-door trash-y trashy tra-vel travel tra-verse traverse trea-cle
treacle tread-ing treading trea-son treason trea-sure treasure trea-tise
treatise tre-ble treble trem-ble tremble trem-bling trembling tren-ches
trenches tren-cher trencher tres-pass trespass tre-foil trefoil tri-al trial
tri-bute tribute tri-bune tribune trick-le trickle trick-ling trickling
tri-dent trident tri-ed tried tri-fles trifles trig-ging trigging trim-ming
trimming trin-kets trinkets trip-ping tripping trod-den trodden trol-lups
trollups troop-er trooper trou-ble trouble trou-bled troubled tru-ant truant
trou-zers trouzers troun-cing trouncing tru-ly truly trum-pet trumpet trust-ing
trusting trus-ty trusty tub-man tubman tuck-ing tucking tues-day tuesday
tug-ging tugging tu^lip tulip tumb-ling tumbling tum-bler tumbler tu-mult
tumult tun-ning tunning tur-ky turkey turn-ed turned turn-ing turning turn-coat
turncoat tur-ret turret tur-tle turtle tur-moil turmoil tu-tor tutor tu-mor
tumor twen-ty twenty twilight twilight twink-ling twinkling twirl-ing twirling
ty-rant tyrant
V. V.
Va-cant Vacant va-grant vagrant vail-ed veiled vain-ly vainly val-ley valley
val-lence vallence va-lour valor va-lue value vamp-ed vamped va-nish vanish
va-pour vapor van-quish vanquish var-nish varnish vas-sal vassal vault-ing
vaulting vaunt-ing vaunting vel-lum vellum vel-vet velvet vend-ing vending
ven-nom vennom ven-ture venture ver-dure verdure ver-juice verjuice ver-ger
verger ver-ry verry ver-ses verses ver-tue virtue ver-vels vervels ves-pers
vespers ves-sel vessel vest-ment vestment vest-ry vestry ves-ture vesture
vex-ed vexed vi-al vi-al vi-ands viands vi-car vi-car vi-ces vi-ces view-ed
viewed vic-tor victor vi-gils vigils vil-lage village vil-lain villain vi-lest
vilest vile-ness vileness vint-ner vintner vin-tage vintage vineyard vineyard
vi-ol viol vi-per viper vir-gin virgin vi-sage visage vi-sit visit un-cle uncle
un-clean unclean un-der under un-doe undo un-done undone un-couth uncouth
un-fold unfold un-just unjust un-kind unkind un-known unknown un-lade unlade
un-less unless un-let unlet un-load unload un-loose unloose u-nite unite um-ber
umber un-rigg unrigg un-ripe unripe un-roast unroast un-seen unseen un-sarv'd
unsarv'd un-sent unsent un-shod unshod un-sound unsound un-taught untaught
un-til until un-wise unwise void-ing voiding vol-ly volly vo-lume volume vo-mit
vomit vo-ting voting vouch-ing vouching vow-ed vowed vouch-safe vouchsafe
vow-el vowel voy-age voyage up-braid upbraid up-held upheld up-hold uphold
up-on upon up-per upper up-right upright up-roar uproar up-side upside up-pish
uppish up-wards upwards ur-chin urchin ur-gent urgent u-rine urine u-sage usage
u-sed used u-ses uses use-less useless use-ful useful u-sing using u-surp usurp
ush-er usher ut-most utmost ut-ter utter vul-gar vulgar vul-ture vulture
W. W.
Wa-ding Wading wad-dle waddle wa-fer wafer waft-ing wafting wa-ges wages
wa-ger wager wag-ging wagging wag-gon wagon wai^-ing wailing wain-scot
wainscot wain-ing waining wait-ing waiting wa-king waking walk-ing walking
wal-led walled wal-let wallet wal-nuts walnuts wal-low wallow wan-der wander
wan-ting wanting wan-ton wanton war-ble warble war-drobe wardrobe war-fare
warfare warm-ed warmed warn-ing warning war-rant warrant war-red warred
wash-^ng washing wash-boul washboul wash-house washhouse wash-balls washballs
wash-pot washpot was-sail wassail watch-ful watchful wasting wasting wast-ful
wastful watch-ing watching watchman watchman wa-ter water wa-ver waver wax-eth
waxes way-side wayside weak-ness weakness weal-thy wealthy wean-ed weaned
wea-pon weapon wear-ing wearing wea-ry weary wea-sel weasel wea-ther weather
wea-ring wearing wed-ded wedded wed-ding wedding wed-lock wedlock wedns-day
wednsday weep-ing weeping weed-ing weeding weigh-ing weighing weigh-ty weighty
wel-come welcome wel-done weldone welfare welfare wel-spring welspring
wench-ing wench-ing westward westward west-wind westwind wheat-en wheaten
where-as whereas where-by whereby where-in wherein where-of whereof where-on
whereon where-to whereto wherewith wherewith wheez-ing wheezing whe-ther
whether whet-ting whetting whim-per whimper whi-ning whining whirl-ing whirling
whirl-pit whirlpit whirlwind whirlwind whisk-ing whisking whis-per whisper
whi-tings whitings white-ness whiteness whit-ster whitster whi-ther whither
whol-ly wholly whol-som wholesome whoop-ing whooping whore-dom whoredom who-rish
whorish who-so whosoever wick-ed wicked wick-et wicket wi-dow widow wi-der wider
wil-ful wilful wil-ling willing wil-lows willows win-dy windy wind-ing winding
win-dow window wing-ed winged wiel-dy wieldy winch-ing winching wink-ing
winking win-ner winner win-ning winning win-now winnow win-ter winter wi-ping
wiping wi-ring wiring wis-dom wisdom wise-ly wisely wi-ser wiser wish-es wishes
wish-ing wishing witchcraft witchcraft with-al withal withdraw withdraw
withdrew withdrew wi-ther wither withheld withheld withold withhold with-in
within without without with-stand withstand with-stood withstood witch-es
witches wit-ness witness wit-ty witty wi-ving wiving wi-zard wizard wo-ful
woeful wo-man woman wo-men women won-der wonder wood-en wooden wool-len woollen
wood-cock woodcock word-ed worded work-er worker workhouse workhouse work-ing
working world-ly worldly worm-seed wormseed wormwood wormwood worn-ed worned
wor-ship worship world-ly worldly wor-ser worser wors-ted worsted worth-less
worthless wor-thy worthy wot-ting wotting wo-ven woven would-est would
wound-ing wounding wrap-ped wrapped wrath-ful wrathful wran-gle wrangle
wreath-ed wreathed wr^nch-ed wrenched wres-tle wrestle wretch-ed wretched
wring-ing wringing wrink-le wrinkle wrin-sing wrinsing wrest-ing wresting
wri-ting writing wri-ter writer writ-ten written wron-ged wronged wrong-ful
wrongful wrought-est wroughtest
Y. Y.
Year-ly Yearly yawn-ing yawning yel-led yelled yern-ed yerned yield-ing
yielding yel-low yel-low yeo-man yeoman yo-ked yoked yon-der yonder young-er
younger young man youngman youth-ful youthful you-ward youward
Z. Z.
Zea-lous Zealous ze-lot zelot ze-nith zenith
Words of Three Syllables.
A. A.
A-ba^-ted Abacted a-ban-don abandon a-ba-sed abased a-ba-shed abashed a-ba-ted
abated a-ba-sing abasing ab-hor-ring abhorring ab-ject-ing abjecting ab-ju-ring
abjuring a-bi-ding abiding a-bo-ding aboding a-bo-lish abolish a-bor-tive
abortive a-boun-ding abounding ab-sti-nence abstinence a-bun-dance abundance
a-bun-dant abundant a-bu-sive abusive a-bu-sing abusing ab-sent-ing absenting
ab-sol-ving absolving ab-so-lute absolute ab-stain-ing abstaining ac-cep-tance
acceptance ac-cept-ing accepting ac-ci-dence accidence ac-ci-dent accident
ac-com-plish accomplish ac-cord-ing according ac-cord-ed accorded ac-comp-tan^
accomptant ac-^ount-ed accounted ac-cur-sed accursed ac-cu-sing accusing
ac-cu-stom accustom ac-cu-riate accuriate ac-know-ledge acknowledge
ac-quain-tance acquaintance ac-quaint-ing acquainting ac-qui-esce acquiesce
ac-quit-tance acquittance ac-quit-ted acquitted ac-quit-ment acquitment
ac-qui-red acquired ac-cru-ing accruing ac-tive-ness activeness ac-tu-al actual
ac-ti-on action a-da-ges adages a-da-mant adamant ad-dict-ed addicted
ad-dres-sing addressing ad-he-ring adhering ad-je-cture adjecture ad-joyn-ing
adjoining ad-journ-ed adjourned ad-judg-ing adjudging ad-just-ing adjusting
ad-ju-ring adjuring ad-mi-red admired ad-mit-ted admitted ad-mit-tance
admittance ad-mo-nish admonish a-dopt-ed adopted a-dorn-ed adorned a-do-ring
adoring ad-van-cing advancing ad-van-tage advantage ad-ven-ture adventure
ad-ver-tise advertise ad-vi-sed advised ad-vo-cate advocate af-fect-ed affected
af-firm-ed affirmed af-flict-ed afflicted af-ford-ing affording af-fright-ed
affrighted a-fore-hand aforehand a-fore-time aforetime af-ter-noon afternoon
af-ter-ward afterward a-go-ny agony a-gree-ing agreeing a-gree-ment agreement
a-larm-ed alarmed al-lay-ing allaying al-be-it albeit al-der-man alderman
al-ledg-ing alleging a-li-en alien al-low-ance allowance al-lu-ring alluring
al-li-ed allied al-ma-nack almanac al-migh-ty almighty al-mond-trees
almondtrees a-lo-es aloes al-rea-dy already al-te-red altered a-long-ing
alonging a-ma-zed amazed a-maze-ment amazement am-bas-sage embassage am-bush-es
ambushes a-me-thist amethist a-mend-ed amended a-merce-ment amercement a-mi-ty
amity a-mu-let amulet an-di-ron andiron an-cle-bones anclebones an-ce-stors
ancestors an-ci-ent ancient a-noint-ed anointed a-noint-ing anointing an-di-ron
andiron a-no-ther another an-noy-ance annoyance an-swer-ing answering an-nex-ed
annexed an-ti-christ antichrsst an-ti-type antitype a-pho-risms aphorisms
a-poph-thegme apophthegme a-po-stle apostle a-po-state apostate ap-pa-rel
apparel ap-pa-rent apparent ap-peal-ing appealing ap-pear-ance appearance
ap-peas-ed appeased ap-per-tain appertain ap-pe-tite appetite ap-ply-ing
applying ap-point-ment appointment ap-pre-hend apprehend ap-proach-ing
approaching ap-pro-ving approving ap-pren-tice apprentice a-pri-cock apricock
ap-po-site apposite a-ra-rat ararat a-ra-ble arable ar-ray-ed arrayed
arch-an-gel archangel ar-gu-ment argument arch-bi-shop archbishop arch-dea-con
archdeacon a-ri-seth arises ar-mou-ry armoury ar-raign-ed arraigned
ar-rear-age arrearage ar-ro-gant arrogant ar-ri-val arrival as-cend-ing
ascending ar-rest-ed arrested ar-ti-cle article as-cer-tain ascertain
as-cri-bing ascribing a-sha-med ashamed as-per-sed aspersed as-sault-ed
assaulted as-say-ed assayed as-sem-bling assembling as-sem-bly assembly
as-sent-ing assenting as-sess-ment assessment as-ses-sor assessor as-signment
assignment as-sist-ant assistant as-sist-ed assisted as-soil-ed assoiled
a-sto-nish astonish as-su-rance assurance a-swa-ged aswaged a-sun-der asunder
at-chiev-ment atchievment a-the-ist atheist a-the-ism atheism a-tone-ment
atonement at-tain-ing attaining at-tain-der attainder at-tack-ed attacked
at-ten-dance attendance at-ten-tive attentive at-ti-red attired at-tor-ney
attorney at-tri-bute attribute a-vail-eth avails at-tach-ing attaching
at-tempt-ed attempted a-va-rice avarice au-di-ble audible au-di-ence audience
au-di-tour auditour a-ven-ger avenger a-ven-ture aventure aug-ment-ed augmented
a-void-ing avoiding a-vouch-ing avouching au-then-tick authentic au-tho-rize
authorize au-tum-nal autumnal a-wa-king awaking a-ward-ing awarding
a-ware-house awarehouse a-wast-coat awastcoat awk-ward-ness awkwardness ax-i-om
axiom
B. B.
Back-bi-ter Backbiter back-bi-ting backbiting back-sli-der backslider
back-sli-ding backsliding back-ward-ly backwardly back-ward-ness backwardness
bad-gers-skins badgerskins bag-ni-on bagnion b^ld-lo-custs baldlocusts
bal-lan-ces balances bal-lancing ballancing ba-nish-ed banished ba-nish-ment
banishment ban-ner-et banneret ban-quet-ing banqueting bap-ti-zing baptizing
bar-ba-rous barbarous barge-ma-ster bargemaster bar-gain-ing bargaining
bar-ley-bread barleybread bar-ley-break barleybreak ba-ro-net baronet
bar-ro-ness barroness bar-ren-ness barrenness bar-ris-ter barrister bar-row-pig
barrowpig bash-ful-ly bashfully bas-ket-hilt baskethilt bas-tar-dise bastardise
bat-tle-ax battelax bat-tel-bow battelbow bat-ter-ing battering bat-tle-ments
battlements bat-che-lor bachelor bead-neck-lace beadnecklace bean-flow-ers
beanflowers bea-ver-hat beaverhat beau-ti-fie beautify beau-ti-ful beautiful
be-ca-mest becamest bec-kon-ing beckoning be-co-ming becoming bed-ma-ker
bedmaker bed-cham-ber bedchamber bed-cur-tains bedcurtains bed-fel-low
bedfellow beds-te-ster bedstester bees-ho-ney beeshoney bee-tle-brows
beetlebrows be-fal-len befallen be-fon-dle befondle be-fore-hand beforehand
be-fore-time beforetime be-foul-ed befouled be-gal-led begalled be-get-teth
begets beg-gar-ly beggarly be-gin-ning beginning be-gird-ed begirded
be-got-ten begotten be-guil-ed beguiled be-ha-ved behaved be-head-ed beheaded
be-he-moth behemoth be-hold-ing beholding be-hoo-veth behooveth be-li-ed belied
be-lie-vers believers be-lie-ving believing bel-low-ing bellowing be-long-ing
belonging be-lo-ved beloved be-moan-ing bemoaning be-ne-fice benefice be-ne-fit
benefit be-night-ed benighted be-queath-ed bequeathed be-rea-ved bereaved
be-seech-ing beseeching be-seem-ing beseeming be-sieg-ed besieged be-tray-ed
betrayed be-troth-ed betrothed be-trust-ed betrusted bet-ter-ing bettering
be-wail-ing bewailing be-witch-ing bewitching be-wray-eth bewrays
bi-shop-rick bishopric bil-li-ards billiards bit-ter-ly bitterly blas-phe-mer
blasphemer blas-phe-ming blaspheming blas-phe-my blasphemy bles-sed-ness
blessedness ble-mish-es blemishes blind-fold-ed blindfolded blis-ter-ing
blistering blood-thir-sty bloodthirsty blos-som-ed blossomed boi-ste-rous
boisterous book-bin-der bookbinder book-sel-ler bookseller bond-ser-vant
bondservant bond-wo-man bondwoman bol-ster-ing bolstering bor-row-ing borrowing
bot-tom-less bottomless boun-ti-ful bountiful bran-dish-ed brandished
bram-ble-bush bramblebush bran-dy-wine brandywine bra-ve-ry bravery bra-zi-ers
braziers break-fast-time breakfasttime bre-vi-ty brevity bri-be-ry bribery
bride-cham-ber bridechamber bri-gan-dine brigandine broi-der-ed broidered
bro-ther-hood brotherhood bro-ther-ly brotherly buf-fet-ed buffeted bul-rush-es
bulrushes bur-den-som burdensome bur-ges-ship burgesship bu-ri-al burial
bu-ry-ing burying bur-nish-ed burnished bu-si-ness business but-ler-ship
butlership bur-sten-ness burstenness but-cher-ing butchering but-ter-ed
buttered but-tock-ing buttocking but-ton-ed buttoned
C. C.
Cab-ba-ges Cabbages ca-la-mus calamus can-dle-mas candlemas can-dle-stick
candlestick can-cer-ed cancered ca-bi-net cabinet ca-len-dar calendar ca-lum-ny
calumny cam-phire-balls camphireballs can-ker-ed cankered can-ker-worm
cankerworm can-cel-ed cancelled ca-pa-ble capable ca-pon-et caponet car-bun-cle
carbuncle care-ful-ly carefully care-les-ly carelessly ca-res-sing caressing
car-nal-ly carnally car-pen-ter carpenter car-ri-age carriage car-cas-ses
carcasses car-ri-on carrion car-ry-ing carrying car-ri-er carrier cas-si-a
cassia cast-a-way castaway ca-ta-logue catalogue ca-te-chize catechize
ca-te-chism catechism ca-tho-lick catholic ca-te-rer caterer ca-vel-ling
cavelling ce-le-brate celebrate ^er-tain-ly certainly cer-tain-ty certainty
cer-ti-fie certify cen-su-red censured chaf-fer-ing chaffering chal-len-ging
challenging cha-li-ces chalices cham-ber-ing chambering cham-ber-lain
chamberlain cham-ber-pot chamberpot cham-let-cloak chamletcloak cham-paign-coat
champaigncoat cham-pi-on champion chan-cel-lor chancellor chance-med-ley
chancemedley change-a-ble changeable cha-pi-ter chapter cha-ra-cter character
charg-a-ble chargable cha-ri-ot chariot cha-ri-ty charity cha-sten-ing
chastening cha-stise-ment chastisement chat-tering chattering chea-pen-ing
cheapening check-er-work checkerwork cheer-ful-ly cheerfully cheer-ful-ness
cheerfulness chees-mon-ger cheesmon^er chees-pair-ing cheespairing che-rish-ing
cherishing cher-ry-tree cherrytree cher-ry-lip cherrylip cher-ry-stone
cherrystone che-ru-bims cherubims chess-play-ing chessplaying che-shire-cheese
cheshirecheese chi-ding-ly chidingly chil-lish-ness chillishness chi-ming-ly
chimingly chim-ney-piece chimneypiece chi-na-dish chinadish chit-ty-face
chittyface che-vy-chase chevychase chol-le-rick chollerick chop-ping-block
choppingblock chop-ping-knife choppingknife chro-ni-cles chronicles chri-sti-an
christian chris-ten-dom ceristendom chry-so-lite chrysolite chub-bish-ness
chubbishness chuck-far-thing chuckfarthing ^huf-fish-ness chuffishness
chur-lish-ness churlishness churn-ing-tub churningtub ci-der-press cyderpress
ci-pher-ing cyphering cin-na-mon cinnamon cin-der-wench cinderwench
cir-cum-spect circumspect cir-cum-stance circumstance cir-cum-cise circumcise
cir-cum-vent circumvent ^i-ti-zen citizen ^i-vet-cat civetcat cla-mor-ing
clamoring cla-mo-rous clamorous clean-li-ness cleanliness cle-men-cy clemency
clo-thi-er clothier clou-di-ness cloudiness ^lus-ter-ing clustering
^ock-a-trice cockatrice ^of-fee-house coffeehouse ^o-e-qual coequal ^of-fer-er
cofferer ^og-ni-sance cognizance ^ol-lect-ing collecting ^ol-ledg-es colleges
^ol-loque-ing colloqueing ^ol-li-er collier ^o-lo-nel colonel ^ol-lo-quies
colloquies ^o-lo-ny colony ^o-lour-ed colored ^om-bat-ing combating
^um-ber-ing cumbering ^omb-ma-ker combmaker ^om-bi-ning combining ^o-me-dy
comedy come-li-ness comeliness com-fort-ed comforted com-fort-er comforter
com-fort-less comfortless com-mand-er commander com-mand-ing commanding
com-mand-ment commandment com-mend-ed commended com-mit-ted committed
com-mit-tee committee com-mon-hall commonhall com-mo-ner commoner com-mon-ly
commonly com-mon-wealth commonwe^lth com-mu-ning communing com-mence-ment
commencement com-pact-ed compacted com-pa-ny company com-pa-ring comparing
com-pas-sed compassed com-pas-ses compasses com-pel-led compelled com-pla-cent
complacent com-pi-ling compiling com-plain-ing complaining com-pleat-ing
completing com-ple-ment complement com-po-sing composing com-port-ing
comporting com-pound-ing compounding com-pre-hend comprehend com-pu-ted
computed con-ceal-ing concealing con-ceit-ed conceited con-ceiv-ing conceiving
con-cern-ed concerned con-clu-ding concluding con-cor-dance concordance
con-cu-bine concubine con-demn-ed condemned con-de-scend condescend con-du-cing
conducing con-duct-ing conducting con-duct-or conductor con-fe-rence conference
con-fes-sed confessed con-fi-dence confidence con-fi-dent confident con-fi-ding
confiding con-fine-ment confinement con-firm-ed confirmed con-fis-cate
confiscate con-flict-ing conflicting con-flu-ence confluence con-form-ed
conformed con-form-ing conforming con-for-mist conformist con-found-ed
confounded con-fu-sed confused con-fu-ted confuted con-geal-ed congealed
con-gru-ous congruous con-je-cture conjecture con-joyn-ing conjoyning
con-ju-gal conjugal con-ju-ring conjuring con-ju-rer conjurer con-nex-ing
connexing con-ni-ving conniving con-que-rour conqueror con-que-ring conquering
con-sci-ence conscience con-sci-ous conscious con-se-crate consecrate
con-sent-ing consenting con-se-quence consequence con-si-der consider
con-sist-ing consisting con-serv-ing conserving con-sign-ing consigning
con-sort-ed consorted con-so-nant consonant con-spi-ring conspiring con-sta-ble
constable con-stan-cy constancy con-stru-ing construing con-su-ming consuming
con-sum-mate consummate con-sump-tive consumptive con^sti-tute constitute
con-strain-ed constrained con-sult-ed consulted con-tain-ed contained
con-temn-ed contemned con-tem-plate contemplate con-tent-ed contented
con-test-ing contesting con-ti-nence continence con-tract-ed contracted
con-tra-dict contradict con-tra-ry contrary con-tri-bute contribute
con-tri-vance contrivance con-tro-ling controling con-tro-vert controvert
con-ve-ning convening con-ver-sant conversant con-vert-ed converted con-vey-ing
conveying con-vict-ed convicted con-vin-ced convinced con-vo-cate convocate
con-voy-ing convoying cook-e-ry cookery co-part-ner copartner co-pi-ous copious
cop-per-smith coppersmith co-py-ing copying co-py-book copybook co-py-hold
copyhold cor-di-al cordial cor-mo-rant cormorant co-ro-ner coroner cer-po-ral
corporal cor-pu-lent corpulent cor-re-ctive corrective cor-rect-ed corrected
cor-res-pond correspond cor-rupt-ed corrupted cor-ro-sive eorrosive
cost-li-ness costliness cot-ta-ges cottages co-ve-nant covenant co-ver-ing
covering co-ver-ed covered co-ve-tous covetous coun-cel-lor councellor
coun-cel-led councelled coun-te-nance countenance coun-ter-feit counterfeit
coun-ter-vail countervail coun-ty-court countycourt coun-try-man countryman
cour-te-sie courtesy cour-te-ous courteous cour-ti-er courtier cow-ar-dise
cowardice crab-bed-ness crabbedness craf-ti-ness craftiness cra-si-ness
crasiness cra-ving-ly cravingly cre-a-tor creator cre-di-tor creditor
cre-di-bly credibly cri-ple-ing cripleing cro-co-dile crocodile crook-ed-ness
crookedness cru-ci-fie crucify cris-ta-line cristaline cru-el-ty cruelty
cu-cu-mers cucumers cun-ning-ly cunningly cud-gel-ling cudgeling cul^pa-ble
culpable cum-ber-ing cumbering cum-min-seeds cumminseeds cup-bear-er cupbearet
cup-boards-head cupboardshead cu-ri-ous curious cur-rent-ly currently
cur-ry-comb currycomb cur-sed-ly cursedly cush-i-on cushion cus-to-mer customer
cus-to-dy custody cus-tom-house customhouse cut-ting-room cuttingroom
D. D.
Dal-ly-ing Dallying dam-na-ble damnable dam-ma-ges damages dam-mask-ing
dammasking dam-ni-fie damnifie da-mo-sel damosel damp-ish-ness dampishness
dan-ge-rous dangerous dan-di-prat dandiprat dan-cing-school dancingschool
dap-per-blade dapperblade da-ring-ly daringly dar-ken-ed darkened daw-bing-ly
dawbingly dead-ish-ness deadishness deaf-ish-ness deafishness de-bi-tor debtor
de-ben-tor debentor de-bo-nair debonair dea-ne-ry deanery dear-li-er dearlier
de-ba-sing debasing de-ba-ting debating de-cay-ing decaying de-cea-sed deceased
de-ceiv-ed deceived de-ceit-ful deceitful de-cei-ver deceiver de-cen-cy decency
de-cent-ly decently de-cent-ness decentne^s de-ci-ded decided de-cla-red
declared de-coct-ed decocted de-creas-ed decreased de-cree-ing decreeing
de-cli-ning declining de-cre-pit decrepit de-di-cate dedicate de-fa-cing
defacing de-fa-ming defaming de-feat-ing defeating de-fen-ced defenced
de-fend-ed defended de-fen-der defender de-fer-ring deferring de-fy-ing defying
de-fi-ling defiling de-fraud-ing defrauding de^fi-ning defining de-form-ing
deforming de-fray-ing defraying de-gra-ding degrading de-ject-ed dejected
de-i-ty deity de-lay-ing delaying de-le-gate delegate de-li-cate delicate
de-light-ful delightful de^lin-quent delinquent de-li-ver deliver de-lu-ded
deluded de-mand-ing demanding de-mean-or demeanor de-me^rit demerit de-mi-sed
demised de-mo-lish demolish de-mon-strate demonstrate de-mur-ring demurring
de-mure-ness demureness de-ni-al denial de-noun-cing denouncing de-part-ing
departing de-plo^red deplored de-po-sed deposed de-pra-ved depraved de-pri-ved
deprived de-pres-sed depressed de-pu-ted d^puted de-pu-ty deputy de-ri-ded
derided de-ro-gate d^rogate de-scend-ing descending de-scri-bed described
de-sert-ed deserted de-sign-ed designed de-ser-ving deserving de-si-ring
desiring de-sist-ing desisting de-so-late desolate de-spair-ing despairing
des-pe-rate desperate de-spi-sing despising de-sti-tute destitute de-stroy-ing
destroying de-struc-tive destructive de-tain-ed detained de-ter-mine determine
de-ter-ing detering de-test-ing detesting de-vi-ces devices de-vil-ish devilish
de-vi-sing devising de-vo-ted devoted de-vour-ing devouring di-a-dem diadem
di-a-logue dialogue di-a-mond diamond dif-fer-ence difference dif-fi-cult
difficult dif-fi-dent diffident di-gest-ed digested dig-ni-fie dignifie
dig-ni-ty dignity di-gres-sed digressed di-li-gence diligence di-li-gent
diligent di-mi-nish diminish di-ning-room diningroom di-o-cess diocese
di-a-lect dialect di-rect-ed directed di-rect-ly directly dis-a-ble disable
dis-a-gree disagree dis-ap-point disappoint dis-ap-prove disapprove dis-al-low
disallow dis-a-nul disanul dis-arm-ed disarmed dis-cern-ed discerned
dis-charg-ed discharged dis-ci-ple disciple dis-ci-pline discipline
dis-claim-ing disclaiming dis-clo-sed disclosed dis-com-fit discomfit
dis-con-tent discontent dis-cre-dit discredit dis-co-ver discover dis-cou-rage
discourage dis-creet-ness discreetness dis-cour-sing discoursing dis-dain-ful
disdainful di-sea-sed diseased dis-en-gage disengage dis-fi-gure disfigure
dis-gra-cing disgracing dis-gui-sing disguising dis-heart-en dishearten
dis-ho-nest dishonest dis-ho-nour dishonor dis-joyn-ing disjoyning dis-o-bey
disobey dis-ob-lige disoblige dis-or-der disorder dis-may-ed dismayed
dis-mem-ber dismember dis-mis-sed dismissed dis-lo-cate dislocate dis-man-tle
dismantle dis-pair-ing dispairing dis-pa-rage disparage dis-pen-sed dispensed
dis-per-sed dispersed dis-play-ing displaying dis-plea-sure displeasure
dis-po-sed diposed dis-pos-sess dispossess dis-pu-ting disputing dis-patch-ing
dispatching dis-prais-ed dispraised dis-pro-fit disprofit dis-pro-ved disproved
dis-qui-et di^quiet dis-re-pute disrepute dis-sem-ble dissemble dis-sent-ing
dissenting dis-se-ver dissever dis-solv-ing dissolving dis-so-lute dissolute
dis-sua-ded dissuaded dis-tast-ed distasted dis-tem-per distemper. dis-tinct-ly
distinctly dis-tin-guish distinguish dis-tinct-ly distinctly dis-tract-ed
distracted dis-train-ed distrained dis-tres-sed distressed dis-tri-bute
distribute dis-trust-ing distrusting di-vert-ing diverting di-vine-ly divinely
di-vi-dend dividend di-vi-ding dividing di-vor-ced divorced di-vorce-ment
divorcement di^vulg-ing divulging di-ur-nal diurnal doc-tri-nal doctrinal
do-mi-neer domineer do-ting-ly dotingly droop-ing-ly droopingly drop-si-cal
dropsical dun-ge-on dungeon du-ra-ble durable dread-ful-ness dreadfulness
drun-ken-ness drunkenness drow-si-ness drowsiness drug-gis-ter druggister
du-ti-ful dutiful dust-bas-ket dustbasket du-ra-ble durable dul-ci-mer dulcimer
do-lo-rous dolorous dole-ful-ness dolefulness
E. E.
Ea-ger-ness Eagerness ear-li-er earlier ear-nest-ly earnestly earth-li-ness
earthliness ea-si-ness easiness eas-ter-ly easterly e-bo-ny ebony ec-cho-ing
ecchoing e-clyp-tick eclyptick e-di-fie edify e-di-tor editor e-du-cate
educate ef-fect-ed effected e-ject-ment ejectment eigh-teenth-ly eighteenthly
e-lect-ed elected el-der-ly elderly e-le-gant elegant e-le-ment element
e-le-phant elephant e-le-vate elevate e-le-ven eleven e-le-venth eleventh
e-lo-quence eloquence e-lo-quent eloquent em-bas-sy embassy em-bol-den embolden
em-bra-cing embracing em-broi-der embroider em-bri-o embrio e-me-rald emeral^
e-me-rods emerods e-mi-nent eminent em-ploy-ment employment em-pti-ness
emptiness em-pair-ed empaired em-pe-ror emperor em-pha-sis emphasis e-na-ble
enable e-na-mour enamour en-camp-ed encamped en-coun-ter encounter e^-com-pass
encompass en^cou-rage encourage en-^hant-ment enchantment en-creas-ed increased
en-croach-ing encroaching en-cum-ber encumber en-da-mage endamage en-dan-ger
endanger en-dea-vour endeavor en-di-ting enditing en-dow-ment endowment
en-dear-ing endearing en-du-reth endures e-ne-my enemy en-ga-ged engaged
en-feoff-ment enfeoffment en-fla-ming enflaming en-for-ced enforced
en-fran-chise enfranchise en-gage-ment engagement en-gra-ving engraving
en-joy-ment enjoyment en-joyn-ing enjoining en-large-ment enlargement
en-light-en enlighten en-joy-ed enjoyed en-mi-ty enmity e-no-ble enoble
en-qui-ring enquiring en-rich-ing enriching en-stal-ling enstalling en-sam-ple
ensample en-su-ing ensuing en-tail-ed entailed en-tan-gle entangle
en-ter-course intercourse en-ter-fer enterfer en-ter-cede entercede
en-ter-prize enterprise en-sna-red ensnared en-ti-ced enticed en-ter-tain
entertain en-tran-ces entrances en-vi-ous envious en-vy-ing envying
en-treat-ing entreating en-trust-ing entrusting en-tomb-ed entombed en-ti-tle
entitle en-thro-ning enthroning en-thral-ling enthralling en-trap-ping
entrapping en-vi-ron environ en-tire-ly entirely e-pi-cure epicure e-pi-gram
epigram e-pi-stle epistle e-pi-logue epilogue e-qual-ler equaller e-qui-page
equipage e-qui-ty equity e-rect-ed erected e-sca-ping escaping e-schew-ing
eschewing e-spi-ed espied e-spou-sing espousing es-say-ing essaying e-sta-blish
establish e-steemed esteemed es-ti-mate estimate e-strang-ing estranging
e-ter-nal eternal e-ven-ing evening e-ven-song evensong e-ven-tide eventide
eu-cha-rist eucharist e-ver-more evermore e-ve-ry every e-vi-dence evidence
e-vi-dent evident e-vil-ler evill^r ex-act-ing exacting ex-act-er exacter
ex-act-ness exactness ex-alt-ed exalted ex-a-mine examine ex-am-ple example
ex-ceed-ing exceeding ex-cel-lent excellent ex^cel-ling excelling ^x-cept-ed
excepted ex-ces-sive excessive ex-chang^ing exchanging ex-clu-ded excluded
ex-clu-sive exclusive ex-che-quer exchequer ex-cu-sing excusing ex-empt-ed
exempted ex-er-cise exercise ex-claim-ing exclaiming ex-e-crate execrate
ex-e-cute execute ex-haust-ed exhausted ex-hi-bit exhibit ex-hort-ing exhorting
ex-or-cists exorcists ex-pect-ing expecting ex-pel-led expelled ex-pen-ces
expenses ex-pi-ate expiate ex-pi-red expired ex-plain-ing explaining ex-pli-cit
explicit ex-pound-ing expounding ex-pres^sing expressing ex-plo^ded exploded
ex-po-site exposite ex-qui-site exquisite ex-ter-nal external ex-tin-guish
extinguish ex-tol-ling extolling ex-tend-ing extending ex-tort-ing extorting
ex-tract-ing extracting ex-trem^-ly extr^mely ex-tri-cate extricate
ex-trin-sick extrinsick
F. F.
Fa-bu-lous Fa^ulous fa-cti-ons factions fa-cul-ty f^culty fa-cti-on f^ction
fa-^ti-ons factions fa-ding-ly fadingly faint-heart-ed fainthearted
fair-ha-vens fairhavens faith-ful-ly faithfully fal-la-cy fallacy fal-ter-ing
faltering fa-mi-ly family fa-mish-ed famished fa-mous-er famouser fan-cy-ing
fancying fan-ta-sie fantasy fan-tas-tick fantastic far-thin-gal farthingal
fa-shi-on fashion fas-ten-ed fastened fa-ther-less fatherless faul-ti-er
faultier fa-vour-ed favored fa-vou^rite favorite fear-ful-ness fearfulness
fea-ther-ed feathered fee-ble-ness feebleness feed^ing-ly feedingly feel-ing-ly
feelingly feign-ed-ly feignedly fel-low-heirs fellowheirs fel-low-ship
fellowship fe-mi-nine feminine fer-ry-boat ferryboat fer-ry-man ferryman
fe-of-fee feoffee fer-vency fervency fer-vent-ly fervently fes-ter-ing
festering fes-ti-val festival fet-ter-ed fettered few-el-ing feweling fic-ti-on
fiction fil-thi-ness filthiness fi-li-al filial fi-nal-ly finally fi-nish-er
finisher fi-nish-ing finishing fin-ger-ing fingering fir-ma-ment firmament
fis-ty-cuffs fistycuffs fit-ting-ly fittingly fish-er-man fisherman
fish-ing-lines fishinglines fish-ing-nets fishingnets fish-ing-rods fishingrods
flant-ing-ly flantingly flat-ter-ing flattering fleg-ma-tick phlegmatic
flou-rish-ing flourishing flow-er-ing flowering fold-ing-ly foldingly
fol-low-ing following flesh-li-ness fleshliness flin-ti-ness flintiness
flirt-ing-ly flirtingly fly-blow-ing flyblowing fool-ish-ness foolishness
for-as-much forasmuch for-bear-ing forbearing for-bid-ding forbidding
for-feit-ing forfeiting fore-fa-thers forefathers fore-know-ledge foreknowledge
fore-run-ner forerunner fore-see-ing foreseeing for-swear-ing forswearing
for-ge-ry forgery fore-warn-ing forewarning for-get-ful forgetful for-get-ting
forgetting for-gi-ving forgiving for-give-ness forgiveness for-got-ten
forgotten for-mal-ly formally fo-reign-er foreigner for-lorn-ed forlorned
for-ni-cate fornicate for-mer-ly formerly for-sa-ken forsaken for-sook-est
forsookest for-ti-fie fortify for-ward-ness forwardness foun-der-ing
foundering fran-kin-cense frankincense fran-tick-ness frantickness frau-du-lent
fraudulent free-wo-man freewoman fre-quent-ly frequently fret-ting-ly
frettingly frol-lick-som frollicksom fron-ti-ers frontiers friend-li-ness
friendliness frost-bit-ten frostbitten fro-ward-ly frowardly frown-ing-ly
frowningly fruc-ti-fie fructify fruit-ful-ness fruitfulness fru-stra-ted
frustrated frui-te-rer fruiterer fu-gi-tive fugitive ful-fil-led fulfilled
ful-som-ness fulsomness fu-mi-gate fumigate func-ti-on function fun-da-ment
fundament fu-ne-ral funeral fur-bish-ing furbishing fu-ri-ous furious fur-me-ty
furmety fur-na-ces furnaces fur-nish-ed furnished fur-ni-ture furniture
^ur-ri-er furrier fur-ther-ance furtherance fur-ther-end furtherend
fur-ther-side furtherside fur-ther-off furtheroff fur-ther-more furthermore
fus-ti-ans fustians fus-ty-guts fustyguts
G. G.
Gab-ble-ing G^bbleing gad-ding-ly gaddingly gain-say-ers gainsayers
gain-say-ing gainsaying gal-ba-num galbanum gal-lan-try gallantry gal-le-ry
gallery g^l-ley-slave galleyslave gar-di-ner gardener gar-nish-ed garnish^d
gar-ri-^on garrison ga-ther-ing gathering gen-der-ing gendering ga-zing-stock
gazingstock ge-mi-ni gemini ge-ne-ral general ge-ne-rate generate gen-tle-ness
gentleness gen-tle-man gentleman gent-li-er gentlier ghost-li-ness ghostliness
gib-ber-ish gibberish gid-di-ness giddiness gid-dy-brains giddybrains
gin-ger-bread gingerbread glass-hou-ses glasshouses glau-ber-ing glaubering
glit-ter-ing glittering glis-ter-ing glistering glis-ter-pipe glisterpipe
gloo-mi-ness gloominess glo-ri-fie glorify glo-ry-ing glorying glo-^i-ous
glorious glu-ten-ous glutenous glut-to-ny gluttony god-li-ness godliness
good-li-ness goodliness gor-ge-ous gorgeous go-vern-ment government go-ver-nour
governor gos-sip-ing gossiping gra-ci-ous gracious grand-chil-dren
grandchildren grand-fa-ther grandfather grand-mo-ther grandmother grai-ne-ry
grainer^ gra-ti-tude gratitude gras-hop-per grasshopper gra-vel-ling gravelling
gra-vi-ty gravity gree-di-ness greediness grie-vously grievously grid-i-ron
gridiron gril-li-ade grilliade grudg-ing-ly grudgingly guar-di-an guardian
gum-san-drick gumsandrick gun-ners-mate gunnersmate gun-pow-der gunpowder
gut-ter-ing guttering guil-ti-ness guiltiness
H. H.
Ha-bi-ted Habited hack-ney-coach hackneycoach hag-rid^den hagridden hal-low-ed
hallowed ham-per-ing hampering han-dy-craft handycraft han-dy-work handywork
hand-ker-chiefs handkerchiefs hand-mai-den handmaiden hand-wri-ting handwriting
han-dle-ing handleing hand-som-ness handsomness hap-pen-ed happened hap-pi-er
happier har-bour-ing harboring har-den-ed hardened har-mo-ny harmony
har-ras-sing harrassing har-vest-time harvesttime has-ti-ness hastiness
hate-ful-ler hatefuller hay-ma-king haymaking haugh-ti-ness haughtiness
hea-di-er headyer heal-thi-er healthier hear-ken-ed hearkened hear-ti-er
heartier hea-then-ish heathenish hea-ven-ly heavenly hedg^et-ter hedgsetter
heed-les-ness heedlesness heed-ful-ness heedfulness hel-lish-est hellishest
help-les-est helplesest help-ful-lest helpfullest here-af-ter hereafter
here-to-fore heretofore hence-for-ward henceforward he-re-sie heresy
he-re-tick heretic he-ri-tage heritage he-ro-ick heroic hi-de-ous hideous
hin-der-ing hindering hin-der-ance hinderance hin-der-most hindermost his-to-ry
history hi-ther-ward hitherward hi-ther-to hitherto hog-gish-est hoggishest
ho-li-er holier ho-li-ness holiness home-li-er homelier ho-mi-ly homily
ho-nour-ing honoring ho-mi-cide homicide hol-low-ness hollowness ho-ne-sty
honesty ho-ney-comb honeycomb ho-ney-pot honeypot hope-ful-lest hopefullest
hop-mer-chant hopmerchant ho-ri-zon horizon hor-rid-ness horridness hor-ri-ble
horrible hos-ta-ges hostages house-hold-er householder house-hold-stuff
householdstuff house-keep-er housekeeper how-be-it howbeit hum^ble-ness
humbleness hu-mor-ing humoring hum-ming-ly hummingly hun-ger-ing hungering
hunt-ing-match huntingmatch hur-ri-cane hurricane hur-rired hurried
hus-band-man husb^ndman hus-band-men husbandmen hus-ban-dry husbandry
hy-po-crites hypocrites hy-po-cras hypocras
I. I.
I-dle-ness Idleness ^-de-a idea ^ea-lou-sie jealousy ^eo-par-dy jeopardy
^eer-ing-ly jeeringly ^eest-ing-ly jestingly ^et-ting-ly jettingly ^e-su-it
jesuit ^ew-el-ler jeweller ^ew-el-ling jewelling ^g-no-ble ignoble ^g-no-rance
ignorance ^g-no-rant ignorant ^l-le-gal illegal ^m-be-zil imbezil ^m-balm-ing
imbalming ^-ma-ges images ^-ma-gine imagine ^m-bold-ned imboldned ^-mi-tate
imitate ^m-mer-ced immerced im-mi-nent imminent im-mo-dest immodest im-mor-tal
immortal im-part-ing imparting im-per-fect imperfect im-pi-ous impious
im-plo-ring imploring im-ploy-ed employed im-ploy-ment employment im-por-tance
importance im-por-tune importune im-po-sed imposed im-post-hume imposthume
im-pos-ture imposture im-po-tent impotent im-prove-ment improvement im-pro-per
improper im-pu-ted imputed im-pu-test imputest in-as-much inasmuch in-car-nate
incarnate in-cen-sed incensed in-chant-ed enchanted in-chant-ment enchantment
in-cert-ed incerted in-cli-ning inclining in-clo^sed enclosed in-clu-sive
inclusive in-con-stant inconstant in-crea-sing increasing in-croach-ing
incroaching in-cul-cate inculcate in-cum-bent incumbent in-cum-brance
encumbrance in-dear-ed indeared in-debt-ed indebted in-den-ture indenture
in-dent-ed indented in-di-ting inditing in-di-gent indigent in-dea-vour
endeavor in-di-rect indirect in-dis-creet indiscreet in-dor-sed indorsed
in-dow-ed endowed in-du-ced induced in^dul-gence indulgence in-dul-gent
indulgent in-fa-my infamy in-fa-mous infamous in-fan-cy infancy in-fan-try
infantr^ in^fan-gled infangled in-fect-ed infected in-fe-rence inference
in-fer-nal infernal in-fi-del infidel in^fi-nite infinite in-flict-ed inflicted
in-flaming inflaming in-fold-ing enfolding in-form-er informer in-form-ing
informing in-flu-ence influence in-fring-ing infringing in-graft-ing ingrafting
in-gage-ment engagement in-grate-ful ungrateful in-ha-bit inhabit in-he-rent
inherent in-he-rit inherit in-joy-ing enjoying in-ju-stice injustice
in-joyn-ing injoyning in-large-ment enlargement in-ligh-ten inlighten
inn-keep-er innkeeper in-ner-most innermost in-no-cent innocent in-so-much
insomuch in-qui-ry inquiry in-rol-led enrolled in-sight-ed insighted in-so-lent
insolent in-spect-ing inspecting in-spi-red inspired in-sta-ble instable
in-stan-ces instances in-stant-ly instantly in-stinct-ed instincted in-sti-tute
institute in-struct-ed instructed in-stru-ment instrument in-tan-gle entangle
in-tel-lects intellects in-tend-ing intending in-ter-cede intercede in-ter-cept
intercept in-ter-course intercourse in-ter-change interchange in-te-rest
interest in-ter-nal internal in-ter-pose interpose in-ter-pret interpret
in-ter-rupt interrupt in-ter-fere interfere in-ter-val interval in-ter-vene
intervene in-thral-ling inthralling in-thro-ning inthroning in-ti-mate intimate
in-tire-ly entirely in-ti-tle entitle in-trea-ty entreaty in-tru-ding intruding
in-tro-duce introduce in-trust-ed entrusted in-va-lid invalid in-va-ding
invading in-veigh-ing inveighing in-vei-gle inveigle in-vent-ing inventing
in-vi-ron inviron in-volv-ing involving in-vi-ting inviting in-ward-ly inwardly
join-tu-ring joynturing jour-neying journeying i-vo-ry ivory joy-ful-ness
joyfulness ju-bi-le jubilee ir-ri-ate irriate is-su-ed issued ju-da-ism judaism
jus-ti-ces justices ju-sti-fie justify
K. K.
Ka-len-da^ Calendar kind-nes-ses kindnesses kil-der-kin kilderkin ki-bed-heels
kibedheels kid-nap-per kidnapper kins-wo-man kinswoman kis-sing-crust
kissingcrust knead-ing-trough kneadingtrough know-ing-ly knowingly
knuc-kle-bone knucklebone
L. L.
La-bour-ing Laboring la-by-rinth labyrinth lac-ker-ing lackering la-dy-day
ladyday la-dy-ship ladyship la-i-ty laity la-ment-ed lamented lan-dres-ses
landresses lan-gua-ges languages lan-guish-ing languishing l^t-ter-end
latterend la-zi-ly lazily lea-ven-ed leavened lec-tu-rer lecturer left-hand-ed
lefthanded lea-den-mines leadenmines le-che-ry lechery le-ga-cy legacy le-gi-on
legion length-en-ed lengthened lent-preach-ers lentpreachers lem-mo-nade
lemmonade le-o-pard leopard le-pro-sie leprosy learn-ed-ly learnedly
les-sen-ing lessening let-ter-case lettercase let-ti-ces lettices le-vel-ling
levelling le-vi-ty levity l^-be-ral liberal l^-ber-ty liberty l^-ber-tine
libertine l^-bel-ling libelling ^^-cen-sing licensing ^^eu-te-nant lieutenant
l^gh-ten-ing lightening l^fe-guard-man lifeguardman li-mit-ed limited ^^-ne-age
lineage ^^-o-ness lioness ^^n-ger-ing lingering ^^s-ten-ing listening
^^t-tle-ness littleness ^^ve-li-ness liveliness ^^ath-som-ness loathsomne^s
^of-ti-ness loftiness ^^ne-som-ness lonesomness love-li-ness loveliness
lou-si-ness lousiness low-li-ness lowliness lon-don-bridge londonbridge
lon-don-town londontown look-ing-glass lookingglass low-er-most lowermost
luke-warm-ness lukewarmness lu-na-tick lunatic lurk-ing-ly lurkingly
lus-ty-guts lustyguts lu-shi-ous lushious ly-ri-cal lyrical
M. M.
Ma-ca-roons Macaroons mac-ke-rel mackerel ma-gi-strate magistrate mag-ni-fie
magnify mag-ni-tude magnitude ma-ga-zine magazine mai-den-head maidenhead
maid-ser-vant maidservant ma-je-sty majesty main-te-nance maintenance
main-tain-ed maintained male-chil-dren malechildren ma-lig-nant malignant
ma-nage-ment management ma-na-cles manacles ma-ho-met mahomet ma-ni-fest
manifest ma-ni-fold manifold man-si-on mansion ma-nu-ring manuring ma-nu-script
manuscript man-ser-vant manservant man-slay-er manslayer man-slaugh-ter
manslaughter mar-gi-nal marginal mar-ket-ing marketing mar-ket-cross
marketcross ma-ri-ner mariner mar-ri-age marriage mar-ry-ing marrying
ma-rish-es marshes mar-ma-let marmalet mar-ques-dom marquesdom mar-tyr-dom
martyrdom mar-vel-lous mavelous mas-cu-line masculine mas-sa-cre massacre
mas-te-ry mastery mea-ly-mouth mealymouth match-ma-ker matchmaker mea-su-ring
measuring me-di-ate mediate me-di-cine medicine me-di-tate meditate me-lo-dy
melody me-mo-ry memory men-plea-sers menpleasers men-steal-ers menstealers
men-stru-ous menstrous men-ti-on mention mer-chan-dise merchandise mer-ci-ful
merciful mer-cy-seat mercyseat mer-ri-ly merrily mes-sen-ger messenger
mes-si-as messiah mes-su-age message me-ta-phor metaphor me-theg-lin metheglin
mi-chael-mass michaelmas mid-dle-most middlemost migh-ti-ness mightiness
milk-ing-pale milkingpale mil-li-ons millions mi-mi-cal mimical mi-ne-rals
minerals mi-nish-ed minished mi-ni-ster minister mi-ni-string ministering
mind-ful-ness mindfulness mi-ra-cle miracle mir-mi-dons mirmidons mis-cal-ling
miscalling mis-car^ry miscarry mis-cast-ing miscasting mi-se-ry misery
mis-hap-pen mishappen mis-chie-vous mischievous mis-leading misleading
mis-li-king misliking mis-si on mission mis-ta-ken mistaken mis-trust-ing
mistrusting mis-u-sed misused mis-pend-ing mispending mi-ti-gate mitigate
mock-e-ry mockery mo-de-rate moderate mo-de-sty modesty mol-li-fie mollify
mo-nar-chy monarchy mon-strous-ly monstrously mo-ra-lize moralize mo-nu-ment
monument mor-eo-ver moreover mor-tal-ly mortally mort-ga-ged mortgaged
mor-ti-fie mortify mo-ti-on motion mo-ther-less motherless move-a-ble moveable
moun-te-bank mountebank mourn-ful-ly mournfully mul-ti-ply multiply mur-mur-ing
murmuring mu-^a-ble mutable mul-ti-tude multitude mur-der-er murderer mu-si-cal
musical mu-tu-al mutual mu-stard-seed mustardseed mu-stard-pot mustardpot
mu-ster-ing mustering mut-ter-ing muttering myr-tle-groves myrtlegroves
myr-tle-trees myrtletrees my-ste-ry mystery
N. N.
Na-ked-ness Nakedness nar-row-ly narrowly nar-ra-tive narrative nas-ti-ness
nastiness na-ti-on nation na-tu-ral natural naugh-ti-ness naughtiness
na-vi-gate navigate need-ful-ler needfuller need-les-ser needlesser neg-lect-ed
neglected neg-li-gence negligence neigh-bour-hood neighborhood neigh-bour-ly
nighbourly nei-ther-most neithermost net-tle-ing nettleing net-ma-ker netmaker
neu-tral-ly neutrally news-mon-ger newsmonger nib-ble-ing nibbleing nig-gard-ly
niggardly night-watch-es nightwatches nigh-tin-gale nightingale nim-ble-ness
nimbleness nip-ping-frost nippingfrost nit-ty-ness nittyness no-ble-ness
nobleness noc-tur-nal nocturnal nod-dle-head noddlehead noi-som-ness noisomness
non-suit-ed nonsuited no-ta-ble notable no-ta-ry notary north-bor-der
northborder north-quar-ter northquarter no-vel-ty novelty no-vem-ber november
no-vi-ces novices nou-rish-ment nourishment nul-li-ty nullity num-ber-ing
numbering num-ber-less numberless nu-me-rous numerous nu-me-rate numerate
nun-ne-ry nunnery nur-se-ry nursery nur-tu-ring nurturing nut-crack-er
nutcracker nu-tri-ment nutriment nut-ting-time nuttingtime
O. O.
O-bey-ed Obeyed o-bey-sance obeisance o-bi-lisk obilisk ob-ject-ed objected
ob-li-ged obliged o-bra-zeel obrazeel ob-ser-ved observed ob-ser-vant observant
ob-scure-ness obscureness ob-sti-nate obstinate ob-struct-ed obstructed
ob-tain-ed obtained ob-vi-ous obvious oc-cu-list occulist oc-cu-py occupy
oc-cur-rence occurrence o-ce-an ocean oc-to-ber october o-di-ous odious
of-fen-ces offenses of-fend-ed offended of-fen-sive offensive of-fer-ing
offering of-fi-cer officer of-fi-ces offices off-scowr-ing offscowring
of-ten-times oftentimes o-live-tree olivetree o-live-yard oliveyard oil-o-live
oilolive ol-dest-man oldestman o-li-o olio o-lym-pick olympic o-mi-nous
ominous o-ni-ons onions o-pen-arse openarse o-pen-ed opened o-pen-ing opening
o-pen-ly openly o^pe-rate operate op-po-ser opposer op-po-sing opposing
op-po-site opposite op-pres-sed oppressed op-pres-sor oppressor o-ra-cle oracle
o-ra-tor orator or-dain-ed ordained or-dain-ing ordaining or-der-ed ordered
or-der-ing ordering or-der-ly orderly or-di-nance ordinance o-ran-ges oranges
o-range-trees orangetrees or-na-ment ornament or-phan-ism orphanism os-trich-es
ostriches o-ther-wise otherwise o-ver-al overall o-ver-bid overbid o-ver-bake
overbake o-ver-boots overboots o-ver-came overcame o-ver-cast overcast
o-ver-charge overcharge o-ver-came overcame o-ver-did overdid o-ver-do overdo
o-ver-drive overdrive o-ver-eat overeat o-ver-flow overflow o-ver-earn overearn
o-ver-flown overflown o-ver-head overhead o-ver-laid overlaid o-ver-look
overlook o-ver-matcht overmatcht o-ver-much overmuch o-ver-past overpast
o-ver-plus overplus o-ver-rate overrate o-ver-rule overrule o-ver-reach
overreach o-ver-run overrun o-ver-sea oversea o-ver-see oversee o-ver-shooes
overshooes o-ver-sight oversight o-ver-spread overspread o-ver-take overtake
o-ver-talk overtalk o-ver-threw overthrew o-ver-throw overthrow o-ver-thrown
overthrown o-ver-took overtook o-ver-turn overturn o-ver-walk overwalk
o-ver-whelm ouerwhelm o-ver-wise overwise out-bid-ding outbidding out-go-ings
outgoings out-law-ry outlawry out-lan-dish outlandish out-last-ing outlasting
out-stretch-ed outstretched out-ward-ly outwardly own-er-ship ownership
o-zi-ers oziers
P. P.
Pa-ci-fic Pacific pack-sad-dle packsaddle pa-ga-nism paganism pain-ful-ness
painfulness pa-la-ces palaces pa-lat-ed palated pa-lat-bed palatbed pa-la-tine
palatine pal-pa-ble palpable palm-branch-es palmbranches palm-er-worm
palmerworm pa-pa-cy papacy pa-per-mills papermills pa-per-scul paperscul
pa-ra-ble parable pa-ra-dise paradise pa-ra-ket paraket pa-ra-mount paramount
pa-ra-mour paramour par-don-ed pardoned par-don-ing pardoning pa-rish-es
parishes pa-rish-clerk parishclerk par-ley-ing parleying par-ta-kers partakers
par-ti-al partial par-tridg-es partridges pas-sa-ges passages pas-sen-ger
passenger pas-si-on passion passe-o-ver passover ^as-to-ral pastoral
^as-tu-ring pasturing pa-ti-ence patience pa-ti-ent patient ^a-tri-arch
patriarch ^au-ci-ty paucity ^eace-a-ble peaceable ^a-ter-nal paternal
^eace-ma-kers peacemakers ^eb-ble-stones pebblestones ^eace-ma-kers peacemakers
^e-di-gree pedigree ^ee-vish-ness peevishness ^e-li-can pelican ^e-nal-ty
penalty ^e-ni-tent penitent ^e-nu-ry penury ^en-ny-loaf pennyloaf ^en-ny-post
pennypost ^en-ny-worth pennyworth ^en-te-cost pentecost ^en-sive-ness
pensiveness ^er-ceiv-ing perceiving ^er-fect-ing perfecting ^er-fo^m-ance
performance per-fumed perfumed pe-ril-lous perilous per-ju-ry perjury
pe-ri-wig periwig pe-rish-ed perished per-mit-ted permitted per-se-cute
persecute per-plex-ed perplexed per-sist-ing persisting per-se-vere persevere
per-so-nate personate per-swa-ded persuaded per-spect-ive perspective
pes-ti-lence pestilence per-tain-ing pertaining per-vers-ness perverseness
per-vert-ing perverting pha-ri-see pharisee phi-li-stines philistines
pid-ge-ons pigeons pi-e-ty piety pil-gri-mage pilgrimage pi-ous-ly piously
pi-na-cle pinnacle pis-tol-ed pistoled pil-low-bears pillowbears pi-ti-ful
pitiful pi-ti-ed pitied plas-ter-ing plastering plau-sa-ble plausable
plea-sant-ness pleasantness plen-ti-ful plentiful plea-su-red pleasured
pleu-ri-sie pleurisy pli-a-ble pliable po-e-try poetry poi-son-ing poisoning
po-li-cy policy po-lish-ed polished po-li-ticks politics pome-gra-nate
pomegranate pon-der-ing pondering po-pe-ry popery po-pish-ly popishly
po-pu-lous populous por-ti-on portion port-man-teau portmanteau po^-s^s-sed
possessed pos-si-ble possible po-si-tive positive post-mas-ter postmaster
po-ten-tate potentate po-ver-ty poverty pour-trac-ture pourtracture
pour-tray-ed pourtrayed pow-er-ful powerful pra-cti-cal practical pra-cti-sed
practiced pre-ce-dence precedence pre-ci-ous precious pre-cise-ness preciseness
pre-dict-ed predicted pre-fi-gure prefigure pre-ju-dice prejudice pre-fer-ment
preferment pre-fi-gure prefigure pre-la-cy prelacy pre-mu-nire praemunire
pre-pa-red prepared pres-by-ter presbyter pre-sump-tive presumptive
pre-scri-bed prescribed pre-sent-ly presently pre-si-dent president pre-ten-ces
pretenses pre-tend-ing pretending pre-ser-ved preserved pre-su-ming presuming
pre-vail-ed prevailed pre-vent-ed prevented prin-ci-pal principal prin-ci-ples
principles print-ing-house printinghouse print-ing-press printingpress
pri-so-ners prisoners pri-vate-ly privately pri-vi-ledge privilege pri-vi-ly
privily pro-ba-ble probable pro-claim-ing proclaiming pro-di-gal prodigal
pro-di-gy prodigy pro-fit-ed profited pro-ge-ny progeny pro-hi-bit prohibit
pro-ceed-ings proceedings pro-cu-ring procuring pro-fes-sing professing
pro-long-ing prolonging pro-mi-sing promising pro-noun-cing pronouncing
pro-fa-ning profaning pro-fane-ness profaneness pro-pa-gate propagate
pro-per-ty property pro-per-ly properly pro-phe-sie prophecy pro-phe-tess
prophetess pro-po-sed proposed pro-pound-ed propounded pro-rogue-ing
prorogueing pro-se-cute prosecute pro-se-lyte proselyte pro-spect-ive
prospective pro-sper-ous prosperous pro-stra-ted prostrated pro-tect-ed
protected pro-te-stant protestant pro-sti-tute prostitute pro-test-ed protested
pro-test-ing protesting pro-ven-der provender pro-vi-dence providence
pro-vi-ding providing pro-vin-ces provinces pro-vo-cate provocate pro-vo-king
provoking pru-dent-ly prudently psal-te-ry psaltery pub-li-can publican
pub-li-cate publicate pub-lick-ly publicly pub-lish-ed published pul-pi-teer
pulpiteer pu-nish-ment punishment pur-cha-sed purchased pu-ri-fie purify
pu-ri-tan puritan pu-ri-ty purity pur-loyn-ing purloyning pur-po-sing purposing
pur-su-ers pursuers pur-su-ing pursuing pur-te-nance purtenance
Q. Q.
Quaf-fing-like Quaffinglike qua-ker-ism quakerism qua-li-fie qualify
qua-li-ty quality qualm-ish-ness qualmishness quan-da-ry quandary quan-ti-ty
quantity quar-rel-ers quarrelers quar-rel-ing quarreling quar-ter-ing
quartering quar-ter-ed quartered quar-ter-ly quarterly que-ri-ster querister
que-ru-lous querulous que-sti-on question quick-en-eth quickens quick-sil-ver
quicksilver qui-et-ness quietness qui-et-ly quietly quin-tes-sence quintessence
qui-ver-ing quivering qua-ver-ing quavering qui-ver-ed quivered
R. R.
Ra-di-cal Radical ra-dish-es radishes ra-di-ent radient rag-ged-ness
raggedness ral-le-ry rallery ran-coun-ter rancounter ran-som-ed ransomed
ra-pi-er rapier ra-ri-ty rarity ras-ber-ries rasberries ras-kal-ly raskally
rat-tle-ing rattleing ra-ve-nous ravenous ra-vish-ing ravishing rea-di-ness
readiness re-al-ly really rea-son-ing reasoning re-bel-ling rebelling re-bu-ked
rebuked re-build-ed rebuilded re-ceiv-er receiver re-ceiv-ing receiving
reck-on-ing reckoning re-claim-ing reclaiming re-com-mend recommend
re-com-pense recompense re-con-cile reconcile re-cord-ed recorded re-cord-er
recorder re-count-ing recounting re-cre-ate recreate re-cruit-ed recruited
re-cti-fie rectify re-deem-er redeemer re-deem-ed redeemed re-dres-sed
redressed re-di-cule redicule re-fe-rence reference re-fi-ner refiner
re-fi-ning refining re-flect-ing reflecting re-form-ed reformed re-frain-ing
refraining re-fresh-ment refreshment re-fund-ing refunding re-fu-sing refusing
re-gain-ed regained re-gard-ed regarded re-gi-ment regiment re-gi-on region
re-gi-ster register re-gi-stred registered re-gu-lar regular re-hear-sal
rehearsal re-ject-ed rejected re-in-vest reinvest re-joy-cing rejoicing
re-joyn-der rejoinder re-laps-ed relapsed re-la-ted related re-leas-ed released
re-lent-ing relenting re-let-ting reletting re-li-ed relied re-liev-ing
relieving re-lin-quish relinquish re-lish-ed relished re-mand-ed remanded
re-main-der remainder re-main-ed remained re-me-dy remedy re-melt-ing remelting
re-mem-ber remember re-mem-brance remembrance re-mind-ed reminded re-mit-ted
remitted re-miss-ness remissness re-mo-test remotest re-mo-ved removed
re-mo-ving removing ren-der-ed rendered ren-de-vous rendevous re-new-ed renewed
re-noun-cing renouncing re-pair-ed repaired re-pay-ed repayed re-past-ed
repasted re-peal-ed repealed re-peat-ed repeated re-pel-ling repelling
re-pen-tance repentance re-pi-ning rapining re-plant-ed replanted re-ple-nish
replenish re-ple-vin replevin re-ply-ing replying re-port-ed reported re-po-sed
reposed re-pre-hend reprehend re-pre-sent represent re-print-ed reprinted
re-pri-sal reprisal re-pro-bate reprobate re-proach-ed reproached re-pro-ved
reproved re-pug-nant repugnant re-pul-sed repulsed re-purg-ed repurged
re-pu-ted reputed re-quest-ed requested re-qui-red required re-qui-ted requited
re-qui-site requisite re-scu-ed rescued re-sem-ble resemble re-sent-ed resented
re-serv-ed reserved re-si-ding residing re-si-due residue re-sign-ed resigned
re-sist-ed resisted re-solv-ed resolved re-so-lute resolute re-sort-ed resorted
re-spect-ed respected re-spect-ive respective re-sto-red restored re-strain-ed
restrained re-tain-ed retained re-tard-ed retarded re-ten-tive retentive
re-ti-nue retinue re-ti-red retired re-tort-ed retorted re-tract-ed retracted
re-trench-ed retrenched re-treat-ed retreated retriev-ed retrieved re-tro-grade
retrograde re-tri-bute retribute re-turn-ed returned re-veal-ed revealed
re-ven-ger revenger re-vel-lings revellings re-ve-nue revenue re-ve-rend
reverend re-ve-rence reverence re-ver-sed reversed re-view-ed reviewed
re-vi-ling reviling re-vi-sing revising re-vi-ved revived re-vo-ked revoked
re-volt-ed revolted re-vo-lute revolute re-vow-ed revowed re-ward-er rewarder
re-ward-ing rewarding rhe-nish-wine rhenishwine rhe-to-rick rhetoric
ri-bal-dry ribaldry ri-fle-ing rifleing righ-te-ous righteous ri-go-rous
rigorous ring-lead-er ringleader ri-ot-ing rioting ri-ot-ous riotous ri-pen-ing
ripening ri-sing-sun risingsun rob-be-ry robbery rol-ling-stone rollingstone
rope-ma-kers ropemakers rose-ma-ry rosemary rot-ten-ness rottenness
round-a-bout roundabout roy-al-ty royalty ruf-fi-an ruffian rug-ged-ness
ruggedness ru-i-nous ruinous rum-mi-ging rummiging ru-mor-ous rumorous
run-a-gate runagate rud-der-bands rudderbands rud-di-ness ruddiness ru-di-ments
rudiments rus-ti-ness rustiness rut-ting-time ruttingtime rup-ture-truss
rupturetruss
S. S.
Sab-ba-oth Sabbath sa-cra-ment sacrament sa-cri-fice sacrifice sa-cri-ledge
sacrilege sa-cred-ness sacredness sad-dle-ing saddleing sad-du-ces sadduces
safe-guard-ed safeguarded sal-va-tor salvator sa-lu-ting saluting san-cti-fie
sanctify sa-tur-day saturday sa-ti-ate satiate sa-tis-fie satisfy
sa-vage-ness savageness sau-cy-ness saucyness sau-sa-ges sausages sa-ving-ly
savingly sa-vi-our savior sa-vou-ry savoury scab-bed-ness scabbedness
scan-da-lous scanda^ous scar-ci-ty scarcity scat-ter-ed scattered sca-ven-ger
scavenger schis-ma-tick schismatic sci-en-ces sciences school-but-ter
schoolbutter school-mas-ter schoolmaster school-mis-tress schoolmistress
scorn-ful-ness scornfulness scor-pi-on scorpion scorch-ed-ness scorchedness
scoul-ing-ly scoulingly scos-sing-ly scossingly scold-ing-ly scoldingly
scot-tish-ness scottishness scoun-der-el scounderel scra-ping-ly scrapingly
scrib-ble-ing scribbleing scrip-tu-ral scriptural scri-ve-ner scrivener
scrol-ling-ly scrollingly scru-pu-lous scrupulous scru-ti-ny scrutiny
scuf-fle-ing scuffleing scul-li-on scullion scur-vy-er scurvyer scut-che-on
scutcheon seam-ster-ess seamsteress search-ing-ly searchingly sea-son-ed
seasoned sec-ta-ry sectary se-cond-ly secondly se-cre-sie secrecy se-cret-ly
secretly sec-ti-on section se-cu-lar secular se-cure-ly securely se-cu-red
secured se-du-cer seducer se-du-cing seducing seem-ing-ly seemingly
seeth-ing-pot seethingpot self-ish-ness selfishness sel-dom-er seldomer
se-na-tor senator se-ni-or senior sen-su-al sensual sen-si-ble sensible
sense-les-ness senselesness sen-si-tive sensitive sen-ten-ces sentences
sep-tem-ber september se-pa-rate separate se-pul-chre sepulcher se-ques-tred
sequestered ser-je-ant sergeant se-ri-ous serious se-ra-phims seraphims
ser-ge-ant sergeant ser-pen-tine serpentine se-ven-night sevennight ser-vi-tor
servitor ser-vi-tude servitude ser-vant-maid servantmaid ser-ving-man
servingman se-ven-fold sevenfold se-ven-score sevenscore se-ven-teen seventeen
se-ven-teenth seventeenth se-ven-ty seventy se-ve-ral several se-ver-ed severed
sha-dow-ing shadowing shac-kle-ing shackleing sha-green-case shagreencase
shaf-fle-ing shaffleing shal-low-ness shallowness shame-fa-ced shamefaced
shame-les-ly shamelesly shame-ful-ly shamefully shar-pen-ing sharpening
shat-ter-ing shattering sheep-steal-er sheepstealer sheep-mar-ket sheepmarket
sheep-shear-ers sheepshearers shi-ning-ly shiningly shi-ver-ing shivering
shooe-lat-chet shooelatchet shoul-der-blade shoulderblade shooe-ma-ker
shooemaker shel-ter-ing sheltering shep-herd-ess shepherdess shop-keep-er
shopkeeper shoul-der-ing shouldering shun-ning-ly shunningly sick-nes-ses
sicknesses sig-ni-fie signify si-lent-ly silently sil-ver-smith silversmith
si-mi-le simile sing-ing-man singingman sin-gle-man singleman sin-gu-lar
singular si-ni-ster sinister si-tu-ate situate skil-ful-ness skilfulness
sla-vish-ness slavishness slack-ish-ness slackishness slan-der-ing slandering
slaugh-ter-house slaughterhouse slen-der-ness slenderness sin-cere-ly sincerely
sin-gle-ness singleness slip-pe-ry slippery sloth-ful-ness slothfulness
slo-ven-ly slovenly slug-gish-ness sluggishness slum-ber-ing slumbering
slut-tish-ness sluttishness smat-ter-ing smattering smi-ling-ly smilingly
smoa-ky-house smoakyhouse smooth-ing-ly smoothingly smo-ther-ed smothered
snap-pish-ness snappishness snarl-ing-ly snarlingly sneak-ing-ly sneakingly
snatch-ing-ly snatchingly snuff-dish-es snuffdishes so-ber-ly soberly
so-ber-ness soberness so-der-ing sodering so-dom-ite sodomite so-journ-er
sojourner so-lem-nize solemnize so-lemn-ly solemnly some-bo-dy somebody
so-la-cing solacing so-lid-ly solidly so-phis-try sophistry sooth-say-er
soothsayer sor-ce-ry sorcery sor-ce-rer sorcerer sor-did-ness sordidness
sor-row-ful sorrowful sot-tish-ness sottishness soul-di-er soldier south-er-ly
southerly spa-ge-rick spageryck spa-ni-el spaniel spa-nish-snuff spanishsnuff
spa^ring-ly sparingly spark-ish-ness sparkishness spawl-ing-ly spawlingly
spe-ci-al special spe-ci-men specimen spe-ci-ous specious spec-ta-cle spectacle
spec-ta-tor spectator spe-cu-late speculate spee-di-ly speedily spee-di-ness
speediness spel-ling-book spellingbook spi-ce-ry spicery spi-rit-ed spirited
spite-ful-ly spitefully spitch-cock-les spithcockles spit-tle-fields
spittlefields sport-ing-ly sportingly spot-ted-ness spottedness squan-der-ing
squandering stag-ger-ing staggering stam-mer-ing stammering sta-ring-ly
staringly state-li-ness stateliness sta-ti-on station stea-di-er steadier
steal-ing-ly stealingly sted-fast-ly steadfastly sted-fast-ness stedfastness
stew-ard-ship stewardship stir-rop-oyl stirropoyl stitch-ing-silk stitchingsilk
stiff^neck-ed stiffnecked sto-ma-cher stomacher sto-mach-ful stomochfull
stor-mi-est stormiest stub-bed-ly stubbedly stub-born-ness stubbornness
strag-gle-ing straggleing strap-pa-do strappado strap-ping-lass strappinglass
stra-ta-gem stratagem straw-ber-ry strawberry strut-ting-ness struttingness
stu-dying studying stu-di-ous studious stu-pi-fie stupifie stur-di-ness
sturdiness sub-joyn-ed subjoyned sub-jun-ctive subjunctive sub-li-med sublimed
sub-mis-sive submissive sub-ject-ed subjected sub-du-ed subdued sub-mit-ted
submitted sub-orn-ed suborned sub-pae-na subpaena sub-scri-bed subscribed
sub-si-dy subsidy sub-sist-ed subsisted sub-stract-ed subtracted sub-til-ty
subtly sub-til-ly subtilty sub-vert-ing subverting suc-ceed-ing succeeding
suc-ces-sor successor suc-cour-er succourer sud-den-ly suddenly suf-fer-er
sufferer suf-fer-ance sufferance suf-fi-ceth suffices suf-fo-cate suffocate
suf-fra-ges suffrages su-gar-ed sugared sug-gest-ed suggested sui-ta-ble
suitable sul-li-ed sullied sul-len-ness sullenness sul-phu-rous sulphurous
sum-ma-ry summary su-per-scribe superscribe sup-pli-cant supplicant
s^n-day-night sundaynight sun-day-noon sundaynoon sup-per-time suppertime
sup-ple-ment supplement sup-pli-ant suppliant sup-po-sing supposing
sup-pres-sing suppressing sup-plant-ed supplanted sup-ply-ed supplied
sup-pu-ted su^puted sure-ti-ship suretiship sur-feit-ed surfeited sur-li-ness
surliness sur-na-med surnamed sur-ro-gate surrogate sur-pri-sed surprised
sur-sin-gle sursingle sur-vey-ing surveying sus-pect-ed suspected sus-tain-ed
sustained sus-te-nance sustenance syl-lo-gism syllogism sym-me-try symmetry
swal-low-ing swallowing sy-na-gogue synagogue sy-ca-more sycamore sym-pa-thize
sympathize sym-pa-thy sympathy sy-nop-sis synopsis sy-ri-an syrian syl-la-bles
syllables
T. T.
Ta-ber-er Taberer ta-ble-cloth tablecloth taf-fe-ty taffety tag-ma-ker
tagmaker tay-lor-ing tayloring tal-ka-tive talkative tal-low-ing tallowing
tal-ly-men tallymen tam-my-coat tammycoat tam-per-ing tampering tan-ners-fat
tannersfat ta-pe-stry tapestry tar-nish-ed tarnished tar-pau-lin tarpaulin
tar-rass-walks tarrasswalks tar-ry-ing tarrying task-ma-sters taskmasters
tear-ing-ly tearingly teas-ing-ly teasingly taunt-ing-ly tauntingly tat-tle-ing
tattleing te-di-ous tedious teem-ing-ly teemingly tem-po-rize temporize
tem-pe-rance temperance tem-per-ed tempered tem-po-ral temporal ten-der-ness
tenderness ten-to-one tentoone ten-ter-hooks tenterhooks ter-ri-bly terribly
ter-ri-ble terrible ter-ri-ses terrises te-sta-ment testament te-sta-tor
restator tes-ti-fie testify thank-ful-ness thankfulness thank-wor-thy
thankworthy thanks-gi-ving thanksgiving there-un-to thereunto thie-ve-ry
thievery thir-sti-ness thirstiness thir-teenth-ly thirteenthly thir-ti-eth
thirtieth thrif-ri-ly thriftily thrif-ti-ness thriftiness through-li-er
throughlier there-up^on thereupon thun-der-bolt thunderbolt thun-der-ing
thundering time-li-er timelier tin-der-box tinderbox tin-sel-ler tinseller
tip-ple-ing tippleing ti-ring-room tiringroom tire-wo-man tirewoman tis-si-cal
tissical ti-thing-men tithingmen ti-tu-lar titular to-bac^co tobacco to-ge-ther
together to-ken-house tokenhouse tol-le-rate tolerate to-tal-ly totally
to-ward-ly towardly tor-ment-ed tormented tor-men-tors tormentors tor-tu-red
tortu^ed tor-toise-shell tortoiseshell tot-ter-ing tottering to-wel-ling
towelling tract-a-ble tractable tra-ding-man tradingman traf-fick-ing
trafficking tra-ge-dy tragedy tra-gi-cal tragical tram-ple-ing trampleing
tran-sla-ting translating trai-te-rous traitorous tran-scend-ing transcending
trans-fi-gure transfigure trans-fer-red transferred trans-form-ed transformed
trans-gres-sed transgressed trans-pa-rent transparent trans-pro-sing
transprosing trans-ver-sing transversing tra-pan-ning trapanning tra-pan-ner
trapanner tra-vel-ler traveller tra-vel-ling traveling tra-ver-sing traversing
trea-che-rous treacherous trea-che-ry treachery trea-su-rer treasurer
trea-su-ry treasury trea-ta-ble tractable tres-pas-ses trespasses trea-ti-ses
treatises tre-ble-strings treblestrings tren-cher-man trencherman tri-an-gle
triangle tri-bu-nal tribunal tri-fle-ing trifleing tri-ni-ty trinity
tri^par-tite tripartite tri-vi-al trivial tri-um-phant triumphant trou-ble-som
troublesome trum-pet-er trumpeter truce-break-ers trucebreakers tub-preach-ers
tubpreachers tur-bu-lent turbulent tur-moil-ing turmoiling tur-pen-tine
turpentine tur-key-cock turkeycock tur-ret-ed turreted ty-ran-ny tyranny
ty-ran-nize tyrannize ty-thing-men tythingmen twi-light-ing twilighting
V. V.
Va-can-cy Vacancy va-ga-bond vagabond va-len-tine valentine va-li-ant valiant
va-lour-ous valourous va-lu-ed valued vanish-ed vanished va-ni-ty vanity
van-quish-ed vanquished va-pour-ing vapouring va-ri-ance variance vas-sal-age
vassalage va-ti-can vatican va-ri-ous va-ri-ous ve-ge-tives vegetives
ve-he-ment vehement ve-ne-mous venomous ven-ne-ry vennery ven-tu-rous venturous
ve-ni-al venial ver-di-grease verdigrease ven-ge-ance vengeance ve-ni-son
venison ve-ri-ly verily ve-ri-ty verity ver-tu-ous virtuous ver-si-on version
vi-car-age vicarage vi-ci-ous vicious vi-cto-ry victory vi-ctu-als victuals
vi-gi-lant vigilant vil-la-ges villages vil-la-ny villainy vi-ne-gar vinegar
vin-to-ner vintoner vi-o-late violate vi-o-lets violets vi-o-lin violin
vi-per-ate viperate vir-gins-wax virginswax vir-gi-nals virginals
vine-dres-sers vinedressers vi-o-lence violence vi-o-lent violent vi-si-ble
visible vi-si-on vision vi-sit-ed visited un-a-ble unable un-a-ctive unactive
un-a-wares unawares un-be-lief unbelief un-cer-tain uncertain un-clean-ness
uncleanness un-cloath-ed uncloathed un-come-ly uncomely un-con-cern'd
unconcerned un-cord-ed uncorded un-co-ver uncover un-couth-ed uncouthed
un-cre-ate uncreate un-cti-on unction un-daunt-ed undaunted un-der-ling
unde^ling un-der-mine undermine un-der-neath underneath un-der-strue understrue
un-der-stand understand un-de-serve undeserve un-der-take undertake un-der-took
undertook un-du-ly unduly un-e-qual unequal un-e-ven uneven un-fair-ly unfairly
un-faith-ful unfaithful un-feign-ed unfeigned un-firm-ly unfirmly un-fit-ting
unfitting un-fi-nisht unfinisht un-fruit-ful unfruitful un-fold-ed unfolded
un-gird-ed ungirded un-god-ly ungodly un-ho-ly unholy u-ni-corn unicorn
u-ni-form uniform u-ni-on union u-ni-verse universe u-ni-ted united u-nit-y
unity un-just-ly unjustly un-kind-ness unkindness un-la-ding unlading
un-land-ed unlanded un-lap-ped unlapped un-lash-ed unlashed un-law-ful unlawful
un-lead-ed unleaded un-leap-ed unleaped un-learn-ed unlearned un-load-ed
unloaded un-maim-ed unmaimed un-man-ly unmanly un-man-ned unmanned un-mar-red
unmarred un-mask-ed unmasked un-mat-ted unmatted un maul-ed unmauled un-mil-led
unmilled un-mind-ful unmindful un-ming-led unmingled un-min-ced unminced
un-mis-sed unmissed un-per-fect unperfect un-qui-et unquiet un-quench-ed
unquenched un-rea-dy unready un-ru-ly unruly un-roast-ed unroasted un-seem-ly
unseemly un-sel-dom unseldom un-skil-ful unskilful un-snap-ped unsnapped
un-snatch-ed unsnatched un-spot-ted unspotted un-sta-ble unstable un-sta-ved
unstaved un-stitch-ed unstitched un-stol-len unstollen un-stop-ped unstopped
un-sto-red unstored un-tack-ed untacked un-tag-ged untagged un-ta-ken untaken
un-ta-med untamed un-tan-ned untanned un-tap-ped untapped un-t^r-red untarred
un-tast-ed un^asted un-thank-ful unthankful un-time-ly untimely un-tip-ped
untipped un-toast-ed untoasted un-tol-led untolled un-tomb-ed untombed
un-tos-sed untossed un-to-ward untoward un-vail-ed unvailed un-ver-sed unvers^d
un-vex-ed unvexed un-wad-ded unwadded un-wa-ged unwaged un-wast-ed unwasted
un-want-ed unwanted un-warp-ed unwarped un-wast-ed unwasted un-watch-ed
unwatched un-w^l-led unwalled un-wash-en unwashen un-weigh-ed unweighed
un-wor-thy unworthy un-weil-dy unweildy un-whole-som unwholesom un-wise-ly
unwisely vo-lun-teers volunteers vo-lu-ble voluble vo-mit-ing vomiting vo-ta-ry
votary voy-a-ges voyages vouch-sa-fing vouchsafing up-braid-ed upbraided
up-hold-eth upholdeth up-per-most uppermost up-right-ly uprightly up-right-ness
uprightness up-ri-sing uprising u-ri-nal urinal u-su-age usuage ush-er-ing
ushering u-su-al usual u-surp-ing usurping u-su-ry usury u-su-rer usurer
us-que-bath usquebath ut-ter-ance utterance ut-ter-ing uttering ut-ter-most
uttermost vul-gar-ly vulgarly vul-tur-ing vulturing
W. W.
Wad-ded-gown Waddedgown wag-gon-er waggoner wain-scot-ed wainscoted wa-ken-ed
wakened wal-low-ing wallowing wan-der-ing wandering wan-ton-ness wantonness
wa-pen-takes wapentakes warm-ing-pan warmingpan warm^ing-stone warmingstone
war-rant-ed warranted was-al-ing wassaling was-sal-bowl wassalbowl
watch-ful-ness watchfulness wa-ter-ed watered wa-ter-brooks waterbrooks
wa-ter-course watercourse wa-ter^floods waterfloods wa-ver-ing wavering
weak-nes-ses weaknesses weal-thi-er wealthier wea-pon-less weaponless
wea-ri-ness weariness wea-ther-ed weathered wed-nes-day wednesday weigh-ti-er
weightier wel-com-er welcomer wa-ter-pots waterpots wa-ter-springs watersprings
way-fa-ring wayfaring wea-ri-som wearisom well-do-ing welldoing well-pleas-ed
wellpleased well-pleas-ing wellpleasing where-un-to whereunto where-up-on
whereupon whis-per-ing whispering whis-pe-rer whisperer whore-mon-ger
whoremonger whole-som-ness wholesomness wick-ed-ly wickedly wick-ed-ness
wickedness wi-dow-er widower wi-dow-hood widowhood wil-der-ness wilderness
wil-ful-ly wilfully wil-ling-ly willingly wil-low-tree willowtree will-wor-ship
willworship win-now-ed winnowed win-ter-ed wintered wise-heart-ed wisehearted
with-draw-ing withdrawing wi-ther-ed withered with-hold-eth withholdeth
wit-nes-sed witnessed wit-nes-ses witnesses wit-ti-ly wittily wit-ting-ly
wittingly work-man-ship workmanship wor-ship-ed worshipped wor-ship-er worshiper
wor-shipful worshipful won-der-ful wonderful wo-man-ish womanish worm-wood-wine
wormwoodwine wor-thi-ness worthiness wrong-ful-ly wrongfully wran-gle-ing
wrangleing wretch-ed-ness wretchedness
Y. Y.
Ye-ster-day Yesterday ye-ster-night yesternight ye-o-man yeoman youth-ful-ness
youthfulness yoke-fel-low yokefellow yel-low-ish yellowish
Z. Z.
Zea-lous-ly Zealously zo-di-ack zodiac
Words of Four Syllables.
A. A.
A-ban-don-ed Abandoned a-bi-li-ty ability a-bo-lish-ed abolished a-bo-mi-nate
abominate ab-ro-ga-ted abrogated a-bor-tive-ness abortiveness ab-so-lute-ly
absolutely a-bun-dant-ly abundantly a-bu-sive-ness abusiveness a-ca-de-my
academy ac-cep-ta-ble acceptable ac-ces-sa-ry accessory ac-com-plish-ed
accomplished ac-com-plish-ment accomplishment ac-com-pa-ny accompany
ac-ci-den-tal accidental ac-co-mo-date accomodate ac-cord-ing-ly accordingly
ac-cu-me-late accumelate ac-cu-rate-Iy accurately ac-cur-sed-ly accursedly
ac-cu-stom-ed accustomed ac-know-ledg-ment acknowledgment ac-qui-es-ced
acquiesced ac-ti-vi-ty activity ac-ti-o-nate actionate a-cel-da-ma aceldama
a-da^man-tine adamantine ad-di-ti-on addition ad-mi-ni-ster administer
ad-mi-ra-ble admirable ad-mo-nish-ed admonished a-dop-ti-on adoption
ad-van-ta-ges advantages ad-ven-tu-rous adventurous ad-ver-sa-ry adversary
ad-ver-ti-zer advertizer ad-ver-si-ty adversity a-dul-te-ry adultery
a-dul-te-rer adulterer a-dul-ter-ess adulteress a-dul-te-rous adulterous
af-fe-cti-on affection af-fi-ni-ty affinity af-fli-cti-on affliction
a-la-ba-ster alabaster a-la-cri-ty alacrity a-li-e-nate alienate al-le-gi-ance
allegiance al-migh-ti-ness almightiness al-le-go-ry allegory al-to-ge-ther
altogether a-ma-zed-ly amazedly am-bas-sa-dor ambassador am-bi-gu-ous ambiguous
am-bi-ti-on ambition a-mi-a-ble amiable a-mi-ca-ble amicable a-na-the-ma
anathema a-na-to-my anatomy an-nu-i-ty annuity an-swe-ra-ble answerable
an-ta-go-nist antagonist an-ti-qui^ty antiquity an-ti-pa-thy antipathy
an-ti-ci-pate anticipate an-ti-qua-ry antiquary an-ti-the-sis antithesis
a-po-ca-lypse apocalypse a-po-cry-phal apocryphal a-po-lo-gy apology
a-po-lo-gize apologize a-po-stle-ship apostleship a-po-sta-cy apostasy
a-po-sta-tize apostatize ^^pa-rel-led apparelled ^^pa-rent-ly apparently
^^pear-an-ces appearances ^^per-tain-ing appertaining ^^pre-hend-ed apprehended
^^pre-hen-sive apprehensive ^^pro-pri-ate appropriate ^^pur-te-nance
appurtenance ^^bi-tra-ry arbitrary ^^ch-bi-shop-rick archbishopric
^^ch-dea-con-ship archdeaconship ^^^chi-te-cture architecture ^^-gu-men-tal
argumental ^-rith-me-tick arithmetic ^^-rear-a-ges arrearages ^^^ro-gan-cy
arrogance ^^^ti-fi-cer artificer ^^^ti-cu-late articulate ^^-til-le-ry
artillery ^^-mo-ri-al armorial ^^-per-sion aspersion ^^-so-ci-ate associate
^-sto-ni-ed astonished ^-sto-nish-ed astonished ^-sto-nish-ment astonishment
^-stro-lo-ger astrologer ^-stro-lo-gy astrology ^^stro-no-my astronomy
^^^ten-tive-ly attentively ^^-ten-ti-on attention ^^-tho-ri-ty authority
^^-da-ci-ous audacious ^^-di-to-ry auditory ^^-tho-ri-ty authority
^^-then-ti-cal authentical ^^-tho-ri-zing authorizing
B. B.
^^-by-lo-nish Babylonish ^^r-ba-ri-an barbarian ^^r-ba-ri-ty barbarity
^^r-ba-rous-ly barbarously ^^r-ba-rous-ness barbarousness ^^-a-ti-tudes
beatitudes be-ha-vi-our behavior beau-ti-ful-ly beautifully beau-ti-ful-ness
beautifulness be-ne-fa-ctors benefactors be-ne-fi-cence beneficence
be-ne-vo-lence benevolence be-nig-ni-ty benignity be-to-ken-eth betokens
blas-phe-mous-ly blasphemously blas-phe-ming-ly blasphemingly
blood-guil-ti-ness bloodguiltiness boi-ste-rous-ly boisterously
boi-ste-rous-ness boisterousness boun-ti-ful-ness bountifulness boun-ti-ful-ly
bountifully bur-den-som-ness burdensomness burnt-of-fer-ings burntofferings
burnt-sa-cri-fice burntsacrifice bu-sie-bo-dy busiebody
C. C.
Ca-la-mi-ty Calamity ca-pa-ci-ty capacity ca-pa-ci-ous capacious ca-pri-ci-ous
capricious cap-ti-va-ted captivated cap-ti-vi-ty captivity car-ri-a-ges
carriages car-na-ti-on carnation car-na-li-ty carnality ca-tho-li-cal
catholical ca-te-chi-sing catechizing ca-ter-pil-lar caterpillar ce-le-ri-ty
celerity ce-le-bra-ting celebrating ce-le-sti-al celestial cen-tu-ri-on
centurion ce-re-mo-ny ceremony cer-ti-fy-ing certifying cer-ti-fi-ed certified
cer-ti-fi-cate certificate chal-ce-do-ny chalcedony chang-a-ble-ness
changableness cha-ra-cte-rize characterize cha-ri-ta-ble charitable
cha-ri-ta-bly charitably cir-cum-ci-sed circumcised cir-cum-spect-ly
circumspectly chi-rur-ge-on surgeon cir-cum-fe-rence circumference
ci-vi-li-ty civility cock-a-tri-ces cockatrices co-e-ter-nal coeternal
col-la-ti-on collation col-la-te-ral collateral col-lec-ti-on collection
col-le-gi-ate collegiate col-le-gi-ans collegians com-for-ta-ble comfortable
com-bi-na-ting combinating com-bus-ti-on combustion com-bus-ta-ble combustable
com-man-de-ment commandment com-me-mo-rate commemorate com-men-su-rate
commensurate com-mi-se-rate commiserate com-mis-si-on commission com-mo-di-ous
commodious com-mo-di-ty commodity com-mo-nal-ty commonalty com-mo-ti-on
commotion com-mu-ni-cant communicant com-mu-ni-cate communicate com-mu-ni-on
communion com-mu-ni-ty community com-mu-ta-tive commutative com-pact-ed-ness
compactedness com-pa-nion companion com-pas-si-on compassion com-pen-di-ous
compendious com-pa-ni-ed companied com-pa-ra-ble comparable com-pa-ri-son
comparison com-pla-cen-cy complacency com-pel-la-ted compellated
com-pla-cent-ness complacentness com-ple-men-tal complemental com-plex-i-on
complexion com-po-si-tor compositor com-pre-hend-ed comprehended co-me-di-ans
comedians com-pul-si-on compulsion com-pun-cti-on compunction com-pre-hen-sive
comprehensive con-ca-vi-ty concavity con-cep-ti-on conception con-ces-si-on
concession con-ci-si-on concision con-clu-si-on conclusion con-co-mi-tant
concomitant con-cu-pis-cense concupiscence con-de-scend-ing condescending
con-di-ti-on condition con-fe-de-rate confederate con-fe-cti-on confection
con-fes-si-on confession con-fi-dent-ly confidently con-for-ma-ble conformable
con-for-mi-ty conformity con-fu-si-on confusion con-gra-tu-late congratulate
con-je-ctu-red conjectured con-jun-cti-on conjunction con-nex-i-on connection
con-sci-en-ces consciences con-si-sto-ry consistory con-se-cra-ted consecrated
con-si-der-ed considered con-si-der-ing considering con-spi-ra-cy conspiracy
con-stru-cti-on construction con-sum-pti-on consumption con-ta-gi-on contagion
con-tem-pti-ble contemptible con-temp-tu-ous contemptuous ^on-ten-ti-on
contention con-ten-ti-ous contentious con-ti-nen-cy continency con-ti-nu-al
continual con-ti-nent-ly continently con-ti-nu-ance continuance
con-tra-dict-ing contradicting con-tra-cti-on contraction con-tra-ri-wise
contrariwise con-tri-bu-ted contributed con-tri-ti-on contrition con-tro-ver-sy
controversy con-tro-ver-ted controverted con-tu-ma-cy contumacy con-tu-me-ly
contumely con-ve-ni-ent convenient con-ven-ti-on convention con-ver-si-on
conversion con-vic-ti-on conviction con-vul-si-on convulsion co-o-pe-rate
cooperate co-or-di-nate coordinate co-pi-ous-ness copiousness co-ral-la-ry
corallary co-ri-an-der coriander cor-po-ra-ly corporally cor-po-ra-ted
corporated cor-po-re-al corporeal cor-rec-ti-on correction cor-re-spon-dance
correspondance cor-ro-bo-rate corroborate cor-rup-ti-on corruption
cor-rup-ti-ble corruptible cos-ter-mon-ger costermonger co-ve-nan-ted
covenanted coun-ter-vail-ing countervailing coun-ter-feit-ed counterfeited
co-ve-tous-ness covetousness coun-te-nan-cing countenancing cour-te-ous-ly
courteously cre-a-ti-on creation cru-ci-fi-ed crucified cu-ri-ou-sly curiously
cus-to-ma-ry customary
D. D.
Dam-na^ti-on Damnation dam-ni-fi-ed damnified de-bi-li-tate debilitate
de-ceit-ful-ness deceitfulness de-ci-si-on decision de-coc-ti-on decoction
de-di-ca-ted dedicated de-fec-ti-on defection de-fi-ci-ent deficient
de-for-mi-ty deformity de-ge-ne-rate degenerate de-jec-ti-on dejection
de-jec-ted-ness dejectedness de-lec-ta-ble delectable de-li-be-rate deliberate
de-li-ca-cies delicacies de-li-cate-ness delicateness de-li-ci-ous delicious
de-li-ne-ate delineate de-lin-quen-cy delinquency de-li-ve-rance deliverance
de-li-ve-red delivered de-lu-si-on delusion de-mo-lish-ed demolished
de-mon-stra-ted demonstrated de-no-mi-nate denominate de-plo-ra-ble deplorable
de-pres-si-on depression de-ri-si-on derision de-scrip-ti-on description
de-ser-ti-on desertion de-sign-ed-ly designedly de-si-ra-ble desirable
de-si-rous-ly desirously de-so-late-ly desolately des-pe-rate-ly desperately
des-pi-ca-ble despicable de-spite-ful-ly despitefully de-struc-ti-on
destruction de-ter-min-ate determinate de-ter-mi-ned determined de-tes^ta-ble
detestable de-vo-ti-on devotion di-a-me-ter diameter dif-fer-en-ces differences
di-fi-cul-ty difficulty di-ges-ti-on digestion dig-ni-fi-ed dignified
di-gres-si-on digression di-li-gent-ly diligently di-mi-nish-ed diminished
di-rec-ti-on direction dis-al-low-ed disallowed dis-a-nul-led disanulled
dis-ad-van-tage disadvantage dis-a-gree-ing disagreeing dis-ap-point-ed
disappointed dis-ap-pro-ving disapproving dis-com-fit-ed discomfited
dis-com-po-sed discomposed dis-con-tent-ed discontented dis-con-ti-nue
discontinue dis-con-so-late disconsolate dis-co-ver-ed discovered
dis-coun-te-nance discountenance dis-cou-ra-ged discouraged dis-cour-te-sie
discourtesie dis-cre-dit-ed discredited dis-cre-ti-on discretion
dis-dain-ful-ly disdainfully dis-en-ga-ging disengaging dis-fi-gu-ring
disfiguring dis-hear-ten-ing disheartening dis-ho-ne-sty dishonesty
dis-ho-nour-ing dishonouring dis-in-he-rit disinherit dis-jun-cti-on
disjunction dis-o-bey-ed disobeyed dis-ob-li-ging disobliging dis-or-der-ly
disorderly dis-pa^rage-ment disparagement dis-per-si-on dispersion
dis-plea-su-ring displeasuring dis-pos-ses-sed dispossessed dis-pu-ta-ble
disputable dis-qui-et-ness disquietness dis-sen-ti-on dissension dis-se-ver-ed
dissevered dis-so-lu-ble dissoluble dis-sua-si-on dissuasion dis-si^mu-late
dissimulate dis-tem-per-ing distempering dis-tin-cti-on distinction
dis-tin-guish-ed distinguished dis-tra-cti-on distraction dis-tri-bu-ting
distributing di-ver-si-ties diversities di-ver-si-on diversion di-vi-ni-ty
divinity di-vi-si-on division do-mi-neer-ing domineering do-mi-ni-on dominion
dox-o-lo-gy doxology
E. E.
E-di-fy-ing Edifying e-di-ti-on edition e-du-ca-ted educated ef-fe-ctu-al
effectual ef-fe-mi-nate effeminate ef-fi-ca-cy efficacy ef-fi-ci-ent efficient
ef-fi-gi-es effigies ef-fu-si-on effusion e-gre-gi-ous egregious e-gyp-ti-an
egyptian e-le-cti-on election e-le-gan-cy elegancy e-le-gant-ly elegantly
e-le-va-ted elevated e-le-venth-ly eleventhly e-lo-quent-ly eloquently
em-bas-sa-dor ambassador em-broi-der-ed embroidered em-bol-den-ed emboldened
em-pha-ti-cal emphatical e-na-mour-ed enamoured en-com-pas-sing encompassing
en-coun-ter-ing encountering en-cou-ra-ging encouraging en-cum-ber-ing
encumbering en-da-ma-ged endamaged en-dan-ger-ing endangering en-dea-vour-ing
endeavoring en-fran-chise-ment enfranchisement en-ter-med-dle entermeddle
en-ter-tain-ment entertainment en-thu-si-asm enthusiasm e-mi-nent-ly eminently
e-nor-mi-ty enormity en-ter-pri-ses enterprises ^n-ter-min-gle entermingle
^n-vi-ron-ed environed ^-pis-co-pal episcopal ^-qua-li-ty equality ^-qui-ta-ble
equitable ^-qui-va-lent equivalent ^-qui-vo-cate equivocate ^r-ro-ne-ous
erroneous ^s-sen-ti-al essential ^-sta-blish-ment establishment ^-ter-nal-ly
eternally ^-ter-ni-ty eternity ^-va-cu-ate evacuate ^-van^ge-list evangelist
^-ven-ing-tide eveningtide ^-ver-last-ing everlasting ^-vi-den-ces evidences
^-vi-dent-ly evidently ^^-ro-cly-don euroclydon ^x-a-cti-on exaction
^x-a-mi-ned examined ^x-as-pe-rate exasperate ^x-ceed-ing-ly exceedingly
^x-cel-len-cy excellency ^x-cep-ti-on exception ^x-ces-sive-ly excessively
^x-e-cu-ted executed ^x-e-cu-tors executors ^x-em-pla-ry exemplary ^x-emp-ti-on
exemption ^x-er-ci-ses exercises ^x-hi-bit-ing exhibiting ^x-hort-ing-ly
exhortingly ^x-pe-di-ent expedient ^x-pe-ri-ence experience ^x-pe-ri-ment
exp^riment ^x-pi-a-ted exp^^^ed ^x-po-si-tor expo^^^or ^x-po-stu-late
expostulate ^x-pres-si-on expression ^x-qui-site-ly exquisitely ^x-tem-po-re
extempore ^x-te-nu-ate extenuate ^x-ter-nal-ly externally ^x-tin^guish-ed
extinguished ex-tor-ti-on extortion ex-tra-va-gant extravagant ex-tre-mi-ty
extremity ex-tri-ca-ted extricated ex-trin-se-cal extrinsecal
F. F.
Fa-bu-lous-ly Fabulously fa-ci-li-ty facility fa-cti-ous-ly factiously
fal-la-ci-ous fallacious fal-si-fy-ing falsifying fa-mi-li-ar familiar
fan-ta-sti-cal fantastical fash-i-on-ed fashioned fa-vou-ra-ble favorable
fe-bru-a-ry february fel-low-ser-vant fellowservant fel-low-help-er
fellowhelper fi-de-li-ty fidelity for-ma-li-ty formality fore-or-dain-ed
foreordained for-get-ful-ness forgetfulness for-give-nes-ses forgivenesses
for-ni-ca-tor fornicator for-ti-fi-ed fortified foun-da-ti-on foundation
frau-du-lent-ly fraudulently fru-i-ti-on fruition fun-da-men-tal fundamental
fu-ri-ous-ly furiously
G. G.
Ge-ne-ral-ly Generally ge-ne-rous-ly generously ge-ne-ra-ting generating
ge-o-gra-pher geographer ge-o-gra-phy geography ge-o-me-try geometry
ge-o-man-cy geomancy glo-ri-fi-ed glorified glo-ri-ous-ly gloriously
gor-ge-ous-ly gorgeously gra-ci-ous-ly graciously gra-du-al-ly gradually
H. H.
Ha-ber-dash-er Haberdasher ha-ber-gi-on habergion ha-bi-ta-ble habitable
hal-ber-di-er halberdier ha-le-lu-jah halelujah he-re-ti-cal heretical
he-ro-i-cal heroical he-te-ro-dox heterodox hi-e-rar-chy hierarchy
ho-nou-ra-ble honorable how-so-e-ver howsoever hu-ma-ni-ty humanity
hu-mi-li-ty humility his-to-ri-an historian hos-pi-ta-ble hospitable
hy-po-cri^sie hypocrisy hyp-po-cras-wine hyppocraswine hy-po-the-sis
hypothesis hun-ger-bit-ten hungerbitten
I. I.
I-do-la-ter Idolater i-do-la-try idolatry ig-no-mi-ny ignominy ig-no-rant-ly
ignorantly il-le-gal-ly illegally il-li-te-rate illiterate il-lu-mi-nate
illuminate il-lus-tri-ous illustrious i-ma-gi-ned imagined im-ma-cu-late
immaculate im-mo-de-rate immoderate im-mo-des-ty immodesty im-mo-ra-ble
immorable i-mi-ta-ting imitating im-mu-ta-ble immutable im-me-di-ate immediate
im-mi-nent-ly imminently im-par-ti-al impartial im-pa-ti-ence impatience
im-pe-di-ment impediment im-pe-ni-tence impenitence im-pe-ra-tive imperative
im-pi-e-ty impiety im-pi-ou-sly impiously im-pla-ca-ble implacable
im-por-tu-nate importunate im-pos-si-ble impossible im-po-ve-rish impov^rish
im-pres-si-on impression im-pri-son-ment imprisonment im-pro-ba-ble improbable
im-pro-per-ly improperly im-pro-vi-dent improvident in-ca-pa-ble incapable
in-ces-tu-ous incestuous in-com-mo-date incommodate in-com-pe-tent incompetent
in-con-gru-ous incongruous in-con-sis-tent inconsistent in-con-stan-cy
inconstancy in-con-ti-nent incontinent in-cor-po-rate incorporate
in-coun-ter-ed incountered in-cou-rag-ed encouraged in^cre-di-ble incredible
in-cre-du-lous incredulous in-cul-pa-ble inculpable in-cu-ra-ble incurable
in-de-fi-nite indefinite in-dea-vour-ing endeavoring in-de-li-ble indelible
in-de-pen-dent independent in-dif-fer-ent indifferent in-dig-ni-ty indignity
in-di-rect-ly indirectly in-dis-creet-ly indiscreetly in-dis-po-sed indisposed
in-do-ci-ble indocible in-dul-gen-ces indulgences in-ef-fa-ble ineffable
in-dus-tri-ous industrious in-fal-lib-ly infallibly in-fec-ti-ous infectious
^n-fe-ri-or inferior inf-er-nal-ly infernally in-fi-nit-ly infinitely
in-flex-i-ble inflexible in-for-tu-nate unfortunate in-fir-mi-ty infirmity
in-flu-en-ces influences in-ha-bi-tant inhabitant in^cor-rupt-ed incorrupted
in-ge-ni^ous ingenious in-gra-ti-tude ingratitude in-he-ri-tor inheritor
in-he-ri-tance inheritance i-ni-qui-ty iniquity in-ju-ri-ous injurious
in-light-en-ed enlightened in-no-cent-ly innocently in-or-di-nate inordinate
in-no-cen-cy innocence in-qui-si-tive inquisitive in-scrip-ti-on inscription
in-sen-si-ble insensible in-se-pe-rate inseperate in-si-nu-ate insinuate
in-so-lent-ly insolently in-spec-ti-on inspection in-spi-ra-ted inspirated
in-sti-tu-ted instituted in-struc-ti-on instruction in-stru-men-tal
instrumental in-te-gri-ty integrity in-tel-li-gence intelligence
in-tem-pe-rance intemperance in-ten-ti-on intention in-ter-ces-sor intercessor
in-ter-cept-ing intercepting in-ter^med-dle intermeddle in-ter-min-gle
intermingle in-ter-po-sing interposing in-ti-ma-ting intimating in-ter-pre-ter
interpreter in-ter-rup-ting interrupting in-ter-tain-ment intertainment
in-ter-ve-ning intervening in-trac-ta-ble intractable in-tro-du-cing
introducing in-va-li-ding invaliding in-va-si-on invasion in-ven-ti-on
invention in-ven-to-ry inventory in-vi-si-ble invisible in-vin-ci-ble
invincible in-vi-ro-ned environed ir-re-ve-rent irrever^nt ju-di-ca-ture
judicature ju-di-ci-al judicial ju-di-ci-ous judicious jus-ti-fi-ed justified
K. K.
Ken-tish-pip-pins Kentishpippins
L. L.
La-bo-ri-ous Laborious la-men-ta-ble lamentable las-ci-vi-ous lascivious
le-gi-ti-mate legitimate li-be-ral-ly liberatly le-vi-a-than leviathan
li-cen-ti-ous licentious le-vi-ti-cal levitical lieu-te-nan-cy lieutenancy
li-o-nes-ses lionesses long-suf-fer-ing longsuffering look-ing-glas-ses
lookingglasses lo-ving-kind-ness lovingkindness lux-u-ri-ous luxurious
M. M.
Ma-gi-ci^an Magician mag-ni-fi-cence magnificence mag-ni-fi-cat magnificat
mag-ni-fy-ing magnifying ma-ho-me-tan mohammedan ma-le-fac-tor malefactor
ma-le-vo-lent malevolent malicious malicious ma-lig-ni-ty malignity
ma-ni-fest-ed manifested man-si-on-house mansionhouse mar-ri-a-ges marriages
mar-vel-lous-ly marvellously mas-ter-buil-der masterbuilder ma-te-ri-al
material ma-the-ma-ticks mathematics ma-tri-mo-ny matrimony ma-tu-ri-ty
maturity meat-of-fer-ing meatoffering me^-ly-mouth-ed mealymouthed me-di-a-tor
media^or me-di-ta-ting meditating me-lan-cho-ly melancholy me-lo-di-ous
melodious me-mo-ra-ble memorable me-mo-ri-al memorial men-ti-on-ing mentioning
mer-chan-di-zing merchandising mer-ci-ful-ly mercifully mes-su-a-ges messuages
me-to-ni-my metonimy me-tro-po-lis metropolis mi-ni-ste-ry ministry
mi-no-ri-ty minority mi-ra-cu-lous miraculous mis-car-ri-age miscarriage
mis-chie-vous-ness mischievousness mis-hap-pen-ed mishappened mi-ti-ga-ting
mitigating mo-de-rate-ly moderately mo-nar-chi-cal monarchical mo-na-ste-ry
monastery mi-se-ra-ble miserable mo-ra-li-ty morality mor-ta-li-ty mortality
mo-ti-on-ed motioned mu-ni-ti-on munition mol-li-fi-ed mol-li-fi-ed
mor-ti-fi-ed mortified mo-ny-chan-gers monychangers mul-ber-ry-trees
mulberrytrees mul-ti-ply-ing multiplying mut-ton-mon-ger muttonmonger
mu-si-ti-an musician
N. N.
Nar-ra-ti-on Narration na-tu-ra-lize naturalize na-ti-on-al national
na-ti-vi-ty nativity na-vi-ga-ble navigable na-tu-ral-ly naturally ne-ces-si-ty
necessity neg-li-gent-ly negligently ne-cro-man-cer necromancer ne-cro-man-cy
necromancy ne-ver-the-less nevertheless no-bi-li-ty nobility no-to-ri-ous
notorious not-with-stand-ing notwithstanding nu-me-rous-ly numerously
nun-ne-ri-es nunneries nur-se-ri-es nurseries nut-meg-gra-ter nutmeggrater
O. O.
O-be-di-ence Obedience ob-je-cti-on objection ob-la-ti-on oblation
ob-li-qui-ty obliquity ob-li-vi-on oblivion ob-sti-nate-ly obstinately
ob-stru-cti-on obstruction oc-ca-si-on occasion ob-scu-ri-ty obscurity
oc-cu-pi-ed occupied oc-cur-ren-ces occurrences o-di-ous-ly odiously
oe^co-no-my economy of-fen-sive-ness offensiveness of-fi-ci-ous officious
o-lym-pi-ad olympiad om-ni-po-tent omnipotent om-ni-pre-sent omnipresent
om-ni-sci-ent omniscient o-pe-ra-ting operating o-pi-ni-on opinion
op-por-tune-ly opportunely op-pres-si-on oppression o-ra-cu-lous oraculous
o-ra-ti-on oration o-ra-to-ry oratory or-di-nan-ces ordinances or-di-na-ry
ordinary o-ri-gi-nal original or-na-men-tal ornamental o-ver-charg-ed
overcharged o-ver-co-meth overcomes o-ver-flow-ed overflowed o-ver-lay-ing
overlaying o-ver-li-ved overlived o-ver-run-ning overrunning o-ver-se-er
overseer o-ver-sha-dow overshadow o-ver-ta^ken overtaken o-ver-throw-eth
overthrows o-ver-turn-ed overturned o-ver-whelm-ed overwhelmed out-ra-gi-ous
outrageous
P. P.
Pa-ci-fi-ed Pacified pa-la-ta-ble palatable pa-pis-ti-cal papistical
par-li-a-ment parliament par-ti-al-ly partially par-ti-ci-ple participle
par-ti-cu-lar particular par-ti-ti-on partition pa-ti-ent-ly patiently
pas-si-on-ate passionate pa-tri-mo-ny patrimony pa-vil-li-on pavillion
pe-cu-li-ar peculiar pe-do-bap-tism pedobaptism pe-ni-tent-ly penitently
pe-nu-ri-ous penurious per-ad-ven-ture peradventure per-di-ti-on perdition
per-fe-cti-on perfection per-fi-di-ous perfidious per-fun-cto-ry perfunctory
per-ni-ci-ous pernicious per-pe-tu-al perpetual per-se-cu-ted persecuted
per-se-ve-rance perseverance per-so-na-ble personable per-mis-si-on permission
per-plex-i-ty perplexity per-se-cu-ted persecuted per-swa-si-on persuasion
pe-sti-len-cy pestilency pe-ti-ti-on petition phi-lo-so-pher philosopher
phi-lo-so-phy philosophy phy-si-ci-an physician pi-ti-ful-ness pitifulness
plau-si-ble-ness plausibleness plen-te-ous-ness plenteousness pli-a-ble-ness
pliableness plu-ra-li-ty plurality po-e-ti-cal poetical po-li-ti-cal political
pol-lu-ti-on pollution pos-ses-si-on possession po-si-ti-on position
po-si-tive-ness positiveness po-ste-ri-ty posterity po-ten-ti-al potential
pow-er-ful-ler powerfuller pra-cti-cal-ly practically pre-ce-den-cy precedence
pre-ci-ous-ness preciousness pre-ci-si-an precisian pre-de-ces-sor predecessor
pre-de-sti-nate predestinate pre-di-cti-on prediction pre-fi-gu-red prefigured
pre-ju-di-ced prejudiced pre-la-ti-cal prelatical pre-pa-ra-tive preparative
pre-he-mi-nence pre-eminence pre-po-ste-rous preposterous pre-ro-ga-tive
prerogative pres-by-te-ry presbytery pre-scrip-ti-on prescription
pre-ser-va-tor preservator pre-sump-ti-on presumption pre-sump-tu-ous
presumptuous pre-ven-ti-on prevention prin-ci-pal-ly principally pri-vi-led-ges
privileges pro-ba-ble-ness probableness pro-di-gal-ly prodigally pro-di-gi-ous
prodigious pro-fi-ta-bly profitably pro-gres-si-on progression pro-hi-bi-ting
prohibiting pro-pa-ga-ted propagated pro-pri-e-ty propriety pro-ph^^^i-cal
prophetical pro-por-^^-on proportion pro-se-c^^ted prosecuted pro-spe-ri-ty
prosperity pro-tec-ti-on protection pro-fes-si-on profession pre-me-di-tate
premeditate pre-to-ri-um pretorium pro-fi-ta-ble profitable pro-ge-ni-tors
progenitors pro-mo-ti-on promotion pro-phe-sy-ing prophesying pros-pe-rous-ly
prosperously pro-vi-si-on provision pro-ver-bi-al proverbial pro-vin-ci-al
provincial pro-tes-tan-tisme protestantisme pro-vo-ca-ted provocated
pru-den-ti-al prudential pub-li-ca-tor publicator pur-ga-to-ry purgatory
pu-ri-fi-ed purified pur-ga-ti-on purgation
Q. Q.
Qua-li-fi-ed Qualified qua-ter-ni-on quaternion ques-ti-o-ned questioned
quo-ti-di-an quotidian que-ru-lous-ness querulousness
R. R.
Ra-ti-o-nal Rational ra-ve-nous-ly ravenously re-a-li-ty reality rea-so-na-ble
reasonable re-bel-li-on rebellion re-bel-li-ous rebellious re-cep-ta-cle
receptacle re-cep-ti-on reception re-com-men-ded recommended re-com-pen-sed
recompensed re-con-ci-led reconciled re-co-ve-red recovered re-cre-a-ted
recreated rec-ti-fy-ing rectifying re-demp-ti-on redemption re-fer-en-ces
references re-flec-ti-on reflection re-frac-to-ry refractory re-gi-ster-ing
registering re-gu-lar-ly regularly re-jec-ti-on rejection re-la-ti-on relation
re-li-gi-on religion re-lin-quish-ed relinquished re-luc-tan-cy reluctance
re-mem-ber-ed remembered re-mis-si-on remission re-mu-ne-rate remunerate
ren-dez-vous-ing rendezvousing re-ple-nish-ed replenished re-pre-sent-ed
represented re-proach-ful-ly reproachfully re-so-lute-ly resolutely
re-spec-tive-ly respectively re-spon-si-ble responsible re-sto-ra-tive
restorative re-ta-li-ate retaliate re-ten-ti-on retention re-ti-red-ly
retiredly re-tract-ing-ly retractingly re-di-cu-le redicule re-ver-si-on
reversion rhe-to-ri-cal rhetorical ri-di-cu-lous ridiculous righ-te-ous-ness
righteousness ri-go-rous-ly rigorously ri-ot-ous-ness riotousness re-ve-ren-ced
reverenced
S. S.
Sa-cer-do-tal Sacerdotal sa-cra-men-tal sacramental sa-cri-fi-cing sacrificing
sa-cri-fi-ces sacrifices sa-ga-ci-ty sagacity sal-va-ti-on salvation
sanc-ti-fi-ed sanctified sanc-tu-a-ry sanctuary sa-ti-e-ty satiety
scan-dal-lous-ly scandallously schis-ma-ti-cal schismatical scor-pi-on-ist
scor-pi-on-ist scru-pu-lous-ly scrupulously sea-so-na-ble seasonable
se-cre-ta-ry secretary se-cu-ri-ty security se-den-ta-ry sedentary se-di-ti-on
sedition sen-su-al-ly sensually sen-ten-ti-ous sententious se-pe-ra-ting
seperating sep-tu-a-gent septuagent se-ri-ous-ly seriously ser-vice-a-ble
serviceable se-ve-ral-ly severally se-ve-ri-ty severity shame-fa-ced-ness
shamefac^dness sig-ni-fy-ing signifying si-mi-li-tude similitude sim-pli-ci-ty
simplicity sin-ce-ri-ty sincerity sin-gu-lar-ly singularly si-tu-a-ted situated
slip-pe-ri-ness slipperiness so-bri-e-ty sobriety so-ber-mind-ed soberminded
so-ci-a-ble sociable so^ci-e-ty society so-lem-ni-ty solemnity so-lem-ni-zed
solemnized so-li-ci-tor solicitor so-li-ci-tous solicitous so-li-lo-quy
soliloquy so-li-ta-ry solitary sor-row-full-ness sorrowfullness so-ve-reign-ty
sovereignty spe-ci-al-ly specially spe-ci-ous-ly speciously spe-cu^la-tive
speculative spi-ri-tu-al spiritual slan-de-rous-ly slanderou^^^ sta-ti-o-ner
stationer stu-di-ous-ly studiously stu-pi-di-ty stupidity stu-pi-fy-ing
stupifying sub-ject-i-on subjection sub-mis-si-on submission sub-scirp-ti-on
subscription sub-stan-ti-al substantial sub-stract-i^on substraction
sub-ver-si-on subversion suc-ces-si-on succession suf-fi-ci-ent sufficient
suf-fo-ca-ted suffocated sug-ges-ti-on suggestion sul^phur-ous-ly sulphurously
sum-ma-ri-ly summarily sump-tu-ous-ly sumptuously sta-bi-li-ty stability
su-per-flu-ous superfluous su-per-la-tive superlative su-pre-ma-cy supremacy
sym-pa-thi-sing sympathising
T. T.
Ta-ber-na-cle Tabernacle te-di-ous-ness tediousness tax-a-ti-on taxation
tem-pe-ra-ment temperament tem-pe-stu-ous tempestuous tem-po-ri-sing
temporising tem-pta-ti-on temptation ter-re-stri-al terrestrial te-sti-mo-ny
testimony ter-ri-fi-ed terrified te-sti-fy-ing testifying to-bac-co-pipes
tobaccopipes to-le-ra-ble tolerable to-le-ra-ted tolerated tra-di-ti-on
tradition trai-te-rous-ly traitorously tran-quil-li-ty tranquillity
trans-ac-ti-on transaction trans-fi-gu-red transfigured trans-gres-si-on
transgression tran-si-to-ry transitory tran-sla-ti-on translation
trea-che-rous-ly treacherously trea-so-na-ble treasonable tri-bu-ta-ry
tributary tu-i-ti-on tuition tu-mul-tu-ous tumultuous tur-bu-len-cy turbulency
V. V.
Va-ca-ti-on Vacation va-li-ant-ly valiantly va-lo-rous-ly valourously
va-lu-a-ble valuable va-ri-a-ble variable va-ri-e-ty variety ve-ge-ta-tive
vegetative ve-he-ment-ly vehemently ve-ne-ra-ble venerable ve-ra-ci-ty veracity
ver-mil-li-on vermillion ver-tu-ous-ly virtuously vex-a-ti-on vexation
vi-cis^si-tude vicissitude vi-ctu-al-ler victualler vi-gi-lan-cy vigilance
vi-o-lent-ly violently vir-gi-ni-ty virginity un-ac^quaint-ed unacquainted
un-ad-vi-sed unadvised u-na-ni-mous unanimous un-be-liev-ing unbelieving
un-be-liev-ers unbelievers un-bla-ma-ble unblamable un-ca-pa-ble incapable
un-cer-tain-ty uncertainty un-chang-a-ble unchangable un-clean-nes-ses
uncleanness un-der-stand-ing understanding un-con-demn-ed uncondemned
un-co-ver-ed uncovered un-cor-rupt-ed uncorrupted un-der-ta-king undertaking
un-de-serv-ing undeserving un-doubt-ed-ly undoubtedly un-faith-ful-ly
unfaithfully un-feign-ed-ly unfeignedly un-for-tu-nate unfortunate
un-fur-nish-ed unfurnished un-de-fi-led undefiled un-god-li-ness ungodliness
un-der-gird-ed undergirded un-der-set-ters undersetters un-ho-li-ness
unholiness u-ni-ver-sal universal un-law-ful-ly unlawfully un-learn-ed-ly
unlearnedly un^e-qual-ly unequally un-lea-ven-ed unleavened un-li-mit-ed
unlimited un-mea-su-red unmeasured un-mer-ci-ful unmerciful un-mo-va-ble
unmovable un-mar-ri-ed unmarried un-na-tu-ral unnatural un-qui-et-ly unquietly
un-quench-a-ble unquenchable un-pre-pa-red unprepared un-rea-son-ed unreasoned
un-righ-te-ous unrighteous un-sa-vo-ry unsavory un-skil-ful-ly unskilfully
un-search-a-ble unsearchable un-sea-son-ed unseasoned un-speak-a-ble
unspeakable un-thank-ful-ness unthankfulness un-wea-ri-ed unwearied
un-whol-som-ness unwholsomness vo-lup-tu-ous voluptuous u-su-al-ly usually
un-tem-per-ed untempered un-wit-ting-ly unwittingly vo-ca-ti-on vocation
vo-lun-ta-ry voluntary
W. W.
Wa-ter-ci-stern Watercistern wa-ter-cour-ses watercourses wa-ter-ing-tub
wateringtub wel-be-lo-ved welbeloved what-so-e-ver whatsoever when-so-e-ver
whenever where-so-e-ver wheresoever who-so-e-ver whosoever whom-so-e-ver
whomsoever whose-so-e-ver whosesoever won-der-ful-ly wonderfully won-de-rous-ly
wonderously
Words of Five Syllables.
A. A.
A-bo-mi-na-ble Abominable a-bo-mi-na-bly abominably a-ca-de-mi-cal academical
ab-so-lu-ti-on absolution ac-cep-ta-ti-on acceptance ac-ci-den-tal-ly
accidentally ac-cla-ma-ti-on acclamation ac-com-mo-da-ted accommodated
ac-cu-sa-ti-on accusation ac-com-pa-ni-ed accompanied ac-cu-mu-la-ti-on
accumulation ac-ti-o-na-ble actionable ac-cus-to-ma-ry accustomary
ad-di-ti-o-nal additional ad-mi-nis-ter-ing administering ad-mi-ra-ti-on
admiration ad-mo-ni-ti-on admonition ad-o-ra-ti-on adoration a-du-la-ti-on
adulation ad-van-ta-gi-ous advantageous a-dul-ter-es-ses adulteresses
ad-ven-tu-rous-ly adventurously a-li-e-na-ted alienated al-le-go-ri-cal
allegorical al-pha-be-ti-cal alphabetical al-ter-a-ti-on alteration
al-ter-ca-ti-on altercation am-bi-gu-ous-ly ambiguously a-mi-a-ble-ness
amiableness am-bi-ti-ous-ness ambitiousness a-mi-ca-ble-ness amicableness
am-mu-ni-ti-on ammunition a-na-to-mi-zed anatomized an-ti-chris-ti-an
antichristian a-po-cry-phal apocryphal a-po-lo-gi-zed apologized a-po-the-ca-ry
apothecary ap-pa-ri-ti-on apparition ap-pre-hen-si-on apprehension
ap-pro-ba-ti-on approbation ap-pro-pri-a-ted appropriated ap-pur-te-nan-ees
appurtenances ar-bi-tra-ry-ness arbitraryness a-ri-sto-cra-cy aristocracy
a-rith-me-ti-cal arithmetical as-so-ci-at-ed associ^ted a-stro-lo-gi-ans
astrologians ar-ti-fi-ci-al artificial a-the-is-ti-cal atheistical
a-va-ri-ci-ous avaricious au-da-ci-ous-ly audaciously aug-men-ta-ti-on
augmentation au-then-ti-cal-ly authentically
B. B.
Ba-by-lo-ni-ans Babylonians be-a-ti-fi-cal beatifical be-ne-dic-ti-on
benediction be-ne-fi-ci-al beneficial be-ne-vo-lent-ly benevolently
burnt-sa-cri-fi-ces burntsacrifices
C. C.
Ca-te-chis-ti-cal Catechistical ce-re-mo-ni-al ceremonial chri-sti-a-ni-ty
christianity cir-cum-ci-si-on circumcision co-es^sen-ti-al coessential
co-e-ter-nal-ly coeternally co-gi-ta-ti-on cogitation co-hi-bi-ti-on cohibition
col-la-ti-on-ed collationed col-la-te-ral-ly collaterally com-bi-na-ti-on
combination cir-cum-fe-ren-ter circumferenter cir-cum-spec-ti-on circumspection
com-me-mo-ra-ted commemorated com-men-da-ti-on commendation com-mi-na-ti-on
commination com-mis-si-o-ner commissioner com-mi-se-ra-ting commiserating
com-mo-di-ous-ly commodiously com-mu-ni-ca-ted communicated com-mu-ta-ti-on
commutation com-pas-si-o-nate compassionate com-pel-la-ti-on compellation
com-pen-di-ous-ly compendiously com-ple-men-tally complementally
com-po-si-ti-on composition com-pre-hen-si-on comprehension com-pu-ta-ti-on
computation con-dem-na-ti-on condemnation con-de-scen-si-on condescension
con-di-ti-o-nal conditional con-fe-de-ra-cy confederacy con-fir-ma-ti-on
confirmation con-fis-ca-ti-on confiscation con-^la-gra-ti-on conflagration
con-^u-^a-ti-on confutation con-gre-ga-ti-on congregation con-ju-ga-ti-on
conjugation con-sci-en-ti-ous conscientious con-se-cra-ti-on consecration
con-so-la-ti-on consolation con-spi-cu-ous-ly conspicuously con-si-de-rate-ly
considerately con-spi-ra-ti-on conspiration con-ster-na-ti-on consternation
con-sti-tu-ti-on constitution con-sul-ta-ti-on consultation con-sum-ma-ti-on
consummation con-tem-pla-ti-on contemplation con-temp-tu-ous-ly contemptuously
con-ten-ta-ti-on contentation con-ten-ti-ous-ness contentiousness
cgn-tra-di-cti-on contradiction con-tri-bu-ti-on contribution con-tu-me-li-ous
contumelious con-ve-ni-en-cy convenience con-ver-sa-ti-on conversation
con-vo-ca-ti-on convocation con-ti-nu-al-ly continually con-ve-ni-ent-ly
conveniently con-ta-mi-na-ted contaminated con-stel-la-ti-on constellation
co-pu-la-ti-on copulation co-ro-na-ti-on coronation cor-po-ra-ti-on corporation
cor-ro-bo-ra-ting corroborating cu-ri-o-si-ty curiosity cus-to-ma-ri-ly
customarily
D. D.
De-cei-va-ble-ness Deceivableness de-di-ca-ti-on dedication de-cla-ra-ti-on
declaration de-cla-ma-ti-on declamation de-fa-ma-ti-on defamation
de-fi-ni-ti-on definition de-ge-ne-ra-te degenerate de-li-be-ra-ted deliberated
de-bi-li-ta-ted debilitated de-li-ci-ous-ly deliciously de-li-ne-a-ted
delineated de-li-ve-ran-ces deliverances de-plo-ra-ble-ness deplorableness
de-re-li-cti-on dereliction de-so-la^ti-on desolation de-spi-ca-ble-ness
despicableness de-mon-stra-ti-on demonstration de-po-si-ti-ons depositions
de-ter-mi-nate-ly determinatly de-vo-ti-o-nal devotional di-a-bo-li-cal
diabolical di-cti-o-na-ry dictionary dis-a-bi-li-ty disability
dis-ad-van-ta-ges disadvantages dis-coun-tenanced discountenanced
dis-ho-nou-ra-ble dishonorable dis-in-he-rit-^d disinherited dis-o-be-di-ence
disobedience dis-o-be-di-ent disobedient dis-pen-sa-ti-on dispensation
dis-po-si-ti-on disposition dis-pro^por-ti-on disproportion dis-so-lu-ti-on
dissolution di-vi-na-ti-on divination dis-pro-fi-ta-ble di^profitable
dis-pu-ta-ti-on disputation dis-lo-ca-ti-on dislocation di-stri-bu-ti-on
distribution de-va-sta-ti-on devastation do-mi-na-ti-on domination
E. E.
Ec-cle-si-a-stick Ecclesiastic e-du-ca-ti-on education ef-fe-ctu-al-ly
effectually ef-fi-ca-ci-ous efficacious ef-fi-ci-ent-ly efficiently
e-gre-gi-ous-ly egregiously e-ja-cu-la-ting ejaculating e-le-men-ta-ry
elementary em-po-ve-rish-ed impoverished e-mu-la-ti-on emulation
en-ter-chang-a-ble enterchangable em-pha-ti-cal-ly emphatically
en-ter-med-dl-ing entermeddling en-ter-min-gl-ing entermingling
en-thu-si-a-stick enthusiastic^ e-nu-me-ra-ted enumerated e-pis-co-pa-cy
episcopacy e-qua-ni-mi-ty equanimity e-qui-ta-ble-ness equitableness
e-qui-va-lency equivalency e-qui-vo-ca-ting equivocating er-ro-ne-ous-ly
erroneously e-spe-ci-al-ly especially es-sen-ti-al-ly essentially
e-sti-ma-ti-on estimation e-thi-o-pi-an ethiopian e-ty-mo-lo-gy etymology
e-va-cu-a-ting evacuating e-van-ge-li-cal evangelical eu-cha-ri-sti-cal
eucharistical ex-al-ta-ti-on exaltation ex-cla-ma-ti-on exclamation
ex-e-cra-ti-on execration ex-em-pli-fi-ed exemplified ex-e-cu-ti-on execution
ex-hi-bi-ti-on exhibition ex-hor-ta-ti-on exhortation ex-pe-cta-ti-on
expectation ex-pe-di-ti-on expedition ex-com-mu-ni-cate excommunicate
ex-pi-a-ti-on expiation ex-pla-na-ti-on explanation ex-po-si-ti-on exposition
ex-po-stu-la-ting expostul^ting ex-te-nu-a-ting extenuating ex-tor-tion-er
extortioner ex-tra-va-gan-cy extravagancy ex-tra-va-gant-ly extravagantly
F. F.
Fa-ce-ti-ous-ly Facetiously fa-mi-li-ar-ist familiarist fa-vou-ra-ble-ness
favourableness fel-low-ci-ti-zen fellowcitizen fel-low-la-bou-rer
fellowlabourer fel-low-pri-so-ner fellowprisoner fe-mi-nin-gen-der
feminingender fe-lo-ni-ous-ly feloniously fer-men-ta-ti-on fermentation
for-ni-ca-ti-on fornication fun-da-men-tal-ly fundamentally fu-mi-ga-ti-on
fumigation fu-ri-ous-li-er furiouslier
G. G.
Ge-ne-a-lo-gy Genealogy ge-ne-ra-ti-on generation ge-o-gra^phi-cal
geographical ge-o-me-tri-cal geometrical glo-ri-fi-ed-ness glorifiedness
gra-ven-ima-ges gravenimages
H. H.
Ha-bi-ta-ti-on Habitation har-mo-ni-ous-ly harmoniously he-re-ti-cal-ly
heretically he-ro-i-cal-ly heroically hi-e-rar-chi-cal hierarchical
hi-sto-ri-cal-ly historically ho-nou-ra-ble-ness honourableness
hy-po-cri-ti-cal hypocritical hos-pi-ta-li-ty hospitality
I. I.
Je-su-i-ti-cal Jesuitical ig-no-mi-ni-ous ignominious il-le-ga-li-ty
illegality il-le-gi-ti-mate illegitimate il-li-te-rate-ly illiterately
il-lu-mi-na-ted illuminated il-lu-stri-ous-ly illustriously im-be-ci-li-ty
imbecility i-mi-ta-ti-on imitation im-me-di-at-ly immediately im-mo-de-rat-ly
immoderatly im-mor-ta-li-ty immortality im-pa-ti-ent-ly impatiently
im-pe-ni-ten-cy impenitency im-per-fe-cti-on imperfection im-pla-ca-ble-ness
implacableness im-por-tu-nate-ly importunately im-po-si-ti-on imposition
im-po-ve-rish-ed impoverished in-a-bi-li-ty inability in-ac-ces-si-ble
inaccessible in-ca-pa-ci^ty incapacity in-car-na-ti-on incarnation
in-cen-di-a-ry incendiary in-ce-stu-ous-ly incestuously in-ci-ta-ti-on
incitation in-ci-vi-li-ty incivility in-cli-na-ti-ons inclinations
in-co-gi-tan-cy incogitancy in-com-bu-sti-ble incombustible in-com-men-su-rate
incommensurate in-co-mo-da-ting incommodating in-com-mu-ni-cate incommunicate
in-com-pe-ten-cy incompetency in-com-pre-hen-sive incomprehensive
in-con-gru-ous-ly incongruously in-con-si-d^-rate inconsiderate
in-con-si-stent-ly inconsist^ntly in-con-ti-nent-ly incontinently
in-con-ve-ni^ent inconvenient in-cor-po-ra-ted incorporated in-cor-po-re-al
incorporeal in-cor-ri-gi-ble incorrigible in-co-he-rent-ly incoherently
in-con-ti-nen-cy incontinency in-cor-rup-ti-ble incorruptible in-cor-rup-ti-on
incorruption in-cre-du-lous-ly incredulously in-de-fi-nite-ly indefinitely
in-de-pen-den-cy independency in-de-ter-mi-nate indeterminate in-dif-fe-rent-ly
indifferently in-dig-na-ti-on indignation in-dis-cre-ti-on indiscretion
in-dis-so-lu-ble indissoluble in^di-vi-du-al individual in-di-vi-si-ble
indivisible in-do-ci^ble-ness indocibleness in-ef-fa-ble-ness ineffableness
in-ef-fe-ctu-al ineffectual in-e-sti-ma-ble inestimable in-e-vi-ta-bly
inevitably in-ex-cu-sa-ble inexcusable in-ex-hau-sti-ble inexhaustible
in-ex-o-ra-ble inexorable in-ex-pli-ca-ble inexplicable in-fec-ti-ous-ly
enfectiously in-fi-de-li-ty infidelity in-flex-i-ble-ness inflexibleness
in-for-mati-on information in-for-tu-nate-ly infortunately in-ge-ni-ous-ly
ingeniously in-nu-me-r^-ble innumerable in-qui-si-ti-on inquisition
in-sa-ti-a-ble insatiable in-se-pe-ra-ble inseparable in-si-nu-a-ting
insinuating in-spi-ra-ti-on inspiration in-fla-ma-ti-on inflammation
in-he-ri-tan-ces inheritances in-gra-ti-a-ting ingratiating in-sta-bi-li-ty
instability in-sti-t-uti-on institution in-stru-men-tal-ly instrumentally
in-suf-fi-ci-ent insufficient in-su-pe-ra-ble insuperable in-sup-por-ta-ble
insupportable in-sur-re-cti-on insurrection in-tel-le-ctu-alls intellectuals
in-t^l-li-gen-cer intelligencer in-ter-ces-si-on intercession
in-ter-chang-a-bly interchangably in-ter-je-cti-on interjection in-ti-ma-ti-on
intimation in-ter-mis-si-on intermission in-tol-le-ra-ble intolerable
in-tra-cta-ble-ness intractableness in-tro-du-cti-on introduction in-tu-i-ti-on
intuition in-vin-ci-ble-ness invincibleness in-vi-o-la-ble inviolable
in-vi-ta-ti-on invitation in-un-da-ti-on inundation in-vo-ca-ti-on invocation
in-vo-lun-ta-ry involuntary ir-ra-ti-o-nal irrational ir-re-gu-lar-ly
irregularly ir-ri-te-ra-ted irriterated ir-re-li-gi-ous irreligious
ir-re-pa-ra-ble irreparable ir-re-vo-ca-ble irrevocable ju-di-ca-to-ry
judicatory jur-is-di-cti-on jurisdiction ju-di-ci-al-ly judicially
ju-di-ci-ous-ly judiciously jus-ti-fi-ca-tor justificator
L. L.
La-bo-ri-ous-ness Laboriousness la-men-ta-ti-on lamentation la-sci-vi-ous-ness
lasciviousness le-gi-ti-ma-cy legitimacy li-be-ra-li-ty liberality
l^-cen-ti-ous-ness licentiousness li-mi-ta-ti-on limitation lo-ving kindnes-ses
levingkindnesses lux-u-ri-ous-ness luxuriousness
M. M.
Ma-ho-me-tanisme Mahometanisme mar-ty-ro-lo-gy martyrology ma-te-ri-al-ly
materially ma-the-ma-ti-cal mathematical ma-tri-mo-ni-al matrimonial
me-di-a-tor-ship mediatorship me-di-ta-ti-on meditation me-di-o-cri-ty
mediocrity ma-li-ci-ous-ly maliciously ma-li-ci-ous-ness maliciousness
mag-ni-fi-cent-ly magnificently ma-ni-fes-ta-ble manifestable me-lo-di-ous-ly
melodiously mag-na-ni-mous-ly magnanimously men-su-ra-ti-on mensuration
me-ri-to-ri-ous meritorious me-ta-pho-ri-cal metaphorical me-tro-po-li-tan
metropolitan mi-ni-stra-ti-on ministration mi-ni-ste-ri-al ministerial
mi-ra-cu-lous-ly miraculously mo-de-ra-ti-on moderation mo-no-syl-la-ble
monosyllable mu-ta-bi-li-ty mutability mis-chie-vi-ous-ly mischieviously
mis-chie-vi-ousness mischieviousness mis-con-stru-cti-on misconstruction
mi-ti-ga-ti-on mitigation mul-ti-pli-ci-ty multiplicity mur-mu-ra-ti-on
murmuration my-ste-ri-ous-ly mysteriously my-ste-ri-ous-ness mysteriousness
N. N.
Na-vi-ga-ti-on Navigation ne-ces-sa-ri-ly necessarily no-to-ri-ous-ly
notoriously no-bi-li-ta-ting nobilitating nu-me-ra-ti-on numeration
non-con-for-mi-ty nonconformity
O. O.
Ob-li-ga-ti-on Obligation ob-ser-va-ti-on observation oc-ca-si-o-nal
occasional oc-ca-si-on-ed occasioned oc-cu-pa-ti-on occupation of-fi-ci-ous-ly
officiously om-ni-po-ten-cy omnipotency om-ni-sci-en-cy omnisciency
o-pe-ra-ti-on operation op-per-tu-ni-ty oppertunity op-po-si-ti-on opposition
or-di-na-ti-on ordination o-ri-gi-nal-ly originally or-na-men-tal-ly
ornamentally oe-co-no-mi-cal oeconomical os-ten-ta-ti-on ostentation
o-ver-sha-dow-ed overshadowed
P. P.
Pa-pis-ti-cal-ly Papistically par-ti-a-li-ty partiality par-ti-cu-lar-ly
particularly pas-si-o-nat-ly passionatly pe-nu-ri-ous-ly penuriously
per-fi-di-ous-ly perfidiously per-ni-ci-ous-ly perniciously per-mu-ta-ti-on
permutation per-pe-tu-al-ly perpetually per-se-cu-ti-on persecution
pes-ti-len-ti-al pestilential pe-ti-ti-o-ner petitioner pe-ti-ti-on-ed
petitioned po-li-ti-cal-ly politically pos-si-bi-li-ty possibility
po-ten-ti-al-ly potentially pre-des-ti-na-ted predestined pre-pa-ra-ti-on
preparation pre-po-si-ti-on preposition pre-pos-te-rous-ly preposterously
pres-by-te-ri-ans presbyterians pre^ser-va-ti-on preservation pre-sen-ta-ti-on
presentation pre-si-den-ti-al presidential pre-sump-tu-ous-ly presumptuously
prin-ci-pa-li-ty principality pro-ba-bi-li-ty probability pro-cla-ma-ti-on
proclamation pro-di-ga-li-ty prodigality pro-di-gi-ous-ly prodigiously
pro-fa-na-ti-on profanation pro-hi-bi-ti-on prohibition pro-pa-ga-ti-on
propagation pro-phe-ti-cal-ly prophetically pro-por-ti-o-nate proportionate
pro-po-si-ti-on proposition pro-ro-ga-ti-on prorogation prog-nos-ti-ca-tor
prognosticator pro-tes-ta-ti-on protestation pro-ver-bi-al-ly proverbially
pro-vi-den-ti-al providential pro-vo-ca-ti-on provocation pub-li-ca-ti-on
publication pu-ri-ta-ni-cal puritanical
Q. Q.
Qua-li-fi-ca-ted Qualificated ques-ti-on-a-ble questionable quin-tes-sen-ti-al
quintessential quo-ti-di-a-nize quotidianize
R. R.
Ra-ti-o-nal-ly Rationally rea-so-na-ble-ness reasonableness re-bel-li-ous-ly
rebelliously re-col-lec-ti-on recollection re-co-ve-ra-ble recoverable
re-cre-a-ti-on recreation re^for-ma-ti-on reformation re-frac-to-ri-n^ss
refractoriness re-ge-ne-ra-ted regenerated re-lax-a-ti-on relaxation
re-li-gi-ous-ly religiously re-no-va-ti-on renovation re-pa-ra-ti-on reparation
re-pe-ti-ti-on repetition re-pre-hen-si-on r^prehension re-pro-ba-ti-on
reprobation re-pu-ta-ti-on reputation re-ser-va-ti-on reservation
re-sig-na-ti-on resignation re-so-lu-ti-on resolution re-stau-ra-ti-on
restoration re-sur-rec-ti-on resurrection re-trac-ta-ti-on retractation
re-tri-bu-ti-on retribution re-ve-la-ti-on revelation re-ve-ren-ti-al
reverential re-vo-lu-ti-on revolution ri-di-cu-lous-ly ridiculously
ri-di-cu-lous-ness ridiculousness re-sti-tu-ti-on restitution re-ta-li-a-ted
retaliated righ-te-ous-nes-ses righteousnesses
S. S.
Sa-cer-do-tal-ly Sacerdotally sa-cra-men-tal-ly sacramentally sa-cri-le-gi-ous
sacrilegious sa-lu-ta-ti-on salutation sa-tis-fac-ti-on satisfaction
sci-en-ti-fi-cal scientifical se-con-da-ri-ly secondarily se-cre-ta-ry-ship
secretaryship se-cu-la-ri-ty secularity se-di-ti-ous-ly seditiously
sen-su-a-li-ty sensuality se-pa-ra-ti-on separation se-que-stra-ti-on
sequestration sin^gu-la-ri-ty singularity si-tu-a-ti-on situation
so-ci-a-ble-ness sociableness so-li-ta-ri-ness solitariness spe-cu-la-ti-on
speculation spi-ri-tu-al-ly spiritually suf-fi-ci-ent-ly sufficiently
suf-fi-ci-en-cy sufficiency su-per-a-bound-ing superabounding su-per-fi-ci-al
superficial su-per-flu-ous-ly superfluously su-per-la-tive-ly superlatively
su^per-na-tu-ral supernatur^l su-per-scrip-ti-on superscription
su-per-sti-ti-on superstition su-per-sti-ti-ous superstitious sup-plan-ta-ti-on
supplantation sup-pli-ca-ti-on supplication sup-po-si-ti-on supposition
sup-po-si-to-ry suppo^itory sup-pu-ta-ti-on supputation sym-pa-the-ti-cal
sympathetical
T. T.
Tem-pes-tu-ous-ly Tempestuously tem-po-ra-li-ty temporality tes-ti-mo-ni-al
testimonial to-le-ra-ti-on toleration tra-di-ti-o-nal traditional
tran-si-to-ri-ly transitorily trans-for-ma-ti-on transformation tri-bu-la-ti-on
tribulation tri-bu-ta-ry-ly tributaryly tu-mul-tu-ous-ly tumultuously
ty-ran-ni-cal-ly tyrannically
V. V.
Va-lu-a-ble-ness Valuableness va-ri-a-ble-ness variableness ve-ne-ra-ble-ness
venerableness ve-ne-ra-ti-on veneration vex-a-ti-ous-ly vexatiously
vi-cto-ri-ous-ly victoriously vi-o-la-ti-on violation vi-si-bi-li-ty visibility
vi-si-ta-ti-on visitation un-ac-ces-si-ble unaccessible un-ac-cus-to-med
unaccustomed un-ac-quaint-ed-ly unacquaintedly un-ad-vi-sed-ly unadvisedly
u-na-ni-mous-ly unanimously un-ap-proach-a-ble unapproachable un-cha-ri-ta-ble
uncharitable un-con-cei-va-ble unconceivable un-de-fi-led-ness undefiledness
un-de-ser-ved-ly undeservedly un-ex-cu-sa-ble unexcusable un-for-tu-nate-ly
unfortunately u-ni-for-mi-ty uniformity u-ni-ver-si-ty university
un-mea-su-ra-ble unmeasurable un-mer-ci-ful-ly unmercifully un-na-tu-ral-ly
unnaturally un-ne-ces-sa-ry unnecessary un-quen-chableness unquenchableness
un-ques-ti-on-less unquestionless un-rea-so-na-ble unreasonable
un-righ-te-ous-ly unrighteously un-sa-vo-ry-ness unsavoryness
un-search-a-bleness unsearchableness un-sea-so-na-ble unseasonable
un-speak-a-ble-ness unspeakableness un-sta-bi-li-ty unstability
un-suf-fe-ra-ble unsufferable un-wea-ri-ed-ness unweariedness vo-ca-bu-la-ry
vocabulary vo^lun-ta-ry-ness voluntaryness vo-lup-tu-ous-ness voluptuousness
un-cir-cum-ci-sed uncircumcised un-oc-cu-pi-ed unoccupied un-pro-fi-ta-ble
unprofitable un-re-buke-a-ble unrebukable un-righ-te-ous-ness unrighteousness
un-sa-ti-a-ble unsatiable un-gra-ti-ous-ly ungratiously un-com-for-ta-ble
uncomfortable un-pre-pa-red-ness unpreparedness
W. W.
Where-in-so-e-ver Whereinsoever whi-ther-so-e-ver whithersoever
Words of six, seven, and eight Syllables.
A. A.
A-bo-mi-na-ti-on Abomination ab-bre-vi-a-ti-on abbreviation a-ca-de-mi-cal-ly
academically ac-com-mo-da-ti-on accommodation ad-mi-ni-stra-ti-on
administration ac-cu-mu-la-ti-on accumulation ac-cu-me-la-tive-ly
accumelatively ad-di-ti-o-nal-ly additionally af-fec-ti-o-nate-ly
affectionately ac-cel-le-ra-ti-on acceleration al-pha-be-ti-cal-ly
alphabetically al-suf-fi-ci-en-cy alsufficiently an-ti-chris-ti-an-isme
antichristianisme a-po-ca-lyp-ti-cal apocalyptical ar-ti-fi-ci-al-ly
artificially ar-ti-fi-ci-al-ness artificialness as-tro-lo-gi-cal-ly
astrologically a-li-mo-si-na-ry alimosinary
B. B.
Be-a-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Beatificatlon be-ne-fi-ci-al-ness beneficialness
C. C.
Cir-cum-lo-cu-ti-on Circumlocution cir-cum-val-la-ti-on circumvallation
co-es-sen-ti-al-ly coessentially com-me-mo-ra-ti-on commemoration
com-men-da-ti-o-nal commendational com-men-su-ra-ti-on commensuration
com-mi-se-ra-ti-on commiseration com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on communication
con-ca-te-na-ti-on concatenation con-di-ti-on-al-ly conditionally
con-fec-ti-o-na-ries confectionaries con-gre-ga-ti-o-nal congregational
con-sci-o-na-ble-ness conscionableness con-sci-en-ti-ous-ly conscientiously
con-si-de-ra-ti-on consideration con-ti-nu-a-ti-on continuation
con-tri-bu-ta-ri-ly contributarily cor-ro-be-ra-ti-on corroberation
con-tro-ver-si-al-ly controversially con-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on consubstantiation
D. D.
De-ge-ne-ra-ti-on Degeneration de-li-be-ra-ti-on deliberation de-li-ne-a-ti-on
delineation de-no-mi-na-ti-on denomination de-ter-mi-na-ti-on determination
dis-ad-van-ta-gi-ous disadvantagious dis-con-so-la-ti-on disconsolation
dis-con-so-la-to-ry disconsolatory dis-fi-gu-ra-ti-on disfiguration
dis-ho-nou-ra-ble-ness dishonourableness dis-si-mu-la-ti-on dissimulation
dis-ad-van-ta-ge-ous-ly disadvantageously dis-con-ti-nu-a-ti-on discontinuation
dis-o-be-di-en-ti-al disobediential dis-pro-por-ti-o-na-ble disproportionable
dis-pro-por-ti-o-na-ble-ness disproportionableness dis-o-be-di-en-ti-al-ness
disobedientialness
E. E
Ec-cle-si-as-ti-cal Ecclesiastical e-di-fi-ca-ti-on edification
e-du-ca-ti-o-nal educational ef-fi-ca-ci-ous-ly efficaciously
en-thu-si-as-ti-cal enthusiastical e-nu-me-ra-ti-on enumeration
e-ja-cu-la-ti-on ejaculation e-ja-cu-la-to-ry ejaculatory e-qui-vo-ca-ti-on
equivocation e-va-cu-a-ti-on evacuation e-van-gel-li-cal-ly evangellically
e-vill-fa-vour-ed-ness evillfavouredness ex-a-mi-na-ti-on examination
ex-as-pe-ra-ti-on exasperation ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ted excommunicated
ex-e-cu-ti-o-ner executioner ex-e-cu-to-rix-ship executorixship
ex-pe-di-ti-ous-ly expeditiously ex-pe-ri-men-tal-ly experimentally
ex-pos-tu-la-ti-on expostulation ex-pos-tu-la-to-ry expostulatory
ex-tra-or-di-na-ry extraordinary ex-tra-ju-di-ci-al extrajudicial
ex-te-nu-a-ti-on extenuation ec-cle-si-as-ti-cal-ly ecclesiastically
e-du-ca-ti-o-nal-ly educationally en-thu-si-as-ti-cal-ly enthusiastically
ex-com-mu-ni-ca-ti-on excommunication ex-tra-ju-di-ci-al-ly extrajudicially
ex-tra-or-di-na-ri-ly extraordinarily
F. F.
Fa-mi-li-a-ri-ty Familiarity fru-cti-fi-ca-ti-on fructification
fru-i-ti-o-nat-ly fruitionatly for-ti-fi-ca-ti-ons fortification
G. G.
Ge-ne-a-lo-gi-cal Genealogical ge-o-gra-phi-cal-ly geographically
ge-o-me-tri-cal-ly geometrically glo-ri-fi-ca-ti-on glorification
gra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on gratification ge-ne-a-lo-gi-cal-ly genealogically
H. H.
He-te-ro-dox-i-cal Heterodoxical hu-mi-li-a-ti-on humiliation
he-te-ro-dox-i-cal-ly heterodoxically hy-po-cri-ti-cal-ly hypocritically
I. I.
Je-su-i-ti-cal-ly Jesuitically ig-no-mi-ni-ous-ly ignominiously
il-le-gi-ti-ma-cy illegitimacy il-li-te-ra-ti-on illiteration im-ma-cu-l^-ti-on
immaculation ^-ma-gi-na-^i-on imagination im-par-ti-al-li-ty impartiallity
im-pos^si-bi-li-ty impossibility ^m-pro-vi-den-ti-al improvidential
in-ac-ces-si-ble-ness inaccessibleness in-com-mo-da-ti-on incommodation
in-com-mu-ni-ca-ble incommunicable in-com-pr^-hen-si-ble incomprehensible
in-con-si-de-ra-ble inconsiderable in-con-ve-ni-ent-ly inconveniently
in-con-ve-ni-en-cy inconveniency in-com-m^n-su-ra-ble incommensurable
in-cor-po-re-al-ly incorporeally in-cor-ri-gi-ble-ness incorrigibleness
in-cor-rup-ta-ble-ness incorruptableness im-mu-ta-bi-li-ty immutability
im-pro-ba-bi-li-ty improbability im-pro-pri-a-ti-on impropriation
in-de-fa-ti-ga-ble indefatigable in-dis-po-si-ti-on indisposition
in-de-ter-mi-nate-ly indeterminately in-di-vi-du-al-ly individually
in-ef-fe-ctu-al-ly ineffectually in-ex-haus-ti-ble-ness in^xhaustibleness
in-ex-o-ra-ble-ness inexorableness in-ex-pli-ca-ble-ness inexplicableness
in-fal-li-bi-li-ty infallibility in-nu-me-ra-ble-ness innumerableness
in-nu-me-ra-ti-on innumeration in-sa-ti-a-ble-ness insatiableness
in-sen-si-bi-li-ty insensibility in-se-pe-ra-ble-ness inseparableness
in-se-pa-ra-ti-on in^eparation in-si-nu-^-ti-on insinuation in-suf-fi-ci-ent-ly
insufficiently in-suf-fi-ci-en-cy insufficiency in-sup-por-ta-ble-ness
insupportabl^ne^s in-ter-pre-ta-ti^on int^rpretation in-ter-ro-g^-ti-on
interrogation in-ter-ro-ga-to-ry interrogatory in-tol^le-ra-ble-ness
in^ollerableness in-vi-o-la-ble-ness inviolableness in-vi-o-la-ti-on
inviolation in-vi-si-bi-li-ty invisibility in-vo-lun-ta-ry-ness involuntaryness
ir-ra-ti-o-nal-ly irrationally ir-re-con-ci-la-ble irreconcilable
ir-re-gu-la-ri-ty irregularity ir-re-li-gi-ous-ly irreligiously
ir-re-pa-ra-ble-ness irreparableness ir-re-ve-ren-ti-al irreverential
ir-re-vo-ca-ble-ness irrevocableness ju-di-ca-to-ri-al judicatorial
im-pro-vi-den-ti-al-ly improvidentially in-com-mu-ni-ca-ble-ness
incommunicableness in-com-pre-hen-si-ble-ness incomprehensibleness
in-con-si-de-ra-ble-ness inconsiderableness in-com-men-su-ra-ble-ness
incommensurableness in-de-fa-ti-ga-ble-ness indefatigableness
in-de-ter-mi-na-ti-on indetermination ir-re-ve-ren-ti-al-ly irreverentially
ju-di-ca-to-ri-al-ly judicatorially ir-re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on irreconciliation
L. L.
La-men-ta-ti-o-nal Lamentational
M. M.
Ma-ni-fes-ta-ti-on Manifestation me-di-ta-ti-o-nal meditational
me-ri-to^ri-ous-ly meritoriously mo-di-fi-ca-ti-on modification
mor-ti-fi-ca-ti-on mortification mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on multiplication
ma-the-ma-ti-cal-ly mathematically ma-the-ma-ti-ci-an mathematician
N. N.
Na-tu-ra-li-za-ti-on Naturalization na-vi-ga-ti-on-al-ly navigationally
O. O.
O-be-di-en-ti-al Obediential oc-ca-si-o-nal-ly occasionally oe-co-no-mi-cal-ly
oeconomically o-pi-ni-o-na-ted opinionated o-be-di-en-ti-al-ly obedientially
P. P.
Pa-ci-fi-ca-ti-on Pacification pa-tri-mo-ni-al-ly patrimonially
par-li-a-men-ta-ry parliamentary pre-des-ti-na-ti-on predestination
pre-di-cti-o-na-ted predictionated pre-me-di-ta-ti-on premeditation
pre-va-ri-ca-ti-on prevarication pro-cras-ti-na-ti-on procrastination
pro-nun-ci-a-ti-on pronunciation pro-pi-ti-a-ti-on propitiation
pro-pi-ti-a-to-ry propitiatory pro-por-ti-o-na-ble proportionable
pur-ga-to-ri-al-ly purgatorially phi-lo-so-phi-cal-ly philosophically
pu-ri-fi-ca-ti-on purification par-li-a-men-ta-ri-al parliamentarial
pre-con-si-de-ra-ti-on preconsideration pro-por-ti-on-a-ble-ness
proportionableness
Q. Q.
Qua-li-fi-ca-ti-on Qualification ques-ti-o-na-ble-ness questionableness
quin-te-sen-ti-al-ly quintesentially quin-te-sen-ti-al-ness quintesentialness
R. R.
Ra-ti-fi-ca-ti-on Ratification re-co-ve-ra-ble-ness recoverableness
re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on regeneration re-i-te-ra-ti-on reiteration re-nun-ci-a-ti-on
renunciation re-pre-sen-ta-ti-on representation re-ta-li-a-ti-on retaliation
re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on reconciliation ra-ti-o-ci-na-ti-on ratiocination
S. S.
San-cti-fi-ca-ti-on Sanctification sa-tis-fa-cti-o-nal satisfactional
sa-tis-fa-cto-ri-ly satisfactorily sig-ni-fi-ca-ti-on signification
so-lem-ni-za-ti-on solemnization sub-mis-si-o-nat-ly submissionatly
suc-ces-si-o-nat-ly successionatly su-per-fi-ci-al-ly superficially
su-per-fi-ci-al-ness superficialness su-per-na-tu-ral-ly supernaturally
su-pe-ri-o-ri-ty superiority su-per-sti-ti-ous-ly superstitiously
su-per-sti-ti-ous-ness superstitiousness sur-rep-ti-ti-ous-ly surreptitiously
su-pe-re-ro-ga-ti-on supererogation
T. T.
Trans-gres-si-o-nat-ly Transgressionatly trans-fi-gu-ra-ti-on transfiguration
tran-sub-stan-ti-a-ted transubstantiated tran-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on
transubstantiation tri-go-no-me-tri-a trigonometria tra-di-ti-o-na-ted
traditionated tra-di-ti-o-nal-ly traditionally the-o-re-ti-cal-ly theoretically
V. V.
Un-ac-ces-si-ble-ness Unaccessibleness un-ac-cus-to^med-ness unaccustomedness
un-cha-ri-ta-ble-ness uncharitableness un-cir-cum-ci-si-on uncircumcision
un-con-cei-va-ble-ne^s unconceivableness un-con-sci-o-na-ble unconscionable
un-con-si-de-ra-ble unconsiderable un-con-si-de-rate-ly unconsiderately
un-con^si-d^-rate-ness unconsiderateness un-com-pas-si-o-nate uncompassionate
un-ex-cu-sa-ble-ness unexcusableness un-ques-ti-o-na-ble unquestionable
un-mea-su-ra-ble-ness unmeasurableness u-ni-ver-sa-li-ty universality
un-pro-fi-ta-ble-ness unprofitableness un-rea-so-na-ble-ness unreasonableness
un-sea-so-na-ble-ness unseasonableness un-suf-fer-a-ble-ness unsufferableness
un-con-sci-o-na-ble-ness unconscionableness un-con^si-de-ra-ble-ness
unconsiderableness un-com-pas-si-o-nately uncompassionately
un-que-sti-o-na-ble-ness unquestionableness un-re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on
unreconciliation
Proper Names of one Syllable.
A.
Ai ain aix ar ard
B.
Bell ben bull buz
C.
Cain christ charles chub chuck chun cis core coz creet cush cuth
D.
Dan dane dar diep dort delf
E.
Ed er eve
F.
Fez france
G.
Gad gath gauls gaunt gob gog greece gur guise
H.
Hai ham heth hen hin hor hugh hull hur huz
I.
Jah jair james jane joane john jim job joyce jo^e ^r j^de
K.
Kent kish kore koz
L.
Lot lud luke luz lyme lyn
M.
Ma^k mars mash marsh maud meedes meuse mons
N.
Nahtz ner nice nile nymph nob nod non noph nun
O.
Og
P.
Pan paul phuz pull put
Q.
Qu^n
R.
ralph rhodes rhine rome roan rosh ruth rye
S.
Saph saul seir seth shaul shem sheth so spain spaw spire stains stoke strand
sur shur sweedes
T.
Thames thebes tours tob toy tou trent troy tweed turk tire
V.
Vel ur uz
W.
Wales ware wells wilts
Y.
York
Z.
Zair zer zif zin ziph zir ziz zoutch zuph zur
Proper Names of Men, Women, and Places of two Syllables, divided and not
divided.
A. A.
Aa-ron Aaron ab-ba abba a-bel abel ab-di abdi ab-don abdon a-bib abib ab-ner
abner a-bram abram a-chan achan a-chim achim a-chor achor a-dam adam a-dar adar
ad-di addi a-gag agag a^gar agar a-guz aguz a-hab ahab a-haz ahaz al-mon almon
am-mon ammon am-non amnon a-mos amos am-ram amram a-nak anak a-nan anan an-drew
andrew an-gel angel an-na anna an-nas annas a-rab arab a-ram aram a-ran aran
ar-chite archite ar-non arnon a-sa asa ash-dod ashdod ash-ur ashur a-thens
athens
B. B.
Ba-al Baal ba-bel babel ba-ca baca ba-lah balah ba-lak balak ba-lam balam
ba-rak barak ba-ruch baruch b^-shan bashan be-rith berith ber-nice bernice
beth-el bethel beth-page bethpage bil-dad bildad bi-thron bithron blas-tus
blastus bo-az boaz bo-chim bochim boz-rah bozrah bu-nah bunah bun-ni bunni
bu-zi buzi
C. C.
Ca-desh Cadesh cai-phas caiphas cal-dees caldees ca-leb caleb ca-na cana
can-dace candace car-mel carmel cas-tor castor ce-dron cedron ce-phas cephas
ce-sar caesar che-rith cherith chit-tim chittim clau-da cluda cle-ment clement
co-loss coloss cor-ban corban co-rinth corinth co-sam cosam coz-bi cozbi
cris-pus crispus cu-shan cushan cu-shi cushi cy-prus cyprus cy-rene cyrene
cy-rus cyrus
D. D.
Da-gon Dagon da-nites danites da-than dathan da-vid david de-bir debir de-mas
demas der-be derbe dib-lath diblath dim-nath dimnath di-nah dinah do-eg doeg
dor-cas dorcas do-than dorthan du-ra dura
E. E
E-dar Edar e-den eden e-dom edom ed-ward edward e-glon eglon e-gypt egypt
ek-ron ekron e-lam elam e-li eli e-lim elim ec-nan ecnan en-dor endor e-noch
enoch e-nos enos e-nosh enosh e-phod ephod e-phron ephron e-sau esau es-rom
esrom est-her esther eu-nice eunice eu-nuch eunuch ez-ra ezra ez-ri ezri ez-ron
ezron
F. F.
Fe-lix Felix fes-tus festus
G. G.
Ga-di Gadi ga-dites gadites gai-us gaius ga-za gazus ga-zites gazites ge-ber
geber ge-der geder ge-ra gera ge-rar gerar ger-shom gershom ge-Zer gezer
gil-gal gilgal git-tite gittite go-mer gomer go-shen goshen
H. H.
Ha-gar Hagar hag-gai haggai ha-man haman ha-mor hamor ha-ran haran he-ber
heber hen-ry henry her-mon hermon he-rod herod hesh-bon heshbon hez-ron hezron
hin-nom Hinnom hit-tite hittite hi-vite hivite hoph-ni hophni ho-reb horeb
hu-shai hushai
I. I.
Jab-bok Jabbok ja-bin jabin ja-cob jacob ja-el jael jai-rus jairus jam-bres
jambres ja-pheth japheth ja-sher jasher ja-son jason je-hu jehu je-hud jehud
je-red jered jes-se jesse je-sus jesus je-thro jethro jew-ish jewish jew-ry
jewry jo-ab joab jo-ah joah jo-ash joash jo-bab jobab jo-el joel jo-kim jokim
jok-tan joktan jo-na jo-na jo-nah jonah jonas jonas jop-pa joppa jo-cam jocam
jo-se jose jo-seph joseph jo-ses joses jo-tham jotham it-tai ittai i-vah ivah
ju-bal jubal ju-dah judah ju-das judas ju-dith judith ju-ry jury jus-tus justus
K. K.
Ka-desh Kadesh ke-dar kedar ke-desh kedesh ke-nah kenah ke-nites kenites
ki-dron kidron ki-son kison kit-tim kittim ko-ra kora kor-hites korhites
L. L.
La-ban Laban la-chish lachish la-mech lamech le-ah leah le-vi levi le-vites
levites lib-na libna lib-nah libnah lew-is lewis lon-don london lyd-da lydda
lys-tra lystra
M. M.
Ma-chir Machir ma-gog magog mal-chus malchus mam-re mamre ma-ra mara mar-cus
marcus mar-tha martha ma-ry mary mat-than matthan mat-that matthat mat-thew
matthew mem-phis memphis me-zoz mezoz me-shach meshach mi-cah micah mil-cah
milcah mis-pah mispah mo-ab mo-ab mo-lech molech mo-loch moloch mo-ses moses
mu-shites mushites
N. N.
Na-bal Nabal na-both naboth na-chor nachor na-dab nadab na-hor nahor na-hum
nahum na-im naim na-than nathan ne-bad nebat ne-bo nebo ne-cho necho nim-rod
nimrod nis-roch nishroch no-ah noah no-dab nodab
O. O.
O-bed Obed o-mer omer om-ri omri o-nan onan o-phir ophir o-reb oreb or-nan
ornan or-phah orphah or-gan organ or-phan orphan oz-ni ozni
P. P.
Pa-dan Padan pa-shur pashur pat-mos patmos pe-leg peleg per-sis persis pe-ter
peter pha-leg phaleg pha-res phares phar-par pharpar phe-be phebe phe-nice
phenice phi-lip philip pi-late pilate pis-gah pisgah pi-son pison pon-tus
pontus pris-ca prisca psy-che psyche
Q. Q.
Quar-tus Quartus quin-tin quintin
R. R.
Rab-bi Rabbi ra-chab rachab ra-ch^l rachel ra-mah ramah ra-moth ramoth re-chab
rechab re-sin resin reu-ben reuben rho-da rhoda rim-mon rimmon riz-p^h rizpah
ru-fus rufus
S. S.
Sab-bath Sabbath sa-doc sadoc sa-lah salah sa-lem salem sal-mon salmon sa-lome
salome sa-mos samos samp-son sampson sa-phir saphir sa-rah sarah sar-dis sardis
sa-tan satan se-lah selah sha-drack shadrack shal-lum shallum sham-gar shamgor
sha-phan shaphan sha-ron sh^ron sheb-na shebna she-chem shecdem shi-loh shiloh
shit-tim shit-tim shu-ite shuite si-chem sichem si-hon sihon si-las silas
si-mon simon si-nai sinai si-on sion smyr^na smyrna so-dom sodom sto-icks
stoics suc-coth succoth
T. T.
Ta-bor Tabor ta-mar tamar tar-shish tarshish te-kel tekel te-rah terah
te-trarch tetrarch tho-mas thomas tim-nah timnah tim-nite timnite ti-mon timon
tish-bite tishbite ti-tus titus to-paz topas to-phet tophet tro-as troas tu-bal
tubal ty-tus tyrus
V. V.
Vast-hi Vasthi ur-bane urbane u-rim urim u-zai uzai uz-zah uzzah u-zi uzi
Z. Z.
Za-dok Zadok zal-mon zalmon za-rah zarah ze-lak zelak ze-rah zerah ze-red
zered zi-ba ziba zi-don zidon zik-lag ziklag zil-pah zilpah zim-ran zimran
zim-ri zimri zi-on zion zip-por zippor zo-ar zoar zo-phar zophar zo-phim zophim
zo-rah zorah zorites zorites zu-ar zuar zu-zims zuzims
Proper Names of three Syllables.
A. A.
A-ba-na Abana a-bi-ah abiah a-bi-gail abigail a-bi-gall abigall a-bi-hu abihu
a-bi-jah abijah a-bi-lene abilene a-bi-ram abiram a-bi-shag abishag a-bi-shai
abishai a-bi-shur abishur a-bi-ud abiud a-bra-ham abraham ab-so-lom absalom
a-chai-a achaia a-du-mah adumah a-dul-lam adulam ae-ne-as aeneas a-ga-bus
agabus a-grip-pa agrippa a-hi-jah ahijah a-hi-kam ahikam a-hi-tub ahitub
a-ja-lon ajalon al-mo-dad almodad al-phe-us alpheus a-ma-lek amalek a-ma-sa
amasa a-mit-tai amittai am-mo-nites ammonites a-mo-rites amorites an-ti-och
antioch a-pol-los apollos a-qui-la aquila a-ra-rat ararat a-rau-nah araunah
a-si-a asia as-ke-lon askelon au-gus-tus augustus a-zo-tus azotus
B. B.
Ba-by-lon Babylon ba-hu-rim bahurim ba-la-am balaam ba-la-dan baladan
bar-jo-na barjona bar-na-bas barnabas ba-rab-bas barabbas bar-sa-bas barsabas
bar-zil-lai barzillai bath-she-ba bathsheba be-li-al belial bel-shaz-zer
belshazzer be-nai-ah benaiah ben-am-mi benammi ben-ha-dad benhadad ben-ha-nan
benhanan ben-ja-min benjamin ben-ja-mites benjamites be-no-ni benoni be-tha-ny
bethany beth-a-ven bethaven be-the-lite bethelite be-thes-da bethesda
beth-le-hem bethlehem beth-pe-or bethpeor beth-sai-da bethsaida beth-she-mite
bethshemite be-thu-el bethuel
C. C.
Cal-de-a Caldea cal-de-ans caldeans ca-na-an canaan ca-na-nites cananites
car-me-lite carmelite co-ra-zin corazin chro-ni-cles chronicles clau-di-us
claudius cle-o-phas cleophas co-ni-ah coniah cre-ti-ans cretians
D. D.
Da-ni-el Daniel da-ri-us darius de-bo-rah deborah de-li-lah delilah di-a-nah
dianah di-dy-mus didymus dru-sil-la drusilla da-mas-cus damascus
E. E.
E-do-mites Edomites ek-ro-nites ekronites e-la-mites elamites e-li-ab eliab
e-li-ah eliah e-li-as elias e-li-hu elihu e-li-jah elijah e-li-phaz eliphaz
e-li-sha elisha el-ka-nah elkanah el-mo-dam elmodam el-na-than elnathan
e-ly-mas elymas em-ma-us emmaus en-ge-di engedi e-pa-phras epaphras e-phe-sus
ephesus eph-pha-tha ephphatha e-phra-im ephraim e-phrai-mites ephraimites
e-phra-tah ephratah e-ras-tus erastus e-sai-as esaias eu-bu-lus eubulus
eu-ti-chus eutichus ez-ra-lite ezralite
G. G.
Gab-ba-tha Gabbatha ga-bri-el gabriel ga-da-rens gadarens ga-li-lee galilee
gal-li-o gallio ge-de-rite gaderite ge-ha-zi gahazi ger-ga-shites gergashites
ger-ga-sens gergasens gib-be-ah gibbeah gib-be-on gibbeon gi-de-on gideon
gil-bo-a gilboa gi-le-ad gilead gir-ga-shite girgashite gre-ci-ans grecians
H. H.
Hab-ba-kuk Habbakuk ha-das-sa hadassa ha-ga-rens hagarens ha-vi-lah havilah
ha-za-el hazael he-bro-nites hebronites her-mo-nites hermonites hil-ki-ah
hilkiah ho-san-na hosanna ho-se-ah hoseah
I. I.
I-cha-bod Ichabod je-bu-site jebusite je-ho-ram jehoram je-ho-rah jehovah
je-phun-neh jephunneh je-ri-cho jericho je-su-its jesuits je-su-run jesurun
je-ze-bell jezebell jez-re-el jezreel in-di-a india jo-a-kim joakim jo-an-na
joanna jo-a-tham joatham joi-a-kim joiakim jo-na-dab jonadab jo-na-than
jonathan jo-sa-phat josaphat jo-si-ah josiah jo-si-as josias jo-shu-a joshua
ish-bo-sheth ishbosheth ish-ma-el ishmael is-ra-el israel is-ra-lite isralite
is-sa-char issachar i-ta-ly italy ju-de-a judea ju-li-a julia ju-li-us julius
ju-ni-a junia ju-pi-ter jupiter ju-bi-le jubilee jo-se-phus josephus i-ze-har
izehar iz-ra-hites izrahites iz-re-hel izreell ja-bu-el jabuel is-mu-el ismuell
K. K.
Kad-mi-el Kadmiel kad-mo-nites kadmonites ke-mu-el kemuel ke-ne-zite kenezite
ke-tu-rah keturah ki-shi-on kishion ko-ha-thites kohathites ko-ra-thites
korathites
L. L.
La-pi-doth Lapidoth le-ba-non lebanon leb-be-us lebbeus lu-ci-fer lucifer
lu-ci-us lucius ly-di-a lydia li-di-ans lydians ly-si-as lysias
M. M.
Mach-pe-lah Machpelah mag-da-la magdala ma-la-chi malachi ma-nas-seh manasseh
ma-no-ah manoah mat-thi-as matthias maz-za-roth mazzaroth me-di-a media
me-gid-do megiddo mel-chi-ah melchiah me-ra-ri merari me-ro-dach merodach
mes-si-ah messiah mi-cai-ah micaiah mi-cha-el michael mi-di-an midian mi-ri-am
miriam mo-a-bites moabites mor-de-cai mordecai mo-ri-ah moriah my-ti-lene
mytilene
N. N.
Na-a-man Naaman na-a-shon naashon na-o-mi naomi naph-tha-li naphthali
nar-cis-sus narcissus na-za-rene nazarene na-za-reth nazareth na-za-rites
nazarites ne-hush-tan nehushtan ne-ri-ah neriah ni-ca-nor nicanor ni-cho-las
nicholas ni-ne-veh nineveh ni-ne-vites ninevites
P. P.
Pa-les-tine Palestine pen-te-cost pentecost pe-nu-el penuel per-ga-mos
pergamos per-riz-zite perrizzite per-me-nas permenas per-si-a persia per-si-ans
persians pha-nu-el phanuel pha-ra-oh pharaoh pha-ri-sees pharisees phi-le-mon
philemon phi-lip-pi phi-lip-pi phi-le-tus phi-le-tus phi-lis-tim philistim
phi-lis-tine philistine phi-ne-as phineas phry-gi-a phrygia plei-a-des pleiades
pon-ti-us pontius po-ti-phar potiphar pris-cil-la priscilla ptolemais ptolemais
pub-li-us publius
R. R.
Ra-a-mah Raamah rab-bo-ni rabboni rab-sha-keh rabshakeh ra-me-ses rameses
re-be-kah rebekah re-cha-bites rechabites re-pha-el rephael re-pha-im rephaim
re-phi-dim rephidim reu-be-nites rubenites re-zi-a rezia ro^bo-am roboam
ro-ge-lim rogelim
S. S.
Sab-ba-oth Sabbath sa-be-ans sabeans sad-du-ces sadduces sa-mu-el samuel
san-bal-lat sanballat sa-phi-rah saphirah sa-rep-ta sarepta scy-thi-an scythian
se-cun-dus secundus ser-gi-us sergius sha-re-zer sharezer sha-ro-nite sharonite
she-che-mite shechemite she-re-zer sherezer shib-bo-leth shibboleth shi-me-i
shimei shu-la-mite shulamite shu-na-mite shunamite sib-bo-leth sibboleth
si-lo-am siloam si-lo-e siloe sil-va-nus silvanus si-me-on simeon si-ri-on
sirion si-se-ra sisera so-do^mite sodomite so-lo^mon solomon sost-he-nes
sosthenes ste-pha-nas stephanas su-san-na susanna sy-ra-cuse syracuse sy-ri-a
syria sy-ri-ack syriack Sy-ri-an syrian
T. T.
Ta-bi-tha Tabitha te-ko-ah tekoah tel-las-sar tellassar te-ma-nites temanites
te-ra-phim teraphim thad-de-us thaddeus ter-ti-us tertius ter-tul-lus tertullus
the-la-sar thelasar ti-me-us timeus ti-mo-thy timothy ti-ri-a tiria to-bi-ah
tobiah tu-bal-cain tubalcain ty-chi-cus tychicus ty-ran-nus tyrannus
V. V.
Va-ni-ah Vaniah u-phar-sin upharsin u-ri-el uriel uz-zi-ah uzziah u-ri-ah
uriah
Z. Z.
Zab-di-el Zabdiel za-che-us zacheus zal-mun-na zalmunna za-re-phath zarephath
ze-ba-im zebaim ze-be-dee zebedee ze-bi-na zebina ze-bo-im zeboim ze-bu-lun
zebulun ze-lo-tes zelotes ze-ma-rite zemarite ze-mi-ra zemira ze-o-rim zeorim
ze-pho-nites zephonites ze-rai-ah zeraiah ze-re-da zereda ze-ru-ah zeruah
zi-be-on zibeon zi-bi-a zibia zid-ki-jah zid-ki-jah zi-phi-on Zi-phi-on
zip-po-rah zipporah zo-be-bah zobebah zo-he-leth zoheleth zo-ra-thites
zorathites zo-re-ah zoreah zu-ri-el zuriel ze-no-phon zenophon za-bi-na zabina
za-cha-ry zachary ze-bu-a zebua
Proper Names of four Syllables.
A. A.
A-bed-ne-go Abednego a-bi-a-thar abiathar a-bi-e-zer abiezer a-bi-me-lech
abimelech a-bi-na-dab abinadab a-bi-no-am abinoam a-bi-shu-a abishua
a-cel-da-ma aceldama a-do-ni-jah adonijah a-do-ni-ram adoniram a-dra-me-lech
adramelech a-dul-la-mite adullamite a-hi-ma-az ahimaaz a-hi-na-dab ahinadab
a-hi-no-am ahinoam a-hi-to-phel ahitophel a-ho-li-ab aholiab a-lex-an-der
alexander a-ma-le-kite amalekite a-ma-ri-ah amariah a-ma-si-ah amasiah
a-mi-na-dab aminadab am-mo-ni-tess ammonitess am-phi-po-lis amphipolis
a-na-ni-as ananias an-dro-ni-cus andronicus an-ti-pa-tris antipatris a-ra-bi-a
arabia a-ra-bi-an arabian a-ra-mi-tess aramitess ar-che-la-us archelus
a-ris-tar-chus aristarchus ar-me-ni-a armenia ar-tax-erx-es artaxerxes
as-sy-ri-a assyria as-sy-ri-an assyrian a-tha-li-ah athaliah a-the-ni-ans
athenians a-za-ri-ah azariah a-za-ri-el azariel
B. B.
Ba-al-be-rith Baalberith ba-al-pe-or baalpeor ba-al-ze-phon baalzephon
ba-by-lo-nish babylonish ba-ra-chi-ah barachiah bar-ba-ri-an barbarian
bar-tho-lo-mew bartholomew bar-ti-me-us bartimeus be-el-ze-bub beelzebub
be-er-she-ba beersheba bel-te-shaz-zar belteshazzar be-ra-chi-ah berachiah
be-tha-ba-ra bethabara beth-le-he-mite bethlehemite bi-thy-ni-a bithynia
bo-a-ner-ges boanerges
C. C.
Ca-me-lion Camelion ca-na-a-nite canaanite ca-per-na-um capernaum
car-me-li-tess carmelitess ce-sa-re-a cesarea ci-li-ci-a cilicia cor-ne-li-us
cornelius cy-re-ni-an cyrenian cy-re-ni-us cyrenius
D. D.
Dal-ma-nu-tha Dalmanutha dal-ma-ti-a dalmatia de-ca-po-lis decapolis
de-me-tri-us demetrius di-o-tre-phes diotrephes
E. E.
E-bed-me-lech Ebedmelech e-ben-e-zer ebenezer e-gyp-ti-an egyptian e-le-a-zer
eleazer e-li-a-kim eliakim e-li-a-shib eliashib e-li-me-lech elimelech
e-li-sha-ma elishama e-li-sha-phat elishaphat e-li-za-beth elizabeth e-li-ze-us
elizeus e-ma-nu-el emanuel e-pe-ne-tus epenetus e-phe-si-ans ephesians
e-sar-had-don esarhaddon esh-ka-lo-nites eshkalonites e-vo-di-as evodias
e-ze-ki-el ezekiel
F. F.
For-tu-na-tus Fortunatus
G. G.
Ga-la-ti-a Galatia ga-la-ti-ans galatians ga-li-le-ans galileans ga-ma-li-el
gamaliel ge-da-li-ah gedaliah ge-ma-ri-ah gemariah ge-ne-sa-ret genesaret
geth-se-ma-ne gethsemane gi-be-o-nit gibeonit gi-le-a-dite gileadite
H. H.
Ha-cha-li-ah Hachaliah ha-da-de-zer hadadezer ha-da-drim-mon hadadrimmon
ha-da-re-zer hadarezer her-mo-ge-nes hermogenes he-ro-di-an herodian
he-ro-di-as herodias he-ze-ki-ah hezekiah
I. I.
I-co-ni-um Iconium i-du-me-a idumea je-co-ni-ah jeconiah je-hoi-a-dah
jehoiadah je-hoi-a-kim jehoiakim je-ho-na-dab jehonadab je-ho-sha-phat
jehoshaphat je-ke-mi-ah jekemiah je-re-mi-ah jeremiah je-ro-bo-am jeroboam
je-ru-sa-lem jerusalem jez-re-e-lite jezreelite ig-da-li-ah igdaliah
il-ly-ri-cum illyricum im-ma-nu-el immanuel jo-tha-ni-ah jothaniah i-ta-li-an
italian i-tu-re-a iturea
K. K.
Ke-ren-hap-puch Kerenhappuch kir-jath-a-rim kirjatharim kir-jath-icar-im
kirjathicarim kir-jath-se-phar kirjathsephar
L. L.
Le-vi-a-than Leviathan ly-sa-ni-as lysanias
M. M.
Ma-ra-na-tha Maranatha ma-thu-sa-la mathusala mat-ta-thi-as mattathias
mel-chi-se-dech melchisedech me-phi-bo-sheth mephibosheth mer-cu-ri-us
mercurius mi-di-a-nite midianite mo-a-bi-tess m^abitess
N. N.
Na-a-ma-thite Naamathite na-tha-na-el nathanael ne-a-po-lis neapolis
ne-a-ri-ah neariah ne-he-mi-ah nehemiah ne-tha-ni-ah nethaniah ni-co-de-mus
nicodemus ni-co-po-lis nicopolis
O. O.
O-ba-di-ah Obadiah o-bed-e-dom obededom o-ne-si-mus onesimus
P. P.
Pa-dan-a-ram Padanaram pa-le-sti-na palestina pam-phi-li-a pamphilia
phe-ni-ci-a phenicia phi-lip-pi-ans philippians phi-li-sti-a philistia
phi-lo-lo-gus philologus phi-lo-so-phers philosophers phi-lo-so-phy philosophy
pi-ha-hi-roth pihahiroth
R. R.
Ra-a-mi-ah Raamiah ra-a-me-ses raameses ra-ma-tha-im ramathaim ra-math-le-hi
ramathlehi ra-math-miz-peh ramathmizpeh re-ha-bi-ah rehabiah re-ho-bo-am
rehoboam
S. S.
Sa-la-thi-el Salathiel sa-ma-ri-a samaria sa-ma-ri-tan samaritan se-cha-ni-ah
sechaniah sen-na-che-rib sennacherib se-phar-va-im sepharvaim shal-ma-ne-zer
shalmanezer she-ba-ni-ah shebaniah she-ca-ni-ah shecaniah she-le-mi-ah
shelemiah she-ma-ri-ah shemariah si-do-ni-ans sidonians si-li-ci-a silicia
si-me-o-nites simeonites
T. T.
The-o-phi-lus Theophilus thy-a-ti-ra thyatira ty-be-ri-as tyberias
ti-mo-the-us timotheus
V. V.
Va-je-za-tha Vajezatha va-shi-jo-el vashijoel uz-zen-she-rah uzzensherah
uz-zi-e-lites uzzielites
Z. Z.
Ze-ba-di-ah Zebadiah ze-bu-lo-nites zebulonites ze-cha-ri-ah zechariah
ze-de-ki-ah Zedekiah ze-pha-ni-ah zephaniah zo-ro-ba-bel zorob^bel
Proper Names of five Syllables.
A. A.
A-do-ni-be-zek Adonibezek a-do-ni-ze-dek adonizedek a-ha-su-e-rus ahasuerus
a-lex-an-dri-a alexandria a-pol-lo-ni-a apollonia a-r^-^-pa-gite areopagite
a-ri-ma-th^-a arimathea a-ri-sto-bu-lus aristobulus
B B.
Ba-by-lo-ni-ans Babylonians beth-le-hem-judah bethlehemjudah
C. C.
Ca-na-a-ni-tess Canaanitess cap-pa-do-ci-a cappadocia clau-di-us-ce-sar
claudiuscesar
D. D.
D^-o-ni-si-us Dyonisius
E. E.
E-pa-phro-di-tus Epaphroditus e-pi-^u-re-ans epicureans e-thi-o-pi-a ethiopia
e-th^-o-pi-an ethiopian
G. G.
Ge-de-ro-tha-im Gederothaim
H. H.
Ha-ba-zi-ni-ah Habaziniah hi-e-ra-po-lis hierapolis
I. I.
Je-ho-vah-jreth Jehovahjreth is-ra-e-li-tish israelitish jez-re-e-li-tes
jezreelites
K. K.
Ki-ri-a-tha-im Kiriathaim ka-desh-bar-ne-a kadeshbarnea ka-desh-naph-to-li
kadeshnaphtoli
L. L.
La-o-de-ce-a Laodecea la-o-de-ce-an laodecean ly-ca-o-ni-a lycaonia
M. M.
Ma-ce-do-ni-a Macedonia ma-ce-do-ni-an macedonian ma-ry-mag-de-len
marymagdelen mi-di-a-ni-tish midianitish
N. N.
Ne-bu-chadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar ne-bu-za-ra-dan nebuzaradan ni-co-la-i-tans
nicolaitans
O. O.
O-ne-si-pho-rus Onesiphorus
P. P.
Pha-ra-oh-ne-cho Pharaohnecho phi-la-del-phi-a philadelphia por-ti-us-fes-tus
portiusfestus
R. R.
Ra-moth-gi-le-ad Ramothgil^ad rem-mon-methoar remmonmethoar
S. S.
Sa-mo-thra-ci-a Samothracia ser-gi-us-pau-lus sergiuspaulus sha-a-la-bi-a
shaalabia she-a-ri-a-shub sheariashub
T. T.
Ta-a-nath-shi-lon Taanathshilon thes-sa-lo-ni-ans thessalonians
thes-sa-lo-ni-ca thessalonica to-ba-do-ni-jah tobadonijah
Proper Names of six Syllables^
A. A.
A-bel-beth-ma-a-chah Abelbethmaachah al-mon-dib-la-tha-im almondiblathaim
B. B.
Be-ro-dack-ba-la-dan Berodackbaladan beth-le-hem-e-phra-tah bethlehemephratah
C. C.
Che-phar-ha-am-mo-nai Chepharhaammonai clau-di-us-ly-si-as claudiuslysias
cu-shan-ri-sha-thu-im cushanrishathuim
E. E.
El-e-loe-is-ra-ell Eleloeisraell
I. I.
Je-gar-sa-ha-du-tha Jegarsahadutha Ju-das-is-ca-ri-ot judasiscariot
K. K.
Ki-broth-kat-ta-a-vah Kibrothkattaavah ki-ri-ath-je-a-rim kiriathjearim
L. L.
La-ma-sa-bach-tha-ni Lamasabachthani
M. M.
Ma-ha-le-la-crab-bim Mahalelacrabbim ma-ha-lath-le-an-noth mahalathleannoth
ma-her-sha-lal-hash-baz mahershalalhashbaz me-so-po-ta-mi-a mesopotamia
S. S.
Se-la-ham-mah-le-koth Selahammahlekoth sy-ro-phe-ni-ci-an syrophenician
T. T.
Ti-be-ri-us-cae-sar Tiberiuscaesar tim-nath-te-ra-he-res timnathteraheres
Z. Z.
Zaph-nah-pa-a-ne-ah Zaphnahpaaneah
A Table of Words, which sound alike, but are different in the Sense, Spelling,
and Writing.
A.
Abel, Adams second son a bell, to ring with able, sufficient accurate, exact,
curious acute, quick, witty accidence, to teach children accidents, changes,
and chances account, reckoning made account, good esteem achor, a valley acorn,
that grows on oaks acre of land, 160 pole air, the sky heir, to an estate
hair, of the head hare, in the woods are, merry, or sad acts, of parliament
axe, to cleave wood ai me, woe is me ay, ever more advise, to give counsel
advice, to take counsel all, as all things ale, the cobbler loves awle, helps to
buy it aile, grief and trouble all^y, to aswage, heat, or pain alley, a narrow
passage ally, associates aloud, to call out allowed, with approbation amen, a
wishing well amend, to grow better altar, for sacrifice alter, to change angel,
a spirit angle, a term in astronomy angle, to catch fish annal, a chronicle
annual, yearly arras, costly hangings harrass, toil and t^ouble arrows, to
shoot in a bow arrowse, to stir up array, an army drawn up array, comple^t
clothing a peer, of the realm a pear, a pleasant fruit appear, before any
person amaze, a wondering a maze, a pleasant place a mace, for the lord Major
appeal, petitioning a peal, rung on a bell ark, built Noah arch, of a bridge
arch, bishop arrant, wicked and vile errant, a message a scent, a smell ascent,
a going up a hill assent, an agreeing assistants, of a company assistance, a
helping forward ash, a tree so called ass, a dull beast ask, to enquire asp, a
poisonous creature hasp, to fasten a door ant, a pismire aunt, the mothers
sister attach, taking body or goods attaque, to face the enemy augre, to bore a
hole auger, an astrologer austere, fierce and grim oyster, a shellfish
B.
Babble, to prate foolishly babel, the tower of confusion bauble, for children
and fools batcheler, one never married batchelour of arts, at Oxford, etc.
bacon, swines flesh dried beacon, on the top of a hill beckon, with the hand
badge, a mark or coat of arms batch, so many loaves baked together baififfe,
or sergeant bayliffe of a hundred bayleafe, like laurel baiz, to line coats
with bays, of a Tree so called baal, an idol of the heathen bald, without any
hair ball, ^o play with at tennis, etc. bawl, to howl and make a noise balm, an
herb for a wound band, for the neck band, of soldiers band, of a faggot bond,
an obligation for money barbara, a woman's name barbary, a place in africa
barbarous, cruel and inhumane barberries, such as they pickle bark, of a tree
bark, of a dog barque, a small ship berk-shire, near windsor base,
unworthiness bas-viol, an instrument bast, on a silver-lace, etc. bare, naked,
and plain bear, a four footed beast beer, strong and small, etc. bier, to carry
a corpse on belie, to speak falsely belly, a part of the body bellows, to blow a
fire beray, a defilement bewray, to discover berry, as juniper, elder, and
coffee, etc. bury, a dead corpse beseech, to entreat or desire besiege, to
bes^t a city or town been, as where have thou been bin, to keep salt or bread
in begin, to enter upon business biggin, for children to wear boar, a swine
bore, to pierce a hole body, a substance bodies, of a gown bandy, obscene and
filthy boll, to wash hands in bowl, to drink in, or bowl with billett, for a
soldier billot, for the fire bitter, not sweet bittern, a foul better, very
good blach, to make black bleach, to make white blanch, to pull off the rind
bough, of a tree bow, to make obeisance bow, to shoot arrows boy, a lad boyse,
a name br^ad, corn to eat bred, reared up, or brought up brann, of wheat brand,
a fire stick brain, or skull brawn, of a wild boar breaches, divisions
breeches, as men wear brewis, of the fatt of the Pot bruise, a sore place
brute, a rumor brute, beastly and rude buy, to purchase with money by, this,
or by and by bolt, of door boult, meal, as bakers burgess, in parliament
borrage, a herb so called
C.
Cabal, a select company cable of a ship, a rope capable, fit to receive cull,
to name, any one caul, sewet, on the bowels cawl, of a perriwig, etc. callis,
in france challice, the sacramental cup carol, a christmas song coral for
childrens gums carriage, good breeding carrier, from London to Oxford, etc.
carreere, a full speed carrets, Sandwich, the best chariot, a small coach
cannons, great guns canons rules of the church cavalier, a horseman caviller, a
contentious person casualties, unhappy accidents causey, a path way channel or
gutter cannal, to wash in kennel, for hounds cauldron, for boiling chauldron,
36 bushels of coals cease, to be silent, or desist seize, to lay hold on size,
bigness, in breadth or length celler to lay drink in seller, a shopkeeper
censor, a reformer censure, a verdict and judgment censer, to contain incense
centory, a herb or plant century, a hundred years sentry a soldier on duty
chase, to fret and vex chafe, of wheat chattells, all goods, houses and leases
cattle, all beasts chair, to sit in chare woman, which washes, etc. cheer, to
make merry cheer, good provision cithern, a musical instrument citron, a fruit
to preserve circumspect, wary, and shie circumference, a circle circumlocution,
long expressions clause, a piece of a sentence claws, nails of birds or beasts
cluster, of grapes or figgs clyster, for purgation coat, a garment cote to keep
sheep in quote to cite an author collar for a doublet choler, angry and
passionate collier, that sells coals color, as green, red, and blew
scholar, a young learner choose, which you will chews, the cudd could, to be
able cooled, made cold cold, weather common, free for any commons house of
parliament commune, frequent discourse comfort, joy and gladness confects, of
sugar coops, for cocks and h^n^ cope, to change copse, of wood colander, a
strainer coriander, a seed so called coroner, a crowner counsel, advice
council, advisers conceive, with child conceive, by imagination c^^^nel over a
regiment ^o^^ny, a plantation cos^^^^onger, a seller of apples costive, ^ound
in the body cours^, rough and gross course, a hare, or a fox corse, a dead
corpse cousin, a nephew or niece cosen, to cheat and defraud current, a stream
curr^nt, coin corinths, a small fruit cy^ba^, a tinckling instrument ^ymbol a
sign in rhetoric crav^t, for the neck crevet, a melting pott
D.
Dam, stopping of water damn, to condemn dame, a mistress of a family damme of
young ones damosel, a young lass damsin, a black plum dandruffe, scurfe in the
head dear, beloved dear, a bad bargain deer, a heart, stag, or Buck defer, to
delay differ, to vary and fly off demurre, debate, or doubt demure, modest,
and silent deserts, merits, good or bad desect, to forsake desert, a wilderness
decent, comely and handsome descent, a pedigree or genealogy dissent, to
disagree deed, and indenture sealed dead, departed the world decease, to dye
disease, a sickness disseise, put out of place daulphin, heir of France dolphin
a fish in the Sea devices, tricks devizes, a towns name dairy, for butter and
cheese diary, an almanac dissolute, debaucht and loose dissolate, comfortless
doer, one that minds business door, of a church or house do, to act do, a
female Deer dough, unbaked bread dew, on the grass due, a just debt done,
finished dun, a dark color dunce, a blockhead digest, to concoct digest, to
methodize do, thou do so dust, of the earth duke, a title of honor duck, a
fowl, wild the best dolor, grief and sorrow doller, dutch money dragon, that
flies dragoon, a horse musqueteer drain, to draw ponds dry drawn, by horses
draught of drink drought, dryness dray, a brewers sled draw, to pull
E.
Ear, to hear ear, of corn ere, this or before this year, twelve months err, to
mistake in judgment early, betimes in the morning yearly, year, by year earn,
to get a livelihood yern, moved with compassion yarn, thread to knit stockens
earth, we go on hearth, the chimney floor east, where the sun rises yest, of
ale, or beer easter, the resurrection esther, a proper name hester, name of an
Idol yesterday, a day past edge, or brim hedge, or sense elder, older eldern,
tree eminent, a noted person imminent, approaching nigh emeroids, dis^ase of
the piles emerauld, a precious stone enter, into a house interr, a dead body
entire, whole and perfect errant, a straying arrant, knave or rogue exercise,
recreation exorcist, magical art eyes, of the body ice, water or snow frozen
F.
Fair, lovely, and beautiful fair, or market fare, good cheer fare, watermans
hire fear, horror and trouble fain, fools glad feign, dissemble and
counterfeit facility, with ease facile, very easy fined, for alderman find, to
get a gain fiends, evil spirit finns, of a fish felloes, of a wheel fellows,
companions fillip, on the nose phillip, a proper name flea, to pull off the
skin, or a vermin so called flee, to make escape fly, to make have away fly,
an insect so called flour, of a chamber flower, in a garden flower, fine meal,
flocks, of wool, or sheep flux, bloody, a disease foal, a young colt fool, a
silly fellow foil, as tresoile, clover grass foyl, a repulse and opposition
foul, dirty fowl* a bird of the air fore, before, formerly four, a number so
called forth, without fourth, day of the month frize, shagged cloth freeze, to
congeale froise, a sort of pancake phrase, a quaint expression furrs, a fine
hairy skin furze, a prickly shrubs fir, trees so called form, of words fourm,
of wood
G.
Gall, upon the liver gaul, chaffing a tree galleys, turkish ships gallows, for
execution guard, a great hem of a garment guard, a company of soldiers garden,
of plants and flowers guardian, over an Orphan gargle, for a sore mouth
garrulity, vain babbling gentle, mild and courteous gentiles, jewish heathens
gesture, a habit of the body ^ester, that breaks jests glister, like gold
glyster, to a sick person grass, of the meadows grase, to feed on grass grace,
infusion in the Soul gray, a color greyhound groat, four pence grot, a cave
in the earth groan, to make a doleful cry grown, tall or thick ^ gross, twelve
dozen gross, fat and burly guilt, guilty gilt, with gold goat, four-footed
beast got, or did get gun, to shoot with gone, or went away guess, to imagine
or think guest, a friend, and acquaintance
H.
Hale, to tug, or pull hail, congealed snow hall, in a great house hard, as a
flint herd, a head of cattle heard, to be heard haven, a port for ships heaven,
a place of happiness heads, upon the shoulders heed, to take heed hear, with
the ear here, present in this place hire, to give wages her, a female person
hallow, to make holy holly, a tree holy, religious and devout hollow, an empty
sound hollo, to cry aloud hole, that is bored through whole, the total sum
heel, of the foot heal, up a sore he will, that is he will hell, place of torment
happily, it may be happily, fortunately hew, color hugh, a proper name hue, and
cry, after one hew, to cut down host, that keeps an inn host, or Army hoarse in
the throat horse, a beast to ride on hoar, as the hoary frost whore, a lewd
strumpet hoop, for a barrel whoop, to hollow and baul hour, threescore minutes
hore-hound, a plant heart, of the body heart, a deer art, skill and industry
home, at his house whom, that, or which hye, to make have high, stately and
lofty hoy, a western ves^el
I.
Jambs, posts of a door james, a proper name idle, lazy and slothful idol, a
false God isle, an island oil, as oyl-olive incite, to provoke insight, skill,
and judgment ingenious, one of good parts ingenuous, of a good nature imply, to
signify employ, some business inn, for strangers and Travelers in, or within
a house itch, a scab, or mange hitch, entangle job, a proper name jobb, an odd
piece of work joice, name of a woman joist, a little beam juice, liquor pressed
out jointer, a plane of boards jointure, of a woman in marriage
K.
Ken, to know one keen, very sharp kill, to destroy kiln, to dry malt in kin,
related to one knave, a vile fellow nave, of a cart wheel keel, the bottom of a
ship chyle, meat first digested knight, a title of honor night, successor of
the day
L.
Lamb, a young sheep lame, one that halts lamp, to burn oil in lance, a spear
launch, a ship put from harbor lass, a young maid last, to make shoes on
last, the latest to endure least, the smallest lest, a word of caution lesson,
to be learned by heart lessen, to make less listen, to hearken diligently
latin, a language latten, double tin lease, of an estate leash, of hounds
lease, to pick up shatt'red corn less, small less, he that takes a lease
legion, six thousand men legends, popish fables leman, a strumpet lemmons, or
oranges loud, to make a noise lowed, like oxen lowr, or sour looks lower,
beneath lour, a palace in France lead, to hand along lead, a mineral in the
earth liturgy, the common prayer lethary, a drowsy disease line, to draw a
strait line loyn, of mutton, veal, or lamb leopard, a beast spotted leper,
diseased with the leprosy leaper, that jumps and leaps letice, a female name
lettice, a herb for sallet lattice, a wooden barred window loose, to unfasten
louse, a vermin lose, to have losses lice, vermin in the head or body lies,
false stories loath, to disdain an abhor loath, unwilling not satisfied league,
of peace and friendship legs, supporters of the body laud, glory and praise
lord, a title, as lord mayor limn, to paint in small limb, a member of the body
limp, to go halting lint, to put to wounds leaden cistern, of lead leyden,
university in holland
M.
Mail, a coat of Armor male, the he, or masculine maul, to fall foul and
strike major, a commander in an army mayor, of a city, or lord mayor mare, that
bears, colt main, all might and force mane, on the neck of a horse many, a
great company main, the ocean manner, fashion or way manners, good carriage
manor, a Lordship manure, to dung ground medes, and persians meads, green
meadows meat, food meet, fit and convenient mete, to measure corn moat, or
compassing pond mote, or dust, in the eye might, power and strength mite, an
insect in cheese mind, reason and understanding mine, to dig out gold or silver
mine, that is my own mantle, for a child mantil-tree, by a chimney mantled, as
drink when it flours marshal, of an army martial, warlike marred, spoiled and
corrupted marry, joined in matrimony merry, rejoicing and glad message,
commission mesuage, tenements maurice, a proper nam^ morris, dancers medlar, a
fruit medler, a busy body million, a great number melon, a muskmellon moan, to
lament mown, grass mown down mourning, for friends morning, the follower of
night muzzle, to stop the mouth muscle, a little shellfish mole, that lives in
the earth mold, to cast in mortar, lime and hair mixed mortar, to pound spices
in mow, to cut down grass mow, a rick of corn moore, a man's name more, that
exceeds moor, a fenny ground meteors, airy comets meter, fitter meeter, verse
and rhyme mass, the popish lettany mast, belonging to a ship mast, a corn
martin, a bird merton, a college in Oxford manchet, fine white bread mansion,
a lords chief house
N.
Naught, bad, wicked naught, nothing nay, not so, or no neigh, as horses do
nether, lower neither, none of them nesh, tender effeminate nice, curious and
delicate niece, a brothers daughter nigh, nearer nigh, a nick name for Isaac
noise, tumultuous nose, on the face noah, a proper name
O.
Oar, to row withal ore, unrefined Gold our, as our house oyer, and terminer
hour, of the day ore, abbreviation of over oath, to take an oath ought, to do
what we should oats, a grain, or pulse out, as without own, to acknowledge one,
the smallest number once, but one time one's, body or right hand ounce, a small
weight ord^r, rule, and decency ordure, filthiness and nastyness onion, a plant
union, agreement oh, a note of bemoaning owe, to be in debt
P.
Palate, the roof of the mouth pallet, a little bed palliate, to cloak a
business pail, to carry milk pale, and wan in the face pales, round a garden
pair, two of any thing pare, to cut off repair, to mend, or go to a place pear,
a fruit so called peer, a nobleman patent, from the King pattins, for women
patience, in aff^iction patient, a sick person pause, a stop in speaking paws,
of a lion, or bear pace, two foot and a half pains, labor and care panes, of
glass for windows pans, of earth or brass parson, of a parish person, a man or
woman peace, quietness and tranquillity pease, pulse and grain piece, a part or
parcel precedence, foregoing precedent, a pattern pr^sident, foreman of a
society principal, chief of a college principle, a fundamental point power,
might or authority pour, out of a vessel pray, to beg and entreat prey, to
devour play, comedy, or tragedy plea, a defense pens, made of quills pence,
small money penny-post office pennyroyal, a herb penury, want, poverty parse,
a lesson pearce, bore through prize, goods taken from enemies price, value and
worth parasite, that cogs and flatter parracide, that murders his father place,
where one is plaise, the name of a fish prophet, tells things to come profit,
advantage and gain potion, prescription of physic portion, a dowry at marriage
pore, with ones eyes poor, needy and necessitous partition, a dividing a wall
petition, a prayer or request pebble, a little stone people, a multitude
pestle, belonging to a mortar pestle, of pork pistol, a small gun epistle, a
letter pizzle, of a beast pilate, condemned Christ pilot, guide of a ship plat,
as a grass-plat plait, to order the hair po^ch, an egg poached pouch, a great
purse pottage, or porrage to eat porteridge, carriage by porters pole, a long
stick poll, of the head press, of people pressed, money press, for books
Q.
Quadripartite, of four parts quadruple, four times as much quarrel, strife,
falling out quarie, of glass quarrie, of stones querie, a question put quarter,
the fourth part quartan, belonging to the fourth part quench, to put out fire
quince, a fruit queen, a strumpet queen, the kings wife
R.
Raca, empty, silly rachel, a place rachel, jacobs wife rakehel, a notorious
rogue radical, inbred race, horse, or foot race raze, of ginger, or demolish
rake, to scrape together rack, to stretch cloth rack, to torment men rack, for
horses hay wrack, ruin or shipwreck wreek, ruin, or confusion raise, to lift up
rays, the sun beams rare, choice, extraordinary rear, to raise a building rere,
to come behind rain, from the clouds reign, to govern as a king reins, of the
back, or a bridle rye, a place so called rye, a grain reeds, by the water side
read, books or men red, a bloody color reason, argument or cause raisins, a
kind of fruit rome, the name of a city room, to sit or walk in rome, to rage
and tear roven, a city in France reverend, one to be respected reverence, to
pay duty to right, just and even rite, a custom or ceremony write, with a pen
or pencil wright, a name, or wheel-wright rine, frost rhyme, hobling verses
rhine, the river rhine rind, of bacon roof, of a house rough, co^rse, against
the grain roe, a young buck row, of trees in a garden row, with sculls in a
boat rowel, of a spur retch, to stretch or gape reach, to fetch any thing
wretch, a miserable creature rise, to get up, or thrive rice, a grain which is
used raiser, to exact and extort razor, to shave the head or beard real,
sincere and true royal, kingly, majestical
S.
Safeguard, safe custody saveguard, for women to ride in sage, a comfortable
herb sage, grave, wise, and prudent sageness, gravity, and weightiness sale, to
be exposed to be sold sail, of a ship at sea salve, a plaster save, to defend,
and deliver savior, of the world s^vour, a taste, or smell sent, on a message
scent, a smell good or bad suet, fat of beef or mutton suit, to agree with any
humor suit, in law, civil or common suit, of apparel shave, with a razor
sheaves, of corn since, since the time sense, reason and understanding senses,
hearing, seeing, smelling, etc. scarce, hard to be got scars, sores healed up
scull, the brain pan scullers, little boats scholars, such as learn seignior,
the great turk senior, the eldest seasin, to make livery seisin, to take
possession season, time and opportunity sects, schism, and faction sex, male
or female slo, a crabbed fruit slough, a dirty place slow, not quick in motion
^oar, to fly aloft soar, anguish in pain sower, of seeds some, a part or few
sum, a reckoning cast up sun, which shines son, a male child straight, not
crooked strait, narrow, troublesome sound, not diseased, or corrupt swound, to
faint away soon, presently or quickly sown, as wheat or rye ship, that is at
sea sheep, cattle, mutton scoul, or frown school, for scholars slight, to take
no care slight, art and cunning sever, to part from severe, cruel, and hard
hearted say, to speak sea, the ocean see, to look or behold seer, a prophet
seir, a country surgeon, or chyrurgion sergeant, of the counter shear, to cut
with shears share, part with another sheer, quite off shire, a country shekel,
two shillings sickle, to reap corn shoot, a young sprig shoot, bullets, arrows
shout, make a noise shute, a man's name shut, the door stare, a bird so called
stare to look steadfastly stairs, steps to go up stars, in the firmament staple,
of a door staple, a firm commodity stable, for horses stopple, to a bottle
stopper, of a pipe statue, an image statute, a law stature, proportion succor,
relief or help sucker, a young sprig soul, in the body of man soal, of a foot
soale, a fish sear, with a hot iron cere, with a wax candle sow, corn sow,
with pigs spare, to excuse and save spear, a warlike weapon sphere, the
caelestial globe stead, room, lieu, instead of steed, a stately horse bedstead,
to lie upon steel, to strike fire style, a faculty in writing steer, a bullock
steer, to guide a ship stood, did stand studs, silver pins in a watch case
T.
Taber, a small drum tabor, a mount so called taper, a great wax candle tail,
of any beast tale, a foolish story tall, high in stature teal, a fowl tares,
weeds in the corn tears, from weeping eyes tear, to pieces there, in that place
their, belonging to them too, over much tow, the combings of flax to, this
place, or that place toe, belonging to the foot two, in number, or joined
together thyme, the herb so called time, that stays for no mtn turkois-stone,
a jewel turkies, fowls through, by means thereof through, as to pierce through
throw, as to cast from you title, of dignity and honor tittle, a point or
speck tomb, a sepulcher tome, a section of a book tongues, to speak with
tongue, or languages tongs, to take up coals tossed, on the sea toast, nutmeg,
and ale teem, being child team, of horses or oxen turn, round about torn, off
thorn, of a hedge track, footsteps tract, or a treatise treaty, parley of peace
treatment, entertainment trey, of wood for meat tray, number of three
V.
Vacant, empty vacation, idle time vocation, calling or employment vain, silly,
and foolish veins, in the body vane, of a steeple vail, covering of the face
vale, to put off, submit vale, a valley vale, or farewell vial, a glass viol, a
musical instrument value, to set a price valley, a low place volley, of shot
umb^es, of a deer humble, meekness venice, a great City venus, the Goddess of
Love voice, of a man vice, iniquity and wickedness visage, feature in the face
vizzard, to cover the face vital, spirits, where life is victuals, food,
provision use, custom usury, money upon interest us, we uz, Jobs country
W.
Wain, declining of the moon wan, pale and sickly wand, a riding rod waits, the
city-musick weights, ounces and pounds wares, several commodities ware, a place
so called wear, sorts of apparel were, as you were walls, of a city or town
wales, a principality wail, to grieve and lament weal, the public good wheale,
a rising or pimple wheel, of a coach or cart white, emblem of innocence wight,
an Island so called wild, rude and untamed weild, a great sword weald, of Kent
and Sussex way, to walk in weight, in scales wright, as wheel-wright write,
with a pen waist, the middle part wast, desolate and useless wale, great thread
in stuffs bewail, to bemoan and grieve wakes, country feasts awake, to rouse up
walk, to go leasurly walks, for recreation wardship, over an orphan worship, to
say to an Esquire warp, to cleave like boards warp, yarn, woven wey, of salt of
cheese whey, and buttermilke weel, to catch fish we will, for we will wicked, ill
given, debaucht wicket, an half door win, to get a wager wind, that blows
wine, squeezed from grapes witch, that bewitcheth which, who, or that woad,
dying stuff wood, fuel, and timber woe, alas, misery woo, to be a suitor wrap,
to fold up rap, to give a small blow rape, to force a maid wring, to squeez
hard ring, for a finger wrote, I have written rote, to say without book
wrought, to do work
Y.
You, thou, or ye ewe, or sheep yew, a tree your, belonging to you ewer,
belonging to a basin yolk, of eggs yoke, of oxen oak, a tree yore, in old time
year, the twelfth month yare, a phrase at sea
Proper Names of Men and Women, with their Signification.
A.
Abel, just and good Aaron, a priest and teacher abiah, the will of God
abraham, father of the faithful adam, man earthly abigal, the fathers joy
andrew, strong and manly alexander, man's helper ambrose, immortal, divine
annanias, the grace of God anthony, thriving arthur, bearish augustine, kingly
agnes, modest and chaste alice, noble and generous amy, conqueror of Love
B.
Baldwin, swift and speedy bartholomew, son of goodness barnabas, son of
comfort baruch, blessed benjamin, son of the right hand bethel, the house of
God barnard, lord of children brian, sings well barbara, industrious beatrice,
good natured blanch, white and fair
C.
Caleb, as a heart charles, valiant and strong christopher, a good carrier
constantine, fixed, fast cornelius, a devout man catherine, unspotted clara,
shining
D.
Daniel, judgment of God david, beloved of God diana, heathen goddess dido,
aeneas wife dorothy, Gods gift dorcas, like a roe buck
E.
Edgar, prosperous edmund, peacemaker edwin, victorious edward, well deserving
egbert, sparkling light elias, Lord God emmanuel God with us erasmus, learned
eleazer help of God eliezer help of God elijah, God the Lord elisha, my God
saves ephraim, fruitful eunice, good victory everard, good report ezechias,
the Lords strength ezekiel, the good prophet enoch, taught or dedicate ezra, a
helper eleanor, courteous and pitiful elizabeth, peace of the Lord emme, a
careful nurse eve, the mother of all living
F.
Felix, happy florence, prosperous francis, frank and free frederick, peace and
quietness fulk, noble and gentile ferdinando, pure, peace
G.
Gabriel, man of God gamaliel, reward of God gerrard, a good liver george, a
good husband gedeon, a slayer german, ever true gervass, as true as steel
geffrey, a good poet gilbert, brightness godfrey, peace of God gregory,
careful, watching gryffith, strong faith guy, a protector and guide gertrude,
all truth and honesty
H.
Henry, rich in wealth hector, defense to many herbert, a Lord famous hugh,
comfort and joy hubert, fair hope horatio, sparkling eye habakuk, a wrastler
hilkiah, the Lords gentleness helena, pitiful hannah, the Lords gift humphrey,
double diligent
I.
Jacob, a supplanter james, a maintainer ichabod, the glory is departed
jedidah, beloved jehosaphat, the Lord is judge joachim, the Lords preparation
jesus, a savior job, sorrowful joseph, increase of the Lord jeremiah, in the
Lords esteem joab, fatherhood john, beloved of the Lord joshua, a savior
josias, a sacrifice isaac, laughter julian, mild and tender jonathan, Gods gift
jean, good and gracious joane, contented judith, praising God jehosaphat, the
Lord is judge
K.
Kenelme, wise and learned kendrick, good will
L.
Lambert, fair lamb laurence, faithful lazarus, help of the Lord leonard, like
a lion lewis, scorn of the people lionel, little lion luke, lifting up
lodowick, a warrier levi, joined lot, wrapped, joined lettice, joyfulness
lucia, brightness
M.
Malachy, my messenger marmaduke, mighty mark, high and lofty matthew, Gods
gift michael, Gods likeness moses, drawn up melchizedek, king of righteousness
mabel, a good maid margaret, precious pearl m^ry, the best choice maud, a queen
melicent, sweet, as honey muziel, perfumed
N.
Nathaniel, the gift of the Lord Nicholas, captain of thousands Nehemiah, rest
of the Lord Noah, peace and rest
O.
Oliver, olive of peace owen, well bred olympia, sharp witted
P.
Patrick, statesman paul, mavelous peniel, seeing God peter, a Rock or Stone
phillip, a warrior peregrine, a travellour phebe, clear or bright phineas, a
bold countenance priscilla, ancient prudence, wisdom philadelphia, lover of
kindred phillis, lovely and handsome
R.
Ralph, assisting raymund, tranquillity richard, avaritious robert, just and
true roger, musical reuben, son of visions rachel, a sheep rebecca, blunt
contention rosamond, rose of the world
S.
Samuel, heard of God sampson, a strong man solomon, wisdom, and peace saul,
lent of the Lord sebastian, right honorable sylvester, a woodman simon,
hearing, or obeying shem, renowned stephen, a crown swithin, weeping sarah,
lady or dame susanna, lilly or rose sophronia, temperance sibyl, wise council
sophia, wisdom
T.
Theodore, Gods delight theodosius, beloved of God theophilus, a friend of God
thomas, bottomless, deep timothy, the honor of God titus, honorable thomazin,
unsearchable
V.
Valentine, puissant vincent, victorious ursula, a small bear uzziel, the
strength of God
W.
Walter, general of an army william, defense to many winnifred, win or get
peace
X.
Xanthus, a heathen
Y.
Ynca, an Indian Prince
Z.
Zacharia, mindful of the Lord zabdiel, the dowry of God zephaniah, hidden of
the Lord
The Numeral Letters and Figures, which are of great Use.
I 1 one II 2 two III 3 three IV 4 four V 5 five VI 6 six VII 7 seven VIII 8
eight IX 9 nine X 10 ten XI 11 eleven XII 12 twelve XIII 13 thirteen XIV 14
fourteen XV 15 fifteen XVI 16 sixteen XVII 17 seventeen XVIII 18 eighteen XIX
19 nineteen XX 20 twenty XXX 30 thirty XL 40 forty L 50 fifty LX 60 sixty LXX
70 seventy LXXX 80 eighty XC 90 ninety C 100 hundred CX 110 hundred and ten CXX
120 hundred and twenty CXXX 130 hundred and thirty CXL 140 hundred and forty
CL 150 hundred and fifty CLX 160 hundred and sixty CLXX 170 hundred and seventy
CLXXX 180 hundred and eighty CXC 190 hundred and ninety CC 200 two hundred CI,
or D 500 five hundred M, or M 1000 a thousand 5000 five thousand 10000 ten
thousand 50000 50000 fifty thousand 100000 100000 hundred thousand 500000
500000 five hundred thousand 1000000 1000000 tenn hundred thousand, or a mil.
MDCLXXXI 1681 one thousand six hund. eighty one

The Names of the Books of the old and new Testament, with the Number of their
Chapters.
Genesis has chapters 50 Exodus 40 Leviticus 27 Numbers 36 Deuteronomie 34
Joshua 24 Judges 21 Ruth 4 I. Samuel 31 II. Samuel 24 I. Kings 22 II. Kings 25
I. Chronicles 29 II, Chronicles 36 Ezra 10 Nehemiah 13 Esther 10 Job 42 Psalms
150 Proverbs 31 Ecclesiastes has chapters 12 The Song (...) Solomon 8 Isaiah
66 Jeremiah 52 Lamentations 5 Ezekiel 48 Daniel 12 Hosea 14 Joel 3 Amos 9
Obadiah 1 Jonah 4 Micah 7 Nahum 3 Habakuk 3 Zephaniah 3 Haggai 2 Zechariah 14
Malachy 4

The Books of the New Testament.
Matthew has chapters 28 Mark 16 Luke 24 John 21 The Acts 28 The Epistle to
the Romans 16 I Corinthians 16 II Corinthians 13 Galathians 6 Ephesians 6
Phillippians 4 Collossians 4 I Thessalonians 5 II Thessalonians 3 I Timothy
has chapters 6 II Timothy 4 Titus 3 Philemon 1 To the Hebrews 13 The Epistle
of James 5 I Peter 5 II Peter 3 I John 5 II John 1 III John 1 Jude 1 Revelaion
22

Pauses and Stops to be Observed in Reading the Bible.
A Comma (,) a Semicolon (;) a Colon (:) a Period (.) an Interrogation (?) an
Admiration (!) a Parenthesis () an Asterisme (*) an Obelisk () a hyphen (-) a
Caret () Citation (") Section () an Index () Apostrophe (')

1. A Comma is the most frequent Point, and of least Force; marked thus,

Example. But when the Husbandmen saw the Son, they said among themselves, this
is the Heir, come let us kill him, etc.

2. A Semicolon is a Pause longer than a Comma, being a Point with a Comma
under it;

Example. As he that gives to the Poor shall not lack;

3. A Colon stops the Sentence a pretty while, and denotes full but not perfect
Sense, and is marked thus:

Example. As the Way of the Lord is Strength to the Upright: but Destruction,
etc.

4. A Period is a full Stop, and makes an end of a Sentence: marked thus:

Example. Fear God. honor the King.

5. An Interrogation is used after a Question, and marked thus?

Example, Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the Flesh?

6. A Note of Exclamation, or Admiration, wondering or crying out, is marked
thus!

Example. O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!

7. A Parenthesis, is two Semicircles, including a Sentence, and must be
sounded different from the rest, the Sense being perfect without it, and is
marked thus ()

Example. Know ye not (for I speak to them, that know the Law) how that the Law
has Dominion over a Man, as long as he lives?

8. An Asterism is when any part of a Sentence is wanting, marked thus *

9. an Obelisk, directs from the Discourse to the Margin, marked thus

10. A Hyphen is a Note of Connection as mis-like, safeguard, and is marked
thus -

11. A Caret, is when words are left out, as a man of Words, and is marked thus

12. A Citation is used when an Author is Quoted, and how far they go is known,
by every Line being marked thus "

13. a Section is a mark of dividing Chapters, and is marked thus

14. An index is to note any remarkable thing from the Margin, and is marked
thus

15. An Apostrophe, is a small Comma, and set over where a Vowel is left out,
as over instead of over, and saved instead of saved, and is marked thus '

Of Capital or Great Letters in writing.
THey have in the beginning of Words their peculiar Uses: Noting not only
Proper Names of Men, Cities, Callings, as Ambrose, Daniel, London, York,
Mercer, or Grocer; but Dignities and Offices, as Highness, Lord Mayor, your
Honor or Worship, with the Names of Arts, as Grammar, Rhetoric, Writing,
Music, and Arithmetic; The beginnings of every Verse and Sentence, ought to
be a Capital, as I go, I am, I will, etc. Great Letters are likewise to be
used in Emphatical and remarkable Words, as God said to Moses, I AM, has sent
thee. Whole Sentences are emphatical: as JEHOVAH THE BRANCH, KING OF KINGS, AND
LORD OF LORDS; and such like often found in the OLD TESTAMENT, or the NEW. To
begin a Title, of a Book, ought to be in great Letters, as the WHOLE BOOK OF
PSALMS, etc.

Abbreviation of Words.
Admrs. Administrators B. D. Bachelor of Divinity Bucks. Buckingham-shire C.
C. C. Corpus Christi College Comrs. Commissioners D. C. Dean of Christ Church
Drs. Com. Doctors Commons Dr. D. Doctor of Divinity Eccles. Ecclesiastes
Ecclus. Ecclesiasticus J. D. Y. James Duke of York Inhabts. Inhabitants
Introdt. Introduction prerogt. Off. Perogative Office Pub. Not. Public Notary
R. S. S. Fellow of the Royal Society S.S.Th.D. Sacro-Sanctae Theologiae Doct.
Westmr. Westminster
Berks. Berkshire etc. and so forth Credr. Creditor Cant. Canterbury Chron.
Chronicles Cor. Corinthians Collos. Collossians Coll. Colonel Devon.
Devonshire honble. honorable j. e. that is to say K. R. Katharine Rex L. D.
Doctor of Laws Lieut. Lieutenant M. A. Master of Arts Middx. Middlesex Predict.
Prediction Q. C. Queens College Quest. Question Rev. Revelations Salop.
Shropshire the other. the other wll. Worshipful Xpian. Christian
Chap. Chapter Capt. Captain C.R. Charles Rex Doct. Doctrine Deber. Debtor dd.
Delivered Exon. Exeter Feb. February Ans. Answer Ap. April Aug. August Bp.
Bishop Bd. Bound Dr. Doctor Esqur. Esquire I Will. I will 10br. December Fol.
Folio Genesis Genesis Hd. Honored Jan. January Mat. Matthew Lp. Lordship Mrs.
Mistress Knight. Knight Let Us. let us Lr. Letter Lin. Line Mar. March Mr. Master
8vo. Octavo Page Page Ma. Majesty Md. Memorandum N.B. Note well 9br. November
Obt. Obedient Obj. Objection 8br. October Oxon. Oxford 4to. Quarto Qr. Quarto
Qr. Quire Romans Romans R. Reason. Recipe St. Saint P. P. Penny-Post Part.
Partition Pnts. Presents Sec. Secular Sch. Scholar Sol. Solution 7br. September
wst. wd. westward. Section Viz. to wit Ver. Vers^ with. with which. which Wp.
Worship yrs. yours
and and I Am. I am Ld. Lord Pd. Paid P. Per Vid. See Sr. Sir yt. that ye. the
ym. them in. then is. this u. use with. what you. you yr. your
Remember my Co^me^datio^s to all my Friends at Farnha^, and to all my
Acquaintance at Clapha^; to who^ I wish abu^da^ce of Peace, Plenty, and
Co^solatio^.

Or thus.
Good Sr. I have a Suit from my Sons Mr. concerning his Sch. viz. that when he
has read a Chap. you will appose him with. a Qu. or two out of any v. or lin.
you shall think meet; and then out of his Ans. to frame an Obj. or two by his
Sol. to try him, viz. how he understa^ds with. he reads, for I perceive by his
Mr. yt. a Sch. Exercised in answering a Qu. propounded, and in. giving a Sol.
to an Obj. there agts. shall be made not only more Careful to mark the Co^tents
of every Page and Chap. But the better to Understa^d and Remember every lin.
and v. yt. he reads; which good Sr. let me entreat ye. Favor from you. etc.

The Contracting of Proper Names of Men and Women.
Alexander, Sany Abraham, Abram Anthony, Tony Augustine, Austin Ann, Nan or
Nancy Bartholomew, Bat Bellever, Bell Benjamin, Ben Barbara, Bab Clemment, Clem
Christopher, Kit Catherine, Kate Cornelia, Con Daniel, Dan David, Taffy
Dorothy, Doll Deborah, Deb Diana, Di Edmund, Mun Edward, Ned, Neddy Ellinor,
Nelly, Nell Elizabeth, Betty, Bess Fardinando, Fardi Francis, Frank Gabriel,
Gab Gilbert, Gill Henry, Harry, Hall Humphrey, Numph James, Jemmy John, Jack
Jeremiah, Jerre Isaac, Nigh Joseph, Jo Joshua, Jos Jane, Jenny Judith, Judi
Joan, Jug Langley, Lang Leonard, Len Ludovicus, Lodwick Lucretia, Luce
Marmaduke, Duke Michael, Miel Martha, Patt Matthew, Mat Millisent, Mill Mary,
Moll, Poll Margaret, Peg Margery, Madg Nathaniel, Not Nicholas, Nick Noah, Noy
Obadiah, Obed Oliver, Noll Phillip, Phill Phillis, Phil Priscilla, Pris
Prudence, Pru Ralph, Rafe Richard, Dick Robert, Robin, Bob Roger, Hodge
Rebecca, Beck Rosamond, Rose Rachel, Rach Samuel, Sam Simon, Sim Solomon, Sol
Stephen, Stevan Susanna, Sue Theophilus; Theop Theodore, The Timothy, Tim
Thomas, Tom Valentine, Val Walter, Wat William, Will Zachariah, Zack
The Twelve Months of the Year is,
Months. Days. January 31 February 28 March 31 April 30 May 31 June 30 July 31
August 31 September 30 October 31 November 30 December 31

60 Minutes make 1 hour 24 Hours make a day 7 Days make 1 week 4 Weeks make 1
M. 28 D. 13 mon. 1 d. and 6 hours make when 1 year 365 days make when 1 year
366 days make when leap year
Of the Quarter Days in the Year, there are two Accounts to be given.
London Account is thus.
Mar. the 25 is Lady day June 24 is Midsummer day September. 29 is Michaelmas day
December. 25 is Christmas day
Country Account, sometimes is thus.
February 2 is Candlemas day May 1 is May day August 1 is Lammas day November 1
is all Saints day
A Table of Planets and Signs with their Aspects.
Seven Planets.
Saturn Jupiter Mars Sol Venus Mercury Luna
Twelve Signs.
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagitarius Capricornus
Aquarius Pisces
Five Aspects.
Sextile Quadral Trine Opposition Conjunction
Several Proverbs Useful for Children.
A.
Anger dies quickly with a good Man. A Bit in the Morning, is better than
nothing all Day. After Dinner sit a while, after Supper walk a Mile. Almost and
very nigh, saves many a Lie. A good Beginning, makes a good Ending. A new Broom
sweeps Clean.
B.
Better say here it is, then here it was. Better Children Cry, than old Folks
Weep Butter is Gold in the Morning, Silver at Noon, Lead at Night. Better see a
Clout, than a Hole out Birchen Twiggs, break no Ribbs. Birth is much, but
Breeding more.
C.
Children when they stand quiet, have done some Harm. Confession of a Fault,
makes half Amends for it. Cloudy Mornings, turn to clear Evenings. Comparisons
are very Odious. Count not your Chickens before they be hatched. Close Mouth
catches no flies:
D.
Death keeps no Calendar. Deeds are Fruits, Words are but Leaves. Diseases are
the Interests of Pleasure. Diversity of Humors, breeds Tumors. Dinners cannot
be long where Dainties are wanting. Do well, and you shall have well.
E.
Early up, and never the nearer. Empty Vessels make the greatest sound. Every
thing has an end, and a Pudding has two Evening Orts, are good morning
Fodder. Experience is the best Mistress. Eating and drinking takes away the
Stomach.
F.
Fair in the Cradle, and foul in the Saddle. Fire and Water are good Servants,
but bad Masters. Fools make Feasts and wise folks Eat them. Forecast is better
than a sorry worker. Friends may meet, but Mountains never Greet. Fools build
Houses, and wise Men buy'em.
G.
Go to bed with the Lamb and rise with the Lark. Gentility without ability is
worse than plain beggary. Giving much to the poor does increase a man's store.
Grace will last, but favor will blast. Good Will should be taken in part of
Payment. Good Wine needs no bush.
H.
Half an Acre is good Land. Help hands, for I have no Lands. Happy is he whose
Friends were born before him. Hard fare makes hungry bellies. Hope well and
have well. Hunger will break through Stone-walls.
I.
Jack would be a Gentleman if he could but speak French. Idle Folks lack no
Excuses. Ill Weeds grow a-pace. Ill Will, never said well. Ill luck is worse
than found money. Joan in the dark is as good as my Lady.
K.
A Knotty piece of Timber must have smooth Wedges. Keep some till furthermore
come. King's Cheese goes half away in parings. Kindness will creep where it
cannot go. Kissing goes by favor. Kiln calls the Oven burnt house.
L.
Life lies not in Living, but in liking. Light Gains make a heavy Purse.
Little said soon amended. Little strokes fell great Oaks. Long looked for comes
at last: Lion, is not half so fierce as painted.
M.
Manners make a man, quoth William of Wickham. Many hands make quick Work. Meat
is much, but Manners is more. Mischiefs come by the pound, and go away by the
ounce. My Mind to me a Kingdom is. Misunderstanding brings lies to Town.
N.
Necessity has no Law. Need makes the Old Wife trot. New Lords, new Laws. No
longer pipe, no longer dance. No Penny, no Pater Noster. Nothing have, nothing
crave.
O.
Old Friends, and old Wine are best. One shoulder of Mutton drives down
another. Opportunity makes Thieves. One Nail, drives out another. One Slumber,
invites another. One Swallow makes no Summer.
P:
Patience is a Flower, grows not in every ones Garden. Play, Women, and Wine,
undo men Laughing. Providence is better than Rent. Penny in Pocket, is a good
Companion Penny and Penny laid up, will be many. Pride goes before, Shame
follows after.
Q.
Quick at Meat, quick at Work. Quake, like an aspen Leaf. Quake, like an Oven.
Quandary, to be in Quick we must live by, and not by the Dead Quietness is
best, though it cost dear.
R.
Remove an old Tree, and it will wither to Death. Riches are but the Baggage of
Fortune. Raw Leather will stretch. Rolling Stone gathers no Moss. Rome was not
built in one Day. Receiver, is as bad as the Thief.
S.
Ships fear Fire more than Water. Step after step, the Ladder is ascended.
Sorrow is good for nothing but Sin. Spare the Rod, and spoil the Child. Sky
falls, we shall catch Larks. Strike while the Iron is hot.
T.
Time is the Rider that breaks youth. Time and Tide stay for no Man. Try before
you Trust. Trade is the Mother of Money. Truth and Oil are ever above. Truth
has a good Face, but bad Clothes.
V.
Valor can do little without Discretion. Venture a small Fish to catch a great
one. Use makes Perfectness. Use Legs, and have Legs. Valor that Parlies, is
near yiedling. Under Water, Famine, under Snow, Bread.
W.
War makes Thieves, and Peace hangs them. Weight and Measure take away Strife.
Willows are weak, yet they bind other Wood. Welcome Death quoth the Rat, when
the Trap fell down. Wolves loose their Teeth, but not their Memory. Words are
but Sands, it is Money buys Lands.
Y.
Youth and white Paper take any Impression. You cannot make Velvet of a Sow's
Ear. Young serving-Man, an old Beggar. Young Men may Die, but old Men must Die.
Young Lambs-skin goes as soon to the Market as the old Ewe. Youth, if it knew,
what Age would Crave,
It would in time both get and save.

PROVERBS in Rhyme.
By Cardinal Woolsey.
A Whip for a Fool, and a Rod for a School
Is always in good season.
By Will Summers.
A Halter and a Rope for him that will be Pope
Without all Right or Reason.
Snow is white and lies in the Dike,
And every man lets it lie:
Pepper is black, and has a good smack,
And every man does it buy.
The higher the Plum-tree, the riper the Plum;
The richer the Cobbler, the blacker his Thumb.
Bounce Buckram, Velvet's dear,
Christmas comes but once a Year;
And when it comes it brings good Cheer,
But when it is gone it is never the near.
He that buys Land, buys many Stones;
He that buys Flesh, buys many Bones;
He that buys Eggs, buys many Shells;
But he that buys good Ale, buys nothing else*
He that has it, and will not keep it;
He that wants it, and will not seek it;
He that drinks, and is not dry,
Shall want money, as well as I.
Children pick up words, as Pigeons Pease,
And utter them again, as God shall please.
Say well and do well, end with one Letter,
Say-well is good, but do well is better.
FINIS.
Graces.
Grace before Meat.
GOod Lord we beseech thee to bless us, and our meeting at this time, and all
thy good Creatures provided for us, and grant that we may use them soberly, as
in thy presence, and receive them thankfully, as from thine hand, to the glory
of thy holy name, Amen.

Grace after Meat.
WE thank thee, O Lord, for all thy good Creatures which thou at this time has
bestowed upon us, and as thou have fed our Bodies with that food which is
convenient and necessary for them, so we beseech feed our Souls with that food
which perishes not, but endures to Eternal Life, thy holy name be blessed and
praised now and for ever, Amen.

Grace before Meat.
LOrd bless us in the use of all thy good Creatures, that now we shall receive
at thy bountiful hands, giving strength to them to nourish us, and giving
hearts unto us to be thankful unto thee for the same, to the glory of thy holy
name, Amen.

Grace after Meat.
WE return thee hearty thanks, O Lord, that thou have bountifully refreshed and
comforted us with thy good Creatures, and have bestowed many other Benefits
upon us, which thou have denied to many others of thy Servants, to whom be
ascribed all Honor, Power and Glory, now and forevermore, Amen.


