THE TRUE FORM OF CHURCH GOVERNMENT, FIRST INSTITVTED BY CHRIST, NOW USED AND
Practiced in all the reformed Churches of Germany, France, and Scotland:
humbly presented to the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, at this time
most happily assembled. Plainly proved by Scripture, rectifide reason, and the
Testimony of the Church, some hundreds of years after the Apostles time, and
the general consent of the Churches rightly reformed in these latter times,
contrary to the Romish, and our Archiepiscopall Government.

Printed at London 1642.

To the supposed Governors of the Church of ENGLAND, the Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Archdeacons, and the rest of that order.
MAny, and most evident have our declarations been concerning the truth of
that government, which Christ has prescribed in his word for the ruling of the
Church; which we have manifested unto you, both by our writings and speeches,
as occasion has been offered: never has any one of you taken in hand to say
any thing against it, but it has made his eyes to dazzle, as the clearest
sunne-shining; whereby he has been driven to wander hither and thither,
groping for evasions, and yet could not escape, but has fallen into infinite
most monstrous absurdities, and blasphemous assertions, (as by their writings
yet extant it may appear) so forcible is the truth, to amaze the gaine-sayers
thereof, and so pregnant is falsehood to beget and bring forth thousands of
absurdities, and every one worse then other. And will you still continue in
your damnable* and most devilish course? Have you sold your selves unto
Satan, to fight for him until you be damned in Hell with him? Have you
morgaged the salvation of your souls and bodies, for the present fruition of
your pomp and pleasure? is it because you see not what you should do? It may
be so, for many are so blind, that they grope even at noone day; but me
thinks it can hardly be so, unless you be they that have eyes and see not, for
the cause has been (by the blessing of God) so managed, that many ploughmen*
artificers, and children do see it, and know it, and are able by the word of
God to ju^tifie it, and condemn you to be adversaries unto the Gospel in
resisting it. But you think that government not so needful, and your fault but
small (if it be any) in continuing your course begun. The necessity of the
thing is many ways apparent, b^th in that it h^th so plentiful warrant from
Gods own word, (as the course of this Book does evidently declare*) and also
in that the Gospel can take no root, nor have any free passage, for want of
it: and the greatness of your fault appears ^y this, that in so doing, you
are the cause, of all the ignoran^e, Atheism, schisms, treasons, popery, and
ungodliness, that is to be found in this Land, which we challenge to prove to
your faces, if we may ind^fferently be heard, and whereof in the mean wh^le
we will give you a taste: for the first it is clear, that you are the cau^^r,
of that damnable ignorance, wherein the people are so generally wrapped, for
that you have from time to time stopped the streams of knowledge in th^se
places where the Lord in mercy bestowed the same, and in stead of able and
painful Ministers, have pe^^ered the Church, either with presumptuous proud
persons, that are esteemed learned, and take no pains to bring the people unto
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, or (which is the greatest ^u^ber) such ignorant
asses, and filthy swine, as are not worthy to live in a well ordered Common
wealth: and that you are the c^us^ of all Atheism, it is plain, for one may
(as in deed many do) p^o^^sse it, and you say nothing to him for it. If the
most filthy liver will ^awne up ^n you* and bribe your servants, you will not
only favor him, but assist him against any godly Mini^ter whatsoever: but if
any that fear God, refuse to come under the least of your Popish c^remonies,
he shall be molested, till his purse be empty, or else ^y your tyrannous
dealing, he have made shipwreck of a good conscience. And are not you the
cause of all Schisms, that make a h^tch-pot of true Religion and Popery, and
so give some an occasion to fall into this course, and others into that? And it
is as clear, that you are so far^e the cause of all treasons, ^s without you
they had not been: for if every Church had had her government according to
Christ's i^stitution; our young Ge^tlemen, and Stud^nts, had not been (f^r want
of teaching and careful oversight) mad a prey unto the seducers; and
consequently to th^se pract^s^s* which have brought the bodies of so many unto
Ty^orne, and their souls into hell; and who ^ut you be the caus^ of Popery,
whi^est you use them so well, let them do what the li^t yea* and keep them in
office and authority under you, yea (which m^re is) give them such offices as
none that (...) Popish can execute: I speak not of the ignorance which by*
(...) every wh^re, which (as they confe^^e) (...) their devot^^n, and you are
the wretched father^ of that (...) wh^r^by you mu^t needs ^e grandfathers (...)
kind of Popery. And who can (without blushing) deny (...) be the cause of all
ungodliness, seeing your government is that which gives leave to a man to be
any thing, saving a sound Christian. For certainly it is more free in these
days, to be a Papist, Omni^ cum (...) bonum.
Anabaptist of the Family of Love, yea any most wicked one whatsoever, then
that which we should be; and, I could live these twenty years, any one of
these in England (yea in a Bishops house it may be) and never be much molested
for it; so true is that which you are charged with, in a Dialogue lately come
forth against you, (and since burned by you) that you care for nothing but the
maintenance of your dignities, be it to the damnation of your own souls, and
infinite millions more: Enter therefore now at the last, into the serious
consideration of these things: remember that one day, you must be presented
before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, to be arraigned for all the Souls
that have gone to hell (seeing you will needs be the Rulers of the Church)
since the Gospe^l first appeared in this Land, then shall you not be excus^d
with this. The Queen and Council will have it so: nor with that; Our state
cannot bear it. For it shall be sa^d unto you, why do you not inform them
better of my will; why taught you them not to worship with trembling and fear,
and to kiss the Son lest he (...) angry; why did you not tell them, that all
States must be rul^d (...) my Word, and not my word by them and their polic^e^.
When these things shall be laid to your charge, your con^ci^nces shall ^n^wer;
that if you had done so, you should have lo^t your dig^i^ies, which you loved
and sought for especially: then shall you wish, that the mountains would fall
upon you* and the h^l^s cover you from the pre^ence of the Lam^, and from the
presence of him that (...) upon the throne. And I am persuaded* that you are
(...) league with Hell and have made a c^venant with Death; yea, y^u do
pe^swade yourselves that there is no Go^, neither shall (...) be any such day
of ^^count; or it were (...), that you (...) give you (...) Disputations by,
and then shall it easily appear, who has the Lord on his side, and who not.
The Truth will prevail in spite of your teeth, and all other adversaries unto
it, (for God disdaineth to be crossed, by dust and ashes.) Therefore be not
obstinate so long, as until you be found fighters with God; but prevent his
wrath, lest it break forth against you like fire that none can quench, because
of the wickedness of your Inventions. Venture your Bishoprics upon a
Disputation, and we will venture our Lives, take the challenge if you dare: if
the Truth be on your side, you may hereby, be restored to your dignities, and
be no more troubled by us: but if the Truth be against you, what shall it
profit you to win the whole world* and afterward lose your own souls. If you
refuse still our offer, then must you needs be guilty either of this, That you
know your cause will not abide the trial, or of this, That you will take no
pains to confute us that keep such a stir in the Church. Do not think that
because you have humane Authority on your side, therefore you are safe; for
he, whose authority is on our side, is the greatest, to whose voice all the
Devils in Hell shall stoop; much more the silly arm of sinful flesh. We
have sought to advance this cause of God, by humble suit to the Parliament, by
supplication to your Convocation house, by writing in defense of it, and by
challenging to dispute for it; seeing none of these means used by us have
prevailed. If it come in by that means, which will make all your hearts to
ache, blame your selves; for it must prevail, maugre the malice of all that
stand against it, or such a Judgment must overtake this Land, as shall cause
the ears that hear thereof to ti^gle, and make us a byword to all that pass
by us. The Lord open your eyes, that you may see the confusions whereof you are
the cause, and give you true Repentance, or Confound you in all your purposes
that be against Him, and the regiment of his Son Jesus Christ. The same Lord,
for the love he bears to his poor people, open the eyes of his Majesty,
and the Honorable Councellers, that they may see your godless practices, and
in pity to Gods people, rid us from you, and turn away his Judgments, which
the rejecting of his holy yoke has deserved, not punishing them that mourn
for the desolation of Sion* with those that spoil and make havoc of the Lords
inheri^ance. Amen.

To the Reader.
INfinite and unspeakable (Christian Reader) are the miseries from which Jesus
Christ our Savior has freed us, and the benefits and blessings, wherewith in
this life he begins, and for ever will continue to adorn us. The
consideration whereof (if our thankfulness unto his Majesty, were any way
proportionable, to that which we endeavor unto toward men) should make us
continually to devise, and all the days of our life to study how we might
show our selves (at least in some sort) careful to glorify his blessed name,
above all things that we desire, by how much as his love toward us, excels
whatsoever can e^se (according to our wish) befall unto us: but if we do with
equal balance (on the other side) look into the course of man's life* how
well this duty is performed, we shall see, that men declare themselves rather
bent to spit in his face, and to defy him, then any way to honor him as their
head and Sovereign: for (to say nothing of the profane life, and godless
conversation, wherewith the general number, that professes Jesus Christ, is
wholly defiled) we see that many Nations* people and languages are very willing
to receive Jesus Christ as the^r Priest to sacrifice for their sins, but that
he should become their King, to prescribe laws unto them, whereby they may be
ruled, is of all other things the most unsavory, yea (if it be offered) the
most grievous tidings* and unreasonable request: wherein, albeit many Nations
that have renounced that where of Rome, are heynously sinful against his
glorious Majesty, yet is there none in the whole world so far out of square
as England, in reteyning that popish Hierarchy, first coined in the midst of
the mystery of iniquity, and that filthy sink of the Canon law, which was
invented and patched together* for the confirming and increasing of the
kingdom of Antichrist^ Wherein as great indignity is offered unto Jesus
Christ, in committing his Church unto the government of the same, as can be* by
mean unde^lings unto a King; in committing his beloved Spouse unto the
direction of the mistress of the Stews, and enforcing her to live after the
orders of a brothel-house. For the reformation whereof while some have w^itten,
and others according to their Callings, c^^efully st^od* how heinously it has
been taken, how har^ly they have been used, and what ^hamefull reproaches have
been off^red (even unto the course of the Gospel) for spite that has been
^^rne unto Ref^^mation* almost by all estates and degrees, lamentable
ex^^^i^nce ^^th ta^g^^ many ^f us^ but our posterity shall know it more
p^^ticularly, and the Church th^oughout the world shall discern and judge of
it more evidently, when their bodies are rotten in the dust, and their ^en^es
(if they repent not) in eternal and intolerable torments; who have re^ected a
request so holy, profitable, and reasonable; yea, and handled the intreaters
for the same so cruelly, unchristianly, and unlawfully: but they would gladly
persuade themselves (if their conscience would let them) that they have only
executed justice upon us as malefactors, and they persuade men that we desire
a thing, not warr^nted by the Word, not heard of in the Church of God, until
within this few years, nor tolerable in any Christian Commonweal
whatsoever: The which monstrous slanders, albeit they have been many ways,
and by many men of most worthy gifts detected, and made known in those
several books that have been published concerning the same: (...) have I
thought it necessary (in another course) to write also of it. The course of my
enterprise, is first in respect of the favorers of the desired reformation;
Secondly of the adversaries of the same; the favorers of it are also of two
sorts; ministers of the Word, and private persons, and both I hope, may have
profit by it. Concerning the former* when these woeful troubles that were
renewed upon us (by that wretched su^scription, that was every where urged) and
begin to incre^^e, ^ thought it meet to bet^ke my self unto that which I had
read or might any way by study find out, concerning the cause, and collected
all into a brief sum, and referred every thing unto some head; which being
ever present with me, might furnish me to answer in the defense of the truth,
th^ugh it were of a sudden, by which (through the bl^ssing of God. I found such
profit in my several troubles, that I thought it a course not altogether
unprofitable for others also, and upon that occasion betook my self unto a
more seri^us meditaion about the matter, and communicating the thing with
diverse very worthy men, I f^und encouragement and heartening on, generally by
(...) whom I made acquainted th^rewith: so that I trust the judgments* yea and
(...) al^o of others, so ^^^ping with mine) many Min^st^rs that love the cause,
and have not thoroughly studied it as were meet they should, may reap some
profit thereby. Now concerning private men that love the cause, some have great
affairs in hand, and have no leisure to read the several books of this
argument: some when they read, are not of sufficient capacity to conceive the
force of a reason, or to make use of it, to inform themselves in the grounded
knowledge of the cause thereby: some (which is the general fault of our
religious Gentlemen) will take no pains to read, some are poor and not able
to buy the books which might let them see the cause, all these (I hope) may
find help in some measure hereby. Now concerning the Adversaries unto the
cause, they are of two sorts also, they that know is, and they that are
ignorant of it: the former, if they write any thing against it* are contented
to deal in so roving a course as may rather arise unto great volumes, then
soun^ly to say any thing against the cause: Wherein D. Whith^ft, but especially
D. Bridges, have given us an evident example: and these with others of their
judgment (though none in these latter days, have written more unlearnedly
then they, of any argument of divinity whatsoever) are contented to make the
world believe (if men will be so wilfully seduced) that our arguments be no
arguments, that they be grounded upon false foundations, and that we are not
able to conclude our cause in any form of reasoning The course that is here
taken (I trust) shall show that they are liars. The other sort of Adversaries
be they that be merely ignorant of any thing, either for it or against it; and
persuading themselves that the sway and show of the world must needs carry the
truth with it, do (like blind bayards) boldly venture to say any thing against
it, and think they, do well. Now of all these sorts of people, I have to
request something; I hope I shall obtain my request (at the le^st) at the
hands of some of them. The first sort of favorers (which be the Ministers) I
entreat, that as they tender the glory of God, and honor of the cause which
they stand in; so they would diligently employ themselves in this, that they
may be found able to defend the same by sound and evident grounds out of the
Word, and so much the rather, for that the Adversaries do greatly triumph,
when they meet with one that professes the cause, and is not able to defend
it, and confute the gainsayers of it. The second sort of favorers, be the
private persons that l^ve the cause, whom J beseech to be careful (as of all
other points of religion) of this, that they grow in the knowledge of the Word
of God, whereby they may be able* upon their own knowledge to defend the
truth, and not give the enemy any occasion to think or say, that they be of
that mind, because such and such Ministers, whom they do affect, do think^
so. Now concerning the former sort of Adversaries, to wit, they that know it, J
pray them to look into their own hearts, and they shall find they mislike it;
either because it corrects their excessive pomp and maintenance, or
requires more travail in their ministry, then they are willing to undergo,
or at the least, controlleth that dissol^^enesse of behavior, wherein they
willingly wallow: and if it would please God to bring them to a serious
meditation of this, that it is the will of the mighty God (before whom they
must be called to give an account) which they do resist, they would (I doubt
not) more carefully look about them. And lastly for them that being ignorant
of the cause, speak evil^ of that they know not, let them (if they will be
admonished) vouchsafe to read this little Book, and weigh the reasons with an
upright judgment, which shall cause them (at the least) to suspend their
sha^pe censures, which so usually appear i^ their ordinary communication: and
concerning us all, let us know (for one day we shall be sure to feel it) that
the controversy is not about Goats w^ell (as the Proverb says) neither light
and ^^^fling matters* which may safely be followed or re^ected (as indeed the
enemies of this cause do confidently affirm) but about no less matter then
this, whether Jesus Christ shall be King or no; for if none is said to be a
King, but he that rules by the Scepter of his laws, then the turning out of
these orders which Christ has prescribed in his Word, for the ruling of the
Church, is to give him the title, and deny him the authority belonging to the
same, and so (in truth) to make him an Idol, making him to carry a show of that
which he is not, and (with the crucifiers of him) to put a Reed in his hand,
in stead of his Jron rod; and crowning him with thorns, in stead of the Crown
of greatest glory; which is the cause that so many Atheists spit in his face,
and so many godless persons, do make but a jest of him: but when he comes
to show himself in his glorious Majesty, it shall be said unto all these
sorts of Adversaries, Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and ^lea them before me, Luke 19.27. The which
fearful sentence, that we may avoid, let every one of us (as may stand with
our several Callings) carefully endeavor, to advance this kingdom here, which
(among other assurances given us from the Lord) shall be a testimony unto us,
that we shall have part in that glory, which shall be revealed hereafter. Now
concerning the order of this Book; to direct thee (good Reader) unto thy
further instruction, in the points thereof, Thou have in every Chapter, diverse
proofs out of the holy word of God, which must be the things wherewith thou
may safely inform thy conscience: then shall thou find also arguments
drawn from reason rightly ruled by the same Word: and lastly, (because our
Adversaries charge us, that we desire a thing not known unto the old Writers,
nor agreed upon among the new) thou have here the witness of them both in so
plentiful and uniforme wise, as may plainly declare, that all godly learned
men of all times, have given testimony unto the truth of it. If thou be
satisfied therewith, give God the glory, and promote the cause by prayer, and
all other good means that thy Calling may afford: and pray for us, that we may
never shrink, nor be overthrown by the strength of them that fight against it.

FINIS.
The true Government of the Church according to Christ's first Institution, and
the present practices of the Reformed Churches.
CHAP. I. The general Proposition.
THat the word of God describes perfectly unto us, tha^ form of Governing the
Church which is lawful, and the Officers that are to execute the same; from
the which (...) Christian Church ought to swerve. Admonition in the Preface.
Ecclesiastical Discip. fol. 5. Tho. Cartwrights first book, page 26.
Discourse of Government, page 1. etc.

The Assertion of the Bishops and their adherents.
THe Word of God describes not any exact form of Discipline, neither are the
Offices or Officers, namely, and particularly expressed in the Scriptures, but
in some points left to the discretion and liberty of the Church. Whitgift in
praeface, and page ^4. answer to the Abstract, page 33.

The proof of the former is the disproofe of the latter, which is thus
declared.

1. These things write I unto thee, etc. out of which place I reason thus. That
end which Paul respected in writing unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.14 15.
does the holy Ghost direct all ministers unto for ever; for it must be kept,
1. Ti^ 6.14* But he wrote to direct him in the establishing and building of
the Church. Therefore that Word must direct Ministers for ever: and
consequently they neither may add to, nor take from it, but Govern it only
by the rules that be there prescribed.

2. Every house ought to be ruled by the orders of the skillful, wise, and
careful householders only: But the Church is the House of God, and God is such
a Householder: Therefore the Church ought to be ruled by the Orders of God only,
which are no where to be had, but in his Word.

3. That which teaches every good way, teaches also how the Church must be
Governed: But the Word of God teaches every good way, Prover^ 2 9
Pro. 2.9. Therefore it teaches how the Church must be Governed.

4. We cannot glorify God, but by obedience to his Word; in all that we do, 1
Cor. 10 31.
we m^st glorify God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Therefore in all that we do, there must
be obedience to the Word; and consequently in governing his Church.

5. If meat and drink be not sanctified unto us, but by the Word and Prayer,
then much less is any thing holy which is done in the Government of the Church
besides the Word: But the former is true by the testimony of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4 5.
1 Timothy 4.5. Therefore the latter must be true also.

Romans 14 23.
6. All lawful things are of Faith, Romans 14.23. All lawful things that are of
Faith, have a warrant from the Word; for the Word is the foundation of Faith:
Therefore all things lawful, have their warrant from the Word* and
consequently every lawful action in the Government of the Church.

7. Either has God left a prescript form of Government for the Church, under
the New Testament, or he is less careful for it now, then he was under the
Law* for his care is in Guiding it: But he is as careful now for his Church as
he was then: Therefore has he left a prescript form to Govern it.

8. He that was as faithf^ll as Moses, left as clear instruction, both for the
building of Faith, and Government of the Church, as Moses did: Heb. 3.2.
But Christ was as faithful in Gods h^use, Heb* 3.2. Therefore he left as
clear instruction for them both as Moses: but Moses gave direction even for
every particula^, ^s appears in the building of the Tabernacle, and order of
the Priesthood: Therefore has Christ also given particular direction for the
Government of the Church.

9. If the Word of God have described sufficient Ministers and ministeries, for
the building of the Church, and keeping it in good order, Rom 12 5, 6, 7. 1
Cor. 12 28 Ephesians 4.11, etc. See Coun^^rp page 11.
then is our assertion true: But it has set down sufficient for Doctrine,
Exhortation, Overseeing, Distributing, and ordering of every particular Church
or general Synod: Therefore is our Assertion true.

10. That Government which the Apostles taught and planted, is expressed it the
Word of God: But the Apostles taught and planted, Pastors and Teachers for
Instruction; Elders for Oversight, and Deacons to distribute, and that
uniformly in every Church, as appears by their writings and practices:
Therefore a certain form of Government is expressed in the Word.

11. Every lawful offi^^ and action in the building of the Church, is from
Heaven, Matthew. 21.25, 26. Matthew. 21.25, 26.
Every thing that is (in the ordinary building) from Heaven, is revealed in
the Word: Therefore every lawful office and action is revealed in the Word.

12. If God continued (in regard of the substance) the Church administration,
as well as the things to be administered, then as the form of Discipline
described in the Word: But the former is true, as appears by the particular^;
for Priests, Pastors; for Teaching Levites, or Doctors of the Law, Teachers;
for Rulers of the Synagogue, Elders; for Leviticall lookers to the Treasury,
Deacons; for the Sanedrim, the Eldership: Therefore the form of Government is
prescribed in the Word.

13. Every wise King that is careful for his Subjects, sets down Laws for
the Government of the same, and will have them tied to no other: But Christ is
such a King unto his Church: Therefore has he prescribed Laws unto hi^
Church, which none therein can alter or disobey; and cons^quently, the certain
form of Government of the Church is described in the Word.

14. That which the Ministers must teach the People to observe, is set down in
the Word of God, for they may teach nothing but that which is there, Matthew.
28.20. But they are to teach them to observe, Matthew. 28.20.
and be obedient unto the particular form of the Church Government: Therefore
the particular form is set down in the Word.

15. Every Government consists in the Governors matter whereabout they are
to be employed, and manner of doing it: But in the Word are described all these
particulars* as it is showed in the 9. reason: Therefore the Word prescribes a
prescript form of Government.

16. The Christian Religion shall f^^d, that out of this Scripture, Cy^rian in
serm^^^ de baptism^ Ch^isti.
Rules of all Doctrine have sprung, and that from hence does sp^ing, and hither
does return, whatsoever the Ecclesiastical Discipline does contain.

17. We may not give ourselves the liberty to bring in any thing that other men
bring of their will; Cypri^n de presc^^p adv^^sus (...).
we have the Apostles for Authors, which themselves brought nothing of their
own will, but the Discipline which they received of Christ, they delivered
faithfully to the people.

18 It is Adulterous, it is Sacrilegious, whatsoever is ordained by Humane
fury, Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 8.
that the Divine disposition should be violated.

The Conclusion.
Therefore if Timothy was written unto, that he might be directed by the Word,
in disposing of the Churches; if the Laws of God only being the Householder,
must be followed in the Church, his House; if the Word of God teach us in every
good way, whereof the Government of the Church is one; if God must be glorified
in the ruling of his Church, which cannot be, but by obedience to his Word; if
nothing be lawful, but that which is of Faith, warranted by the Word; if God
have showed himself as careful for his Church under the Gospel, as under the
Law; if Christ was as faithful to give direction as Moses, if in the Word be
described sufficient Ministers and Ministeries, to build up the Church; if that
Government, which the Apostles taught and pract^sed, be in the Word; if every
lawful office and action in an ordinary building, be from Heaven, and revealed
thence by the Word; if God continued the same form (in respect of the
substance) in the time of the Gospel, that was under the Law; if every wise
careful King, do set down Laws for the direction of his Subjects; If the
Apostles have taught us to obey that which Christ commanded; if both the
Governors matter of Government, and manner of doing it, be set down in the
Word; if all that pertains to Ecclesiastical Discipline, spring from the
Scriptures; if we may bring nothing into the Discipline of the Church, but
that which the Apostles have delivered us; lastly, if that be Adulterous and
Sacrilegious, that is not according to the Word: then it must needs follow,
that God does describe perfectly unto us out of his Word, that form of
Government which is Lawful, and the Officers that are to execute the same:
from the which it is not lawful for any Christian Church to sw^rve. And
contrariwise, that is a most untrue assertion to say. That the Officers and
offi^es are not particularly expressed, but left to the discretion of the
Church. The reasons that they allege against this, are in effect ^one, and
their objections to these reasons, not worthy to be mentioned.

CHAP. II.
EVery Officer in the Church, must be placed in some Calling warranted by the
word of God, and some Congregation must have need of such a one, before he be
called to any Function. Wherein are these Propositions.

1 No Calling is lawful in the Church, but that which is directly warranted
out of the Word, unto him that executes it. The first proposition.


The Bishops and their adherents think otherwise, as their practice in
ordaining Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chancellors,
Officialls, etc. does plainly declare.

2 The name and office of an Archbishop is contrary to the Word of God. The
second proposition.


3 No man may be ordained unto any Office in the Church, until there be such a
place void as he is fit for: T.C. 1 book, page 61.

They think otherwise, as their making of so many Ministers at once proves,
and as is holden, Whitgift page 222.

1 The first is proved thus: If John was constrained to prove his Minister^^
out of the Scriptures when the Priests accused him; Reason for the first
proposition. John 1.23 25.
then is no Calling lawful, that has not his warrant in the Word, for if any
be privileged, the extraordinary Ministers (whereof he was one) are specially
excepted* But he proved his Ministry by the Word, as appears by his answer
unto them* in the 23 verse. Therefore no Calling is lawful in the Church, that
has not his warrant in the Word.

2 The Callings under the Gospel must have as good warrant as they had under
the Law, because the light of the Gospel is (at the least) as clear as that
of the Law: But there was never any lawful Calling under the Law (excepting
those that were by miraculous manner confirmed from heaven) which had not his
direct warrant out of the Word. Therefore no Calling is lawful in the Church,
which is not directly warranted in the Word.

3 If Corah, Dathan, Numb. 16.
and Abiram (though they were Levites) were punished for that they had no
warrant for that which they presumed to take in hand, then is every lawful
Calling, both in general warranted out of the Word, and particularly laid upon
the parties from the Lord: But the former is true, as the History teaches us:
Therefore must the latter needs be true also.

4 That which gives comfort unto a man in the time of his troubles, must have
a warrant out of Gods word: But every lawful Calling gives comfort unto a man
to the time of his troubles: Therefore every lawful Calling has a warrant out
of Gods word.

5 That which helps Gods people forward in god^ines, must have a warrant out
of Gods word: for God has promised a blessing to his own ordinance only: But
every lawful calling in the Church, helps Gods people forward in godliness:
Therefore every lawful Calling has a warrant out of Gods word.

Therefore if John did prove his calling out of the Scriptures; if every
calling under the Law, The conclusion.
was warranted out of the Scriptures; if Corath, etc. were punished for
enterprising that which they had no warrant for, out of the Scriptures, if
comfort in troubles comes only from the Scriptures; and lastly, if every
h^lp to godliness is warranted in the Scriptures; then, etc.

They confess all these reasons to be true; but do deny that the
Archbishops, L. Bishops, etc. be distinct Ministers from others. Whitgift page
303. which we hold, T. C. 2. book page 438. and prove it thus.

1 Those things that have diverse efficient causes, are diverse: Our Bishops and
the Ministers of the Word have diverse efficient causes, for the one is the
Ordinance of God, the other the Constitution of humane Policy, as themselves
do confess: Therefore they are distinct Ministers from others.

2 A diverse Form makes diverse things: the Ministers of the Word, and the L.
Bishops have diverse forms: for their Ordination (even in the Church of
England) is diverse, seeing one L. Bishop may ordain a Minister: But there must
be three to ordain one of them: Therefore they are distinct Ministers.

3 Members of one division are distinct one from another: the L. Bishops and
ordinary Ministers be members of one division: for usually the Minist^rs be
divided into the Rulers, and them that are to be ruled: Therefore they are
distinct Ministers.

4 The things that have diverse effects, are diverse in themselves one from
another: the L. Bishops and other Ministers have diverse effects; for the one
effects Rule and Government, the other Subjection and obedience: Therefore
they are diverse and distinct Ministers.

5 They that be employed about diverse things are diverse one from another: The
L. Bishops and the ordinary Ministers, be employed about diverse things; for the
one is exercised in general view of many Congregations, and the other in the
particular direction of one: Therefore they be distinct Ministers.

6 That which is perpetual, and that which may be taken away by men, are
distinct one from another: The office of the Minister is perpetual, Ephesians.
4.13. and the Bishops may be taken away as themselves confess: Therefore they
are diverse, and distinct Ministers.

Therefore if the Ministers of the Word, The conclusion*
and L. Bishops proceed from diverse causes; if they have their Being by diverse
forms; if they be members of one division, which (in nature) cannot be one; if
they produce diverse effects; if they be exercised about diverse subjects:
lastly, if the one be perpetual, and the other but for a time, then must it
needs follow, that they are diverse and distinct Ministers one from another.

The name of an Archbishop, and also the office that he executes, The 2
p^oposition and reasons for the proof of it.

That the name of Archb. may be given no man.

1 Pet 5 41 Heb 13 20. Acts 3.15.5.31. Heb. 12.2.


is contrary to the word of God.

First, the reasons that prove it unlawful to give the name unto any man in
the Church, are these.

1 No man may have the name given him, which is prope^ to our Savior Jesus
Christ: But the name of Archbishop is proper unto our Savior Jesus Christ, as
appears in the places quoted: Therefore no man may have the name of Archb.
given unto him.

2 If the name Pope be therefore odiou^, because of that Antichrist, who is
entitled therewith, then must also the name of Archb. when it is ascribed unto
any mortal man; for so much as it is the title of a special member of that
Kingdom of Antichrist: But the former is true even by their own confession.
Whitgift page 300. Therefore must the latter be true also.

But they object diverse things against this, Objections for the name of Archb
and answers thereunto Whitgift page 318.
for the proving of the name Archb. to be lawfully given unto some men, which
together with their answers do brief^y follow.

1 Objection. Clemens allows of those names, as Polydor reports, lib. 4.
cap. 12.

Answer. Polydor is but the reporter, and M* ^ewell has proved evidently
against Harding that Clemens is counterfeit, and worthy of no credit.

2 Objection. Erasmus says, that Titus was an Archbishop.

Answer. He spoke as the times were wherein he lived: but that proves not
that he held him one indeed, no more then our naming of the Archbishop of
Canterbury when we speak of him, proves that we like and allow his Authority.

3 Objection. Anacletus says, that James was the first Archbishop of Jerusalem.

Answer. He is forged (as our Answers to the Papists have showed) but a
witness of better credit calls him only a Bishop, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23.
and Simon Bishop after him, lib. 3. cap. 22. And Iraeneus says, lib. 4 cap 63.
That the Apostles ordained Bishops every where, making no mention of Archb.

4 Objection. The Council of Nice, Canon 6. mentions a Metropolitan Bishop.

Answer. That proves nothing, for it was only as much as to say, the Bishop
of the chief City.

Secondly, the reasons that prove the Office of the Archb. unlawful be these.
That the office o^ Archb. is unlawful.


1 Every Ministry that is lawful, must be of God: The office of the Archb. is
not of God, for that ^ee is not (...) i^ he Word, and themselves confess that
he is of humane policy: Therefore the Office of the Archb. is unlawful.

2 That Ministry whose original is unknown, has no warrant from Gods word,
and consequently is unlawful. The original of the Archb. is unknown as they
confess; Whitgift page 351. Therefore it is unlawful.

3 That Office which is needless in the Church, is also unlawful to be
exercised in the same: The Office of the Archb. is needless, for the Ministry
is perfect without it, as the Apostle proves, Ephesians. 4.13. Therefore the
Office of an Archb. is unlawful.

4 If all the gifts needful for the perfecting of the Church, be appropriated
unto other M^nisteries, then is his Ministry unlawful: But all the needful
gifts, are appropriated unto P^stors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, whereof he
is none: Therefore his Office is unlawful.

5 That Office is unlawful, which none may lawfully give: But none may
lawfully bestow the Office of an Archbishop, because none can give any new
gifts to adorn him withal: Therefore his Office is unlawful.

This reason being used of all sound Divines against the Pope, is of the same
value against the Archb.

6 If the Office of an Archb. be lawful, then it is either in respect of his
excellency above other men, or the place whereof he is above other places:
But neither of these have ever been, neither hereafter can be: Therefore that
Office is unlawful.

Therefore if the Office of the Archb. be not of God; The conclusion.
if the original of it be unknown; if in the Church it be needless; if all
the gifts that God has bestowed upon his Ministry be appropriated unto those
Church Officers, whereof he is none; if none may lawfully bestow such an Office
upon any; if it can neither be incident unto any one man for his excellency,
nor his place for pre-eminence, then must it needs follow, that his Office is
unlawful.

Calvin in his Instit. book 4 cap 11. sect* 7. alleges diverse reasons to
this purpose, and Beza in his book of Divorcements, stretches the same to all
the inferior Officers under him, saying: Officials, Proctors, Promotours, and
all that swinish filth, now of long time ^ath wasted the Church. So does Peter
Martyr upon the Romans 13. speaking against civil Jurisdiction in Bishops, does
by the same reasons condemn it in their subst^tutes.

But this being the corner stone of their building, they labor to support it
with many prop^, the most special whereof are these.

1 Ob^ection. Cyprian says* lib. 1. Epist. 3. ad Cornelium, Neither have
^aresies and Schisms risen of any other occasion, then of that, Objections for
the office o^ the Archb. and answers therun^o.
that the Pri^st of God is not obeyed neither one Priest for the time, and one
Judge for the time in the stead of Christ thought upon, to whom if the whole
Brotherhood would be obedient according to Gods teaching, no man would move any
thing against the College of Priests.

Answer. This place is alleged for the Pope, and the answer that M. Jewel and
others make to it, serves our turn: only let this be noted, that Cyprian
speaks of the people at Rome, that had received another Bishop (besides
Cornelius) who was an haeretick; for all the course of his writing^, condemns
this Superiority. It is expounded by M. Jewel, book 1. sect 4. division 5. of
every Bishop: and so it is by M. Nowell against Dorman, book 1. page 25. and
also by M. Fox. tom 1. fol 93. See T. C. in his 1. reply, page 98. etc.

2 Ob^ection The Authority of the Archb. preserves unity.

Answer Cyprian lib. 4. Epist 9. says* that un^ty is reserved by the agreement
of Bishops, that is of Ministers, one with another.

3 Objection. It compoundeth Controversies, that else would grow to many ^eads
without any special remedy.

Answer. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist 13. says, that the plentiful body and company
of Elders* are (as it were) the glue of mutual concord, that if any of our
company be Author of Haeresie, the rest should help.

4. Objection. Jerome upon Tit. 1. says that in the beginning a Bishop and
Priest (meaning a teaching Elder) were all one: but when men began to say, I am
of Paul, I am of Apollo, etc. It was decreed that one should be chosen to bear
rule over the rest.

Answer. From the beginning it was not so: the saying of Tertul. Contra Prax.
is fit for this: That is true whatsoever is first, and that is false whatsoever
is latter: and Jerome says in the place alleged, that this Authority is by
custom, and not by any Institution of God; if it had been the best way to
take away divisions, the Apostles (in whose times the controversies did arise)
would have taken the same order.

5. Objection. Calvin says that the Apostles had one among them to govern the
rest.

Answ. That was not in Superiority, but for Order, to propound the matters,
gather the voices, and such like; which ^s meet to be in every well ordered
meeting: but his Authority is no more over the rest, then the Speaker in the
Parliament has over the other Knights and Burgesses.

6. Ob^ect. Paul was Superior to Tim^thy and Titus.

Answ. Paul and they had diverse Offices, whereof the Apostles Office was the
chief, the like is to be said of Timothy and Titus, having Superiority over
the other Ministers, for that they were Evangelists, a degree above ordinary
Ministers.

The conclusion.
Therefore if the place alleged out of Cyprian, make nothing for Archb. if
unity be not preserved by him, but by the Bishops among themselves; if his
Authority make nothing to the taking away of Controversies; if it be merely
invented by man, and not from the beginning; if it be by Custom, and not by
any Ordinance of God; if neither one Apostle over the rest, nor any of them
over the Evangelists, nor of the Evangelists over the Pastors and Teachers,
will serve to prove their Authority: then must it needs follow, that it is
utterly unlawful.

The 3 proposit^on and reasons for it.
No man may be Ordained unto any Office in the Church, until there be such a
place void as he is fit for, T.C. book 1, page 61. Whitgift, page 222.

1. As was the 12. place for Matthias, so is a certain Church, to every Church
officer: But Matthias was not ordained unto the place of an Apostle, Acts 1.20.
until Judas by hanging himself, had made it void, Act. 1.20. Therefore may
none be ordained unto any Office in the Church* before the place where he may
be employed, be destitute of such a one.

2. As the Apostles did in planting of the Churches, so must it be done in the
building thereof for ever: But they Ordained neither Pastor, Teacher, Elder or
Deacon, but to some certain Church that had need thereof: Therefore may none
be ordained unto any Office, until a place be void that has need of him.

3. Those things that be of one beginning, continuance and ending, cannot be
one, before or after another: But a Minister, and the execution of his Ministry
in a lawful standing be so; for they be Relatives, and have reference one
unto the other: Therefore a Minister ought not be ordained before there be a
Ministry whereunto he is to be allotted.

4. If none ought to be called to be a Shepherd, that has no flock of Sheep
to keep: neither any Watchman, that is not allotted to some place to watch:
then may none be Ordained to any Office, before there be a place void for him:
for Ministers are in this sense termed shepherds and Watchmen: But the former
is true, as every simple man can easily perceive: Therefore the latter is true
also.

5. To do contrary to the precepts and practice of the Apostles is unlawful:
But to ordain any officer, without a certain place wherein he may be
employed, is contrary to the precepts and practice of the Apostles, as it
appears, Tit. 1.5. Act. 14.23. Therefore to ordain any officer of the
Church, without a certain place whereunto he is to be allotted, is unlawful.

6. It was ordained that no Elder, Deacon, Council. Calcedon. c^p. 6 art. 15.
or any other Ecclesiastical officer, should be ordained a Apolelymen^s, that
is loosely, or let at randone (but a^ afterward is expounded) specially in a
Church of City or Town,

7. The ordination that is made without a title, let it be void: Council
Vrb^num test. Gratuu^ d^^t ^0. Ier^m ad Nepotia^.
and in what Church one is entitled, let him there remain.

8. He complains that ministers were ordained, being chosen by no Church, and
so went here and there, h^ving no certain place.

9. That action, which never is read to be practiced, but by Idolaters, is
unlawful: To have wandering officers, is only ^ound to be in idolaters, as
appears, Judge. 17.8. Therefore it is unlawful.

Therefore, if the Apostles ordained not Matthias* until the place was void;
if in planting of Churches, The conclusion.
they ever allotted Officers to their proper places; If Minister and ministry
be of one beginning, continuance and ending; If it be with a Minister, and his
ministry, as with a Shepherd and his flock, that he cannot be the one, but
in respect of having the other; If it be unlawful to transgress the precepts
and practice of the Apostles; If no Minister in the Church, be ordained at
randone; If the ordination that is without a title be void; If Jerome
complained of it, as a great fault in his time; If no example be found of it,
but in Idolaters: then must it needs follow, that to ordain any Church
officer, until there be such a place void as he is fit for, is utterly
unlawful: and so the Bb. making of many Ministers at once, and licencing of
wandering Preachers, is contrary to the word of God.

An objection.
They will have something to say for every action they do, be it never so
shameful: That which they allege for this, is, that Paul and Barnabas did
wander.

The answer.
The Apostles office (and so the Evangelists as assistants unto them) was to
preach the Word, and plant Churches in every part of the world: but the order
that they left, is a president for us, which is that every Church have their
proper Officers, and that there be no other elsewhere to be found.

CHAP. III.
Our assertion.
EVery Church Officer ought to execute the office committed unto him* with all
faith^ull diligence, and consequently be continually resident upon his charge,
T.C. book 1. page 65.

They deny not the proposition, but the consequent that is inferred upon it,
Their assertion*
as appears by their writings, Whitgift page 246. and by their daily practice
in giving dispensations for many Benefices. The reasons we allege to prove the
necessity of perpetual residence, and the unlawfulness of nonresidence be
these that follow.

1. A Shepherd has a flock to the end to feed it continually: The Minister
is a shepherd, and his charge a flock: Therefore he ought to feed it
continually, and consequently to be perpetually resident, for how can he feed
them from whom he is absent?

2. Where God does place any man, there his continual travail is needful,
for God is most wise in disposing every thing: But God places every right
Minister over that people, which is his charge: Therefore his continual
travail is needful there, and consequently he may not discontinue.

3. Flocks that are in danger, are (by careful Shepherds) watched night and
day, Luke 2.8. Every Congregation is a flock in danger, for the enemy goes
about like a roaring Lion, ^ Pet. 5.8. and sows tares whilst men sleep,
Matthew. 13.25. Therefore every congregation is to be watched night and day by
the Minister thereof, and consequently he may not be non-resident.

4 If his duty to them requires so much travail, as may continu^lly set him
on work, then may he not be non-resident: But it is evident (that it does so)
to all them that either know by the word of God, what study, prayer, doctrine,
exhortation, etc, be required of him, or makes any conscience of giving
account for the souls committed to their charge: Therefore may not they be
non-resident.

5 If the Minister cannot apply himself fruitfully, to the capacity of his
people, unless he have particular knowledge of their disposition, and
capacity, th^^ is it not lawful for him to be non-resident: for by continual
residence among them, he may know them and not else: But the former is true,
as the small knowledge that the people get by general teaching, does evidently
declare: Therefore it is not lawful for him to be non-resident.

6 If the Ministers of the Gospel, be as narrowly tied to their charges, as
the Priests under the law, then may they not be non-resident: For they were
always ready in the Temple, to answer the doubts, 1 Samuel 1.9: But it is clear
that they are, because men are now as hardly trained unto godliness, and the
enemy is as wrathful as he was then: Therefore they may not be non-resident.

7 If the Minister must be an example to his people; then must he be daily
present with them, that they may behold him: But the former is true, 1 Timothy 4
12. Therefore is the latter true also.

8 He whom the sheep are to follow in and out, and must know by the voice,
ought to be continually among them: A good Minister of the word is such a one,
John 10.4. Therefore he must be resident among them.

9 None can be always ^eady to feed his flock, that is absent from it: Every
Minister must be always ready to feed his flock, because it depends upon
him. 1 Pet. 5.2. Therefore every Minister is to be resident with his flock.

10 He that must take heed to his flock, watch over it, and feed it, must be
resident continually with it: Every Mini^ter must do so* Act. 20 28. Therefore
etc.

11 If Satan be the cause of non-residence, then is it utterly unlawful: But
Satan is the cause of it, 1 These. 2.17.18. Therefore it is utterly u^lawfull.

12 That which abridgeth the love of God to his people, and comfort to the
Minister, that same is unlawful: But not to be resident does both: Therefore
it is unlawful.

13 That which hinders the loving familiarity that should be betwixt the
Minister and his people, that same is unlawful: But non-residence does so, for
it makes them strange one to another, and argues small love in him toward
them: Therefore it is unlawful.

14 To be absent from them that have interest in us, and continual need of us,
is unlawful, which we can see to be true in our servants, etc: But the
congregation has an interest in the Minister, and continual need of him:
Therefore it is unlawful for him to be absent from them.

15 If the Priests might not dwell far from the Temple, then may not
Ministers be non-resident: But the former is true, as appears by th^s; that
they had houses builded close to the Temple. 1 Chronicles. 28.13. Therefore the
latter is true also, seeing the residence of the one is as needful as the
other, as appears in the sixth reason.

16 Let no Clerk be placed in two charges, for it is filthy merchandise,
Council. Nice canon 15.
and no man can serve two Masters, and every one must tarry in that place
whereunto he is called.

17 Damasus compares them that set over their charges to others, Council.
(...). 2.
to harlots that put out their children, that they may give themselves to lust
the sooner.

Theodoret lib. 1. cap 19.
18 It was ordained that none, either Bishop or Elder, should go from City to
City.

Therefore, if a Mini^^er have the charge of a flock committed unto him, The
conclusion.
to the end to feed it; if God place men, to the end to have them there
employed; if flocks in danger have need of continual watch; if the Ministers
duty to his flock requires all that travail that he can perform; if he
cannot be fruitfully profitable unto them, without continual residence; if his
residence be as strictly required as theirs under the Law; if he cannot be a
pattern unto them without he be resident; if they cannot follow him, nor know
him if he be absent; if he cannot be always ready to feed his flock, unless
he be there; if he cannot take heed to them, feed them, and watch over them,
without his presence; if Satan be the Author of non-residencie; if his absence
abridge Gods love to them, and comfort from himself; if absence be an
hinderance to the loving familiarity that should be betwi^t him and them; if
they have interest in him, and continual need of him; if he may no more be
absent, then the Priests dwell from the Temple; if the Council of Nice did upon
good grounds forbid it; if absence be like to the practice of an harlot; if it
be not lawful to go from place to place; then is non-residence unlawful, and
the practice thereof contrary to the word of God.

The belly (for which non-residencie is defended and practiced) has no cares,
therefore it is that they hear not these evident sounds; yet have they very
little to say for it, so gross is the error thereof; so much as has any show
of reason, is here set down and answered.

1 Objection. Two Parishes may be united, why then may not one have charge of
them both before, when they be two.

Answer. Because one shepherd may keep one flock though it be great, but he
cannot keep two, being very little, and going in diverse pastures; again, one
man may have so many flocks as he can lead in and out every Sabbath, to the
exercises of Religion, which is very plain that he cannot do, to more then
one congregation.

2 Ob^ection. Parishes were divided by men, as especially by Denis the Monk,
Pope of Rome.

Answer. That is untrue, for the Apostles divided the Church into
congregations, and placed Elders over every one of them, as the whole course o^
the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles proves: and Whitgift confesses page
250. Therefore these mists, notwithstanding non-residencie, must needs be
unlawful: and certainly those that have any sparkle of conscience, fear of
God, or love to their flocks, will never defend it, much less enter into the
practice of it.

CHAP. IIII.
IT belongs to the Church, to make choice of those Officers which Christ
would have placed in the same: T. C. 2 book, Our assertion.
1 part, page 193. Ecclesiast. Discip. fol. 40. and Whitgift confesses it,
page 164.

They deny this, as their denying of all the arguments that be brought for it
does prove, Whitgift page 154.166, etc. and their practice of allowing patrons,
and also being such themselves does evidently decla^e.

If the former be proved true, then the latter must return to Antichrist, which
^s thus declared.

1 That which was the continual and constant practice of the Church in the
time of the Apostles, that same is to be followed for ever, which appears by
this, that the ordinances given from God by Paul, Acts 1.^^
1 Timothy 6.14. are enjoined to be kept until Christ come to judgment: But it
was the constant, and the continual practice of the Churches, then to have a
stroke in the choice of their own ecclesiastical Officers, Act. 1.26. where
the Apostles presented two, to the peoples liking: whereof God was to be prayed
unto, to make one an Apostle, Act. 6.3. where the Church is willed to choose
their Deacons, and Act. 14 25. where they gave their consent in the choosing of
their Elders, by the stretching forth of their hands: Therefore it belongs to
the Church to choose their own Church Officers.

2 If the people had an interest in the liking of their teaching Levites, Numb.
8.9.
(which were of the tribe of Aaron) then much more must the people now, for
there was greater likelihood, that they were sent of God, then any of the
common sort of men: But the former is true, as appears by the manner of the
setting of them aside unto that office in the law: Therefore must the latter
needs be true also.

3 That which pertains unto all, ought to be approved of all the
congregation: But every Ministry in the Church, pertains to all the
congregation: Therefore, authority to approve of them, pertains to all the
congregation.

4 That election which is most effectual to bring the people to obedience, is
of all other the best, and to abridge it, is unlawful: But election by common
consent, is most effectual to bring the people to obedience; when they shall
see him teach or rule, whom they themselves have chosen: Therefore election by
the Church is the best, and all other kinds of elections unlawful.

5 That election which procures greatest reverence of the people to their
teachers and rulers is meetest, and all others unlawful: But for the people to
consent in the election of their Governors, procures greatest reverence, in
their hearts toward them: Therefore election by the people is the best, and
all others be unlawful.

Testimonies of the ancient Writers.
Cyprian bo^kes. Epist 3.
6 The Minister should be chosen (the people being present) in the eyes of all,
and should be by the common judgment, and testimony approved worthy and fit,
etc. Therefore this is the lawful vocation by the word of God, where those
which are chosen, be appointed by the consent and approbation of the people.
For which also, he brings diverse authorities out of the Scriptures.

7. That is truly and certainly a Divine election of a Bishop, Ambrose Epist.
^2.
which is made by the whole Church.

8. Let the people have authority to choose their Clerks and Ministers. Jerome
ad Ruf^^ (...).


9. They run (speaking of the life of the Clerks) to Bishops suffra^a^^
certain times of the year, Ad Nepo^^^num.
and bringing some sum of money, they are anointed and ordained, being chosen
of none, and afterward the Bishop without any lawful election, This is right
ou^ (...) ^a^hion.
is chosen in huggermuger of the Canons, or Prebendaries only, without the
knowledge of the people.

10. In the Oration of the death of his Father, Nazianzen.
approves the election by the people, at large, and confuteth them that would
hinder it

11. When he appointed Eradius to succeed him, faith, Augustine.
it was the approved right and custom, that the whole Church should either
choose o^ consent unto their Bishop.

12. Anthimius choosing a Bishop without the peoples consent, filled all
Armenia with sedition. Basil Epist ^8.


13. Why did Peter communicate the election with the Disciples? left the matter
should have turned to a braule, Chrysostom in act. 1.
and have fallen to a contention.

Testimonies of general Counsels.
14. It is meet that you should have power, both to choose, Council Nicen.
(...) Theodoret.
and to give their names that are worthy to be among the Clergy, and to do
all things absolutely according to the laws and decrees of the Church, and if
it happen any to dye in the Church, then those which were last taken, are to be
promoted, to the honor of him that is dead, if they be worthy, and if the
people choose them.

15. Let the people choose, and the Bishop approve, and seal up the election
with them. The same C^^ test hist. trip^r^ l^b 2. Con^il Constan. ^est (...)
part hist. lib. 9. cap 14.


16. In an Ep^stle to Damasus, Ambrose, etc. says, we have ordained Nectarius
Bishop of Constantinople, etc. the whole City decreeing the same; and
Flaviarus was appointed Bishop of Antioch, the whole City appointing him.

17. When he has been examined in all these and found fully instructed, then
let him be ordained Bishop, Council Carthag. ca^ ^^.
by the common consent of the Clerks and lay people.

18. Let not him be counted a Priest in the Church, Council (...). test d^st. 51.
whom the Clergy, and people of that City where he is, do not choose.

Council. (...). Canon. 10.
19. If any Bishop after the death of his Predecessor, be chosen of any, but of
the Bishops of the same Province, and of the Clergy and Citizens, let another
be chosen: and if it be otherwise, let the ordination be void and of none
effect.

Testimonies out of the Emperors Laws.
^usti^i^n in ^od.
20. Following the doctrine of the holy Apostles, etc. we ordain, that as often
as it shall fall out, that the Ministers place shall be void in any City, that
voices be given of the Inhabiters of that City, that he (of three which for
their right faith, holiness of life, and other things, are most approved) be
chosen to the Bishopric which is most meet o^ them.

Carolus M^gn^^ di^t 63 (...).
21. Being not ignorant of the holy Canons: that the holy Church should use her
honor the more freely, we assert unto the Ecclesiastical order, that the
Bishops be chosen, by the election of the Clergy and people

Lodovic^ Caro^^ (...).
22. He decreed, that he should be Bishop of Rome, whom all the people of Rome
should consent to choose

P^atin^ in vita (...).
23. Lodovicke the second, commanded by h^s Letters, the Romans to choose their
own Bish^p* not looking for other men's voices, which (being strangers) could
not so well tell wh^t was done in the Commonwealth, where they were strangers,
and that it appertained to the Citizens.

Idem in vita Leonis (...).
24. Let the people (says Otho the Emperor) choose and I will approve it.

The testimonies of the new Writers.
25. The new Writers, as Musculus, in his common places, in the t^tle of
Magistrates: Bullinger upon 1 Timothy 4. Calvin. Justitut. Bo^ke 4 chap. 3. sect
15 Harmon. confess. Helvet. cap. 18. and many others are on our side in this
behalf.

26. If there be none that write against it, but ^he Papi^^s, and no arguments
us^d against it, but those which b^ borrowed out of the Popish writers, then
does it belong to the Church to choose their own Church officers: but the
former is true, as a^l that do read them that write o^ this argument do
know, and as is manifest, by compari^g Pighius, Hosius, etc. with Whitgift:
Therefore the latter is true also.

Therefore seeing the interest of the Church in choosing of their Church
officers, The Conclusi^n T C. 2. book 1 part. page 212.
is grounded upon the word of God, both in commandment, and continual
practice, both in the Old and N^w Testament; seeing it is warranted by the
l^ght of common ^eason; seeing it is commended unto us, by the manifold
practice of all ancient times, so long as any sincerity remained, not only in
the time of persecution, but also o^ peace; seeing it has been confirmed by
so many general Councels, and ratified by the Decrees of so many Emperors;
seeing it has such a cloud of witnesses, both of ancient and latter times, of
the best approved writers; seeing none do set themselves against it, but the
Papists, or they that invade it only with the same weapons that are fetched
out of the Popes Armory, it must needs follow, that it belongs unto the
Church to choose their Church officers: and that the taking away of this
freedom, abridgeth the liberty that Christ has endowed his Church withal,
and brings her into great bondage, as Musculus truly affirms.

Their ob^ections against those things are these.

1 Ob^ect. They were then under the cross, ^ew in number, and therefore it was
easily known who were fit.

Answ. The Gospel was dispersed thorowout all Asia, Affricke, and much of
Europe, and they could less keep together, or meet, and therefore that
makes rather for us.

2. Object. We have many hypocrites, to whom it were dangerous to commit such
weighty actions.

Answ. It is true, that we have many: but it is a principle in hypocrisy, to
be forwardst in such public actions, that they may get fame thereby.

3. Object. They had knowledge to do it, but our people be ignorant.

Answ. We should also find our people to have knowledge, if they had teaching:
but howsoever they choose, they cannot have worse then ordinarily are chosen by
the Bishops and Patrons.

4. Object. The Church was not then established.

Answ. That is untrue, for though it wanted the help of Magistrates* yet the
Apostles could and did better establish without them, then we can with the help
of them: but if this order might be altered, it had bin fitter then, for now
the Magistracy may compound the differences of the Elders, which help then
they lacked.

5. Object Drunkards, Papists, etc. will choose them that be like themselves,
and we know the best disposed be always the fewest.

Answ. Such are not of the Church, but without, 1 Cor. 5.12 and therefore are
not ^o meddle in any holy action: but if the people should choose an unmeet
man, the Eldership that governs the action, is to reform them: besides this,
if Gods order had her place, the Schools of the prophets would send them none,
(for the Ministers especially) to make choice of, but meet men, that whomsoever
they took, he should be found sufficient.

6. Object. Paul commands, 1 Timothy 5.22. to lay his hands on no man rashly:
therefore one did it.

Answ. He teaches what to do for his part, and though others would be rash,
yet he should not join with them in it, as appears in the latter end of that
same verse, for that is ascribed unto him, which also belonged unto others,
because he was the director: Calvin and Musculus expound the place so.

7. Ob^ect. The Council of Laodi^ea decreed that the people should not elect.

Answ. That is, as Calvin takes it upon Acts 16. they might not elect alone,
without the direction of some grave and good Minister, which should be the
manner in the elections, that (according to Gods word) we desire.

CHAP. V.
NOne is to be admitted unto any public office in the Church* until he be
thoroughly examined by the Eldership, both concerning his state of Christianity,
and ability to th^^ place whereto he is to be called, T.C. 1 book. page 38.
Disci. Ecclesiast. fol. 46. They think one may do it, as appears by the
Book of o^dering, etc. Whitgift, page 134. and 135. and their slight passing
it over, through the Archdeacons hands*

The former is proved, and the latter disproved thus.

1. Those that are to ordain, must have particular knowledge of the parties to
be ordained, (or else they break the rule pr^scribed them, 1 Timothy 5.22.) which
cannot be without examinat^on: But the Eldership is to ordain every Church
officer, a^ shall appear in the chapter of Ordination: Therefore it belongs
to the Eldership to examine, and^.

2. The matter of greatest importance in the government of the Church, must be
done by the most able Governors of the same: The approving or disproving of
Church officers* is the matter of greatest importance, because the consequence
of ruling well is the best, or ill the worst: and the Eldership is the Senate
of most able Governors in the Church, as shall appear in the Chap. of
Eldership: Therefore the Eldership is to examine, etc.

3 The way whereby a man's insufficiency is best espied, and his ability
discerned, is the fittest to examine them that are to be admitted: But by the
Eldership (consisting of diverse) his insufficiency is best espied, and his
ability best discerned, for the common proverb tells us, that many eyes do
see more then one: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

4 They are to examine Church Officers, that are least subject to be blinded
with partiality: But the Eldership is least subject to partiality, both for
that they be many, who are not so easily overruled by affection or favor, as
one, as also (and that especially) for that it being the Lords own ordinance
(as shall appear) we are to persuade our selves, that his spirit shall guide
them: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

5 The way that was used in the Apostles time in examining, is of us to be
followed, unless some reason out of the word to persuade the conscience, can
be alleged to the contrary, which none have ever yet done: But many used in
the Apostles tim^ to examine, as appears in chosing out one to be in the
place of Judas, Act 1.22.23. and fit men for Deacons, Act. 6.5. whereof the
Governors especially were some, for that they were to ordain upon knowledge,
^s is said in the first reason: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

6 They whose testimony the people may best credit, are to examine them that
are to be admitted: But the people may best credit the judgment of a company
of able and sufficient men, which the Eldership rightly established must needs
be: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

7 Examination belongs unto them which may most persuade the people of his
sufficiency, and so procure greatest reverence unto him in his place: But the
examination by the Eldership is such: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership
etc.

Therefore if they that are to ordain, must examine: The Conclusion.
if it be a matter of greatest w^ight in the government of the Church, and they
the most able to dispatch it; if by them his sufficiency or ins^fficiency be
best found out; if they be hardliest ca^ied away with affection or partiality;
if the examination was such in the Apostles time; if the people may (in reason)
give most credit to the examination that is by such* if that kind of
examination p^rswade the people best of his sufficiency, and procure him
greatest reverence in his place: then must it needs follow, that it per^aineth
to the Eldership to examine those that are to be admitted to any office in the
Church.

There is nothing objected against this, that has any show of ^eason in it,
and therefore it were needless to set any thing down.

CHAP. VI.
BEfore consent be given to any man unto any calling in the Church, it must
appear (by sufficient trial, and due examination) that he is qualified with
those gifts, that the word of God requires in one of that place, Discipl.
Ecclesiast. fol 44. T.C. 2. book, 1. part, page 368. and in many other places.

They gainsay this in two points: first, in maintaining their reading
Ministry: secondly, in governing the Church, by their Commissaries and
Offic^als: which both shall be overthrown. ^f we prove these two propositions
following, to b^ true by the word of God.

The 1. proposition.
No man ought to be received unto the Ministry, but such as be able to teach
the truth, and convince the gain-say^rs.

The Church ought not to be governed by Commissaries Officials and
Chancellours. The 2. proposition.


The 1 proposition is ^hus proved.
1 He that may be received into the Ministry, must be able to teach the
people, whatsoever Christ has comm^nded, Math 28.28. Only he that is able to
teach the truth and convince the gainsayers, can teach the people whatsoever
Christ has commanded: Therefore none must be received into the Ministry, but
such as be able to t^^ch* etc.

2 That which is to be done conditionally, may not be done, if that condition
be not kept: Men are to be received into the Ministry conditional^y, that is,
if they be unreproveable, Tit. 1.5 6. Therefore if they be not such as be there
described, they may not be received: and consequently, none may be received,
but such as be able to teach* etc.

3 That which cannot be done without the manifest breach of Gods commandment,
may not be done at all: To receive any that be not able to teach, is a manifest
breach of Gods commandment. 1 Timothy 3.1. Tit. 1.9. Therefore no man ought to be
received into the Ministry, that is not able to teach, etc.

4 They whom the Lord refuses to be his Ministers, may not be received into
the Ministry: for the Ministry being the Lords harvest, we may admit none to
labor therein, but only such, as he has given liking of, by the rules of his
word: The Lord refuses to be his Ministers, all these that cannot teach, Hosea
4* 6. Therefore such as are not able to teach, may not be received, and
consequently none may be received, but those that be able to teach, etc.

5 He that may be admitted into the Ministry, must be able to divide the word
of God aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. Only he that is able to te^ch and convince the
gainsayers, can divide the word of God aright: Therefore none may be admitted
into the Ministry, but he that is able to teach, etc.

6 He that may be admitted into the Ministry, must have a treasury, furnished
wi^h old things and new, and must be abl^ to ^ri^g it forth as occasion shall
serve, Matthew. 13.52. Only he that is able to teach, etc. is such a one:
Therefore only he may be admitted* etc.

7 He that can espy the enem^, and give warning before hand now to resist him,
may be receiv^d into the Minis^^ry* ^z^k 33 7. None can espy the enemy, and
give warning afore-han^ how to (...) him, but both t^is able to (...) etc.
Th^ref^r^ one man be ad^itted unto the Minist^ry* but he (...) to t^ach, etc.

8 (...) his people into hell, may not be adm^^te^ unto the Mini^tery: He that
^s not a^le to te^ch and convince the gai^-^ayer lea^eth him^e^f and his p^^ple
in^o (...)* Ma^h 15.14. Therefore (...) no^ able to teach etc. may not be
admitted into the Mi^^ste^y.

9 He that ^reachet^ ^ot* but ^oldeth his peace, murdereth. August lib. de (...)


10 He that preaches not, i^ not (...), and so he beg^tteth no ^aith in man.
G^egor 1. epist. 33.

(...) ad Oc^^men^um.




11. In that S. Paul requires that a Bishop should be wise, he barreth thos^,
that under the name of simplicity, excuse the folly of Ministers

12 We condemn all (...) Ministers, Cons^^* ^elvet.
not endued with gifts necessary for a (...) that should feed his flock.

Therefore* if a Minister mu^^ tea^h unto his people all that Christ has
commanded; if none may be made Ministers, but conditionally, if they be
qualified with gi^t^ meet for the same* if unpreaching Ministers cannot be made
without the manifest breach of the commandment of God; if they may not be made
Ministers, whom the Lord refuses to have; if every Min^ster must have a
treasury well furnished* and be able to bring forth of it when need requires;
if every M^nister mus^ have ^kill to see the enemy, and to give warning
aforehand how to resist him; if unlearned Ministers draw their people to hell
after them; if he that preaches not, be a murderer; if he be not sent, and so
do no good: if he be barred from the Ministry: lastly, if he be condemned,
as not to be in such a place: then must it needs follow, that none may be
received into the Ministry, but such as be able to teach the truth, and to
convince the gain-sayer.

Many are the arguments that be alleged to this purpose, and many more may be
alleged, (for the whole course of the Scriptures tend thereunto) the
testimony of all sorts of Writers, is very plentiful for this purpose: yea of
the very Canon law, (as the Author of the Abstract has learnedly proved) and
yet do not our Prelates rest in the same, but have set themselves (though in a
silly manner) against it, in this sort that follows.

1 Objection. There must be reading in the Church, therefore a reading
Ministry* Whitgift page 252.

Answ. By that reason we must have an Officer for every particular action, for
there must be breaking of bread in the Church, and pouring of water; but it
follows not, that therefore there must be one, whose Office must be only to
break bread, or to power water.

2 Objection. It is better to have Readers then none, for Preachers cannot be
had for every congregation.

Answer. It is not better, for if they had none, they would seek for him that
they should have; whereas now, they that have a Reader only, think themselves
in case good enough: but if there be such want of Preachers, why are so many of
the most diligent and able ones, turned out?

3 Objection. It is impossible to have Preachers every where, and such as can
be had, must be taken.

Answer. Sometimes you say all is well: and is it now impossible that our State
should obey the Lords ordinance; this is the greatest disgrace to it that can
be: and yet it follows not, for no necessity may warrant us, to violate the
decrees of the highest.

4 Objection. It were uncharitableness to turn them out that be bare Readers,
for so they, their wives and children might beg.

Answer. This is to sell men's souls for morsels of br^ad: shall we rather
fear the begging of three or four, then the damnation of a thousand? but they
may be otherwise provided for; they need not beg, many of them may return to
their occupations again.

So that all these objections notwithstanding, the conclusion remains sure,
which is grounded upon so many certain and unmovable foundations.

The 2. proposition ^s thus proved.
The Church ought not to be governed by Commissaries, and Officials, and
Chancellours.

1 They which are no Elders of the Church, have nothing to do in the
Government of the same, 1 Timothy 5.17. These Chancellours, Commissaries, and
Officials, are no Elders in the Church; whether we expound Elder for a
Minister, and him also, that is assistant unto the Minister in overseeing the
Church, or for a Minister only as they do: for none of them be Ministers, and
if they be, they do not rule in this respect, that they are Ministers:
Therefore the Church ought not to be governed by them.

2. They that must govern the Church of God, must have a warrant for their so
doing, from Jesus Christ the head of the Church: But Chancellors, etc. have no
warrant so to do, from Jesus Christ the head of the Church: Therefor the
Church ought not to be governed by them.

3. Those whose names, offices and practice, be derived from Antichrist, may
have nothing to do in the government of the Church* for who will suffer his
wife to be governed by the Master of a (...): But the names, offices, and
practice of Chancell^rs, (...) and Commissaries be such, which is plain by
this, that they have the^r ground in that filthy dunghill the C^non law:
Therefore they may have nothing to do in the government of the Church.

4. They that being inferiors, do proudly tyrann^z^ over the^r superiors,
ought not to rule the Church of God, for it is meet it should be ruled by
modest* humble and orderly men: But suc^ ^re they (for being inferiors to the
ministers of the Word, as our adv^rsa^i^s do confess, and is plain also by
the Canon law they crow over them as ^f they were their slaves:) and if they
do not so (...) can do nothing: Therefore they ought not to rule the Church
of God.

5. They that live by the faults of men, are not fit t^ rule the Church of God:
for they will rather increase off^nces (that their (...) may ^ncrease) then
orderly lessen them, as experience (also) prov^th: But such are all
Chancellours, Commissaries and Official^: Therefore they ought not to rule the
Church of God.

Therefore, if Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials be no Elders of the
Church; if they have no warrant from Jesus Christ* Conclusion*
the head of the Church; if their names, offices, and practice, be derived from
Antichrist; if their office compel them (being inferiors) to tyrannize over
their superiors: if they live only by the faults and offenses of men: then it
must needs follow, that the Church of God ought not to be governed by them.

CHAP. VII.
EVery officer of the Church must be ordained by the laying on of the hands of
the Eldership, T.C. 2. book, 1. part. page 274. Discip. Ecclesiast. fol. 53.

They say if ought to be done by the Bishop alone, Whitgift* page 196. their
daily practice does likewise show it.

The former is proved, and the latter disproved by these reasons follo^ing.

1. As Church officers were ordained in the Apostles time, so must they be
continually, for they did lay the plot, according whereunto the Church must be
built unto the end: but they were ordained in the Apostles time by the laying
on of the hands of the Eldership, Act. 6 6. and 13.3. Therefore the Church
officers must be ordained by laying on of the hands of the Eldership.

2. Church officers must be ordained by them that have warrant from the Word,
to assure the parties ordained, that they are called of God: Only the
Elders^ip has such a warrant, 1 Timothy 4* 14. Therefore they ought to be
ordained by the Eldership.

3. Many of the sentences alleged before, out of Councels, Emperors Laws*
Histories* and (...) writers both old and new, for election not to be by one*
but by diverse, speak also of ordination, and so are forcible to this purpose.

Theod^^et Book 5. cap. 3
4. E^agrius came to the office of a B^sh^p unlawfully, because only Paulinus
ordained him* contrary to the (...) of many Canons, which provide, that they
should not be orda^n^d, ^ut by all the Bishops of the Prov^nce, or (at the
least ^y three.

^ Council* Cart^ag. c^p 23.
5. When a Bishop is to be ordai^ed, etc one Bishop shall pronounce the
blessing* and the rest of the Bishops with the Elders pr^sent, shall all l^y on
their ^ands.

Cypri^n, lib. 1. Epi^t. 4.
6. When a Bishop was to be ordained, the Bishops adjoining did ordain him.

Therefore if Church officers were ordained in the Apostles time, not by one,
The Conclusion.
(...) by the E^dership, consi^ting of many; i^ they be to ordain, that have
warrant out of the Word, to assure the parties ordained, that they are called
of God; if ordination by one B^sh^p be unlawful and contrary to many canons of
Councels; if the Bishops and Elders were to lay on their h^^ds: lastly, if the
B^shop^ adjoining were to ordai^, (...) needs follow that Church offic^rs are
not to be ordained (...) the laying on of the hands of the Eldership.

But they fight hand against this, because it s^riketh at a maine pillar of
their ^ingdom^, their chief grounds be these.

1. Object. Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders, where is no mention of an
Eldership.

Answ. They are said to ordain, because they being the chief procured it; so
is Joshua, 5.3. said to circumcise, which was the Levites office, so say we,
the Queen has made a law, and yet not she alone makes any.

2. Ob^ection. Though it were so then, yet is it not so required now, no more
then the community in the Apostles time.

Answer. There was no more community then (for they that think otherwise, are
in that point Anabaptists) then is to be required now, so that instance makes
for us.

3. Ob^ect. Examples are no general rules to be followed.

Answ. Examples not contrarying any rule, or reason of the Scripture, be to be
followed, as if they were commandments, so that notwithstanding any thing
alleged to the contrary, it remains upon the former gro^nds most steadfast,
that it belongs to the Eldership to ordain those Church officers that are to
be employed in the public service of God.

CHAP. VIII.
THe ordaining of Church officers must be done with humble prayer of the
Eldersh^p, and the Congregation* Discip. Ecclesi. ^ol 50.

Their unreverent beginning and proceeding therewith i^ a c^rner, is contrary
to this: which is condemned by the proof of our asser^ion by these reasons.

1. We are to behave our selves in these actions, as they by whom we have
direction to do them, have set us an example: But the Apostles and Elders,
when they ordained Church officers, did always commend the action to God by
prayer, together with those congregations, over which they placed them, Act. 6
6 and 14.^3. Therefore the ordaining of Church officers must be done by humble
prayer of the Eldership, and Congregation.

2. The greater the action i^ that is in hand, the more careful must they be
that have it in hand, to humble themselves by prayer, for the Lords assi^tance
there^n: Bu^ the ordaining of Church officer^, is an action of most weighty
importance: ^h^refore they that have it in hand (which be the Eldership to
ordain him, and Congregation to receive him) ought to hum^le themselves in
earnest pra^er before hand.

3. They that shall have part in the comfort or discomfort o^ the action, are
to join together in pr^yer un^o God for the better event, and against the
wors^: but the Eldership and people, shall both have part in the event ^f the
action: Therefore they are to join together in humble prayer before hand, etc.

CHAP. IX.
CHurch officers must be ordained by laying on of hands; in this they agree
with us, concerning the ceremony it self, albeit neither in the parties by
whom, nor on whom it must be conferred. The profit of this Ceremony appears
in reasons following.

1. That which stirs up every party, to pray with more fervencie, is
profitable to be used: But such is this Ceremony, for it affects the
ordainers, when they feel him for whom they pray; and the ordained when he
feels a calling and charge from God (as it were) sensibly coming upon him,
and the congregation, when they see him separated from the rest, by whom they
shall reap much comfort or grief: Therefore the use of it is very profitable.

2. That which helps forward the party ordained in his care, to walk with a
good conscience in his calling, is profitable to be used: Such is the
imposition of hands, for both it declares unto him, that he is separated of
God for that purpose, and also gives him hope, that his hand who allotted him
thereunto, will always assist him in the course of that calling: Therefore it
is of a profitable use.

3. That which works a more acknowledgment of Gods ordinance in the hearts of
the people, is profitable to be used: such is the laying on of hands, for it
declares unto them, that the Lord has placed him in that Calling over them:
Therefore it is profitable to be used.

Conclusion.
Therefore seeing the Ceremony of laying on hands is forcible, to increase the
fervencie of every party, when they pray; seeing it assures the calling to
the party ordained, and gives him an argument of good hope, for the blessing
of God upon him in the course of the same; and seeing it procures a more
persuasion in the people, that he is allotted unto them from the Lord himself;
it is evident that it is not a vain and idle ceremony (as many do imagine)
but of good and profitable use, in all ordinations.

CHAP. X.
THe Lord has ordained that there should be one Bishop or Pastor (at the
least) president over every Congregation, who are of equal authority in their
several charges, and in the general government of the Church, T.C. 1 bo^ke,
page 22. and 2 book, 1 part, page 515.

They maintain contrary unto this, these two.

1. That one may have two or mo charges, and be absent from them, ^s their
dispensations and practice do prove.

2. That one Minister may have a soveraigntie and Lordship over his ^^llow
Ministers, which both being disproved, the former ^ssertion will remain still
sure.

1. One man may not have mo charges then be is able in any measure to
discharge: No man is able in any measure, Reasons against the first propositi^n.
to discharge the duty that is belonging to mo flocks then one, seeing he
cannot preach unto them, both in season and out of season: Therefore no man may
have more Charges then one.

2. That which makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil, cannot be
lawful: for one to have more charges then one, makes open entrance for the
enemy to spoil, for the Woolfe watches to devour, whilst the shepherd is
absent: Therefore no man may have mo charges then one.

3. The which has neither precept, nor president for it, either in Gods word,
or any approved Writer, ^ut only from Antichrist, is unlawful: But such is
the having of mo charges th^n one: Therefore it is unlawful.

4. That which declares a Minister to be more desirous of the fleece, then to
profit the flock, that same is unlawful: But such is the having of more
charges then one, for were it not for the gain, they would think one a burden
as heavy as they could bear: Therefore it is unlawful.

5. All the reasons that be alleged in the third chapter, against
nonresidence, are forcible to this purpose, for if he may not be nonresident,
he may not h^ve mo charges, unless he be willing to be quartered, that every
charge may have a piece of him.

He reckons them among thieves, Hooper upon 1 command.
and their action to be theevery, condemned by that commandment.

Therefore, The Conclusion.
if one man cannot in any tolerable measure discharge mo charges then one; if
to have mo makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil; if it have neither
precept, nor president for it, but only in the kingdom of Antichrist; if it
declare the practizers to be more desirous of the fleece, then to feed the
Flock; If all the reasons that condemn nonresidencie be against it; Lastly,
if it be plain theevery: then must it needs follow, that one may not have two,
or mo charges.

Their objections (such as they be) are set down in the 3 chapter, and the
answers unto them.

The second Proposition that they hold is thi^. The second Proposition that
they hold, and reasons against ^t.


One Minister may have a sover^igne authority, and Lordship over his fellow
Ministers: which is thus disproved.

1. They that have their commission indiff^rently given them, without
difference between one and another, are of equal authoriti^, and may not be
one over another: but such is the commission of all Gods Ministers
indifferently, as appears, Matthew. 28.19.20. Therefore they are of equal
authority, and may not have any dominion one over another.

2. That which Christ has directly forbidden, that may not in any case be
allowed but is ever unlawful: But Christ has directly forbidden, that one
Minister should have dominion over another, Matthew. ^0.25. Luke 22 25. Therefore
one Minister may not have superiority or dominion over another.

3. They that may not be Lords over the people of God, may much less be Lords
over the Ministers, for the Ministers be (in respect of the Ministry) above
the people: but a Minister may not be Lordly over Gods people (as is testified
by him on whom they would father the greatest lordlinesse) 1 Pet. 5.3.
Therefore one Minister may not be Lord, or have superiority over another.

Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 3.
4. It is ordained, and is equal and right, that every man's cause be heard,
where the fault was committed: and it is meet to handle the matter there,
where they may have both the accusers, and witnesses of the fault; which
shows that every Minister had authority over his own flock, and no other to
meddle.

Luther adver^^s papa^^ a Satan^ fun^^t.
5. Bishops, wheresoever they be in all the world, are equal to our Bishops, or
Parish Ministers and Preachers; Of none it can be said one is Lord, another is
Servant: whatsoever belongs to the Church, belongs equally to all, saving
that some are of better gifts then others, howbeit such gifts cause no
inequallitie or Lordship in the Church.

Muscul. loc. com de manist. ve^bi.

The same upon 2 These. 2. Co^fes Helvet* cap. 17.

The same cap. ^8.


6 In the Apostolic Church, the ministers of the Word, were none above another,
and were subject to no head or president, etc.

7. The honor of a Bishop, being taken from the rest of the Ministers, and
given to one, was the first step to Papacy.

8. Christ did most severely forbid unto the Apostles and their successors,
primacie and dominion.

9. Equal power and function is given to all Ministers of the Church, and that
from the beginning, no one preferred himself before another, saving only that
for order, some one did call them together, propounded the matters that were to
be consulted of, and gathered the voices.

The Conclusion.
Therefore, if all Ministers have their commission indifferently given unto
them, If Christ have forbidden, that one Minister should have dominion over
another; if no minister may exercise dominion over Gods people; if authority
to handle Controversies, belonged to every several congregation; if a Bishop
and Parish Minister be all one; if in the Apostles time, no Minister was above
another; if the superiority of one above another, was the first step to the
Papacy; lastly, if they have equal power and function from the beginning:
than must it needs follow, that no Minister may have superiority, or exercise
dominion over another.

Their objections hereunto (so many as are worthy any answer) be these.

1. Object. Christ Math. 20.25. forbids only ambition, and not dominion, as
Musculus expounds it.

Ans. Musculus his judgment appears in the 6 and 7 reasons, the place is
expounded against superiority by Calvin, Bulling. Zwing. G^alter, Hemingi^s,
etc. But let it be so expounded: that dominion is am^ition, because it causes
a man to aspire above his ^ellow Ministers.

2. Object. The Greek word signifies rule with oppression, which is the thing
that is forbidden.

Answ. That is not so, for Luke 22 25. uses the single verb Kurieuein, which
signifies simply to rule: the sons of Zebedeus desired not to oppress but
to rule, which desire ^e reproved.

3 Objection. Christ says not, no man shall be so, but he that will be so,
desiring it.

Answer. But Luke says, let the greatest be as your servant, and therefore
that is but a silly shift.

So that their assertions being overthrown, A Bishop should be in every
congregation.
and their objections answered, it remains, that we prove yet more directly,
that the Lord has ordained, that there should be a Bishop resident over every
congregation; which is thus proved.

1 If a Bishop and Minister be all one, then must there be a Bishop in every
congrega^ion, for every man will confess that every congregation ought to have
a Mi^ister: But a Bishop and a Minister is all one, as appears by this tha^
S. Paul describes not one quality for the Bishop, but it is also the quality
of every good Minister; and also in that he describes no other Minister but
the Bishop: Therefore there ought to be a Bishop in every congregation.

2 S. Paul's Bishops and his Deacons were appointed to one place, as appears
both in the description of them, and the practice of the Apostles: But the
Deacons were in every Congregation, which appears, Phil. 1.1. Acts 6.2. that
Office being needful every where; and in that it continued so, longer then the
Office of Bishops, Athanasius Apol. 2. Jerome Contra (...), etc. Therefore
there ought to be a Bishop in every congr^^^t^^n.

3 That which Paul enjoy^^^ to Titus, is also to be practiced always in the
like (...): But he commanded him to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5.
which are expounded in the next verse to be Bishops: Therefore there must be a
Bishop in every congregation.

Ignatiu^ (...).
4 Every Church should have her Communion Table, and every Church her Bishop.

5 Where there was found any worthy to be a Bishop, there a Bishop was
appointed, (...) l^b 3. (...). 1. (...)* 75.
and where there was not to furnish both Bishop and preaching El^er (he
means the Doctor) there the Apostles made a Bishop, and left the Elder.

2 C^ncil. Ca^t^ag t^m. 1. cap. 10 3. (...) 4 cap 8*
6 If a Bishop run into a slander, and many Bishops cannot suddenly be
gathered; his cause shall be heard of twelve Bishops etc.

7 If an Elder be accused, he may call six Bishops from the places hard by.

S^ories make mention of Bishops of little Towns, as (...) lib. 5. cap. 16
Soti^us Bishop of the Village Cuman: (...). lib. 5 cap. 4.
Mares, Bishop of a sm^ll Town called Solicha: (...) 4 ^6.
Gregory, Bishop of a small City, called Nazianzum: Quaest 16. (...) ^0 (...)
Evagri^^^.
The Bishop of a Castle.

9 A Minister, that is to say, a Bishop, and (a little after) the Apostle does
plainly teach, that a Minister and a Bishop i^ all one, and (upon Titus) a
Bishop and a Minister are the same: and (ad Ocea^um) with the ancient Fathers,
Bishops, and Elders were all one.

10 D. Barnes (in his (...) Article) says, I will never believe, neither can I
ever believe, Act and Monum^nts, fol. 216.
that one man may by the law of God, be a Bishop of two or three Cities, yea ^
a whole Country, for that it is contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul, who
writing to Titus, commands that ^e should ordain a Bishop in every Town.

11 It is pity to see how far the Office of a Bishop is degenerated from the
original in the Scripture; Hooper upon 8 command. page ^0.
it was not so in the beginning, when Bishops were at the best, at the Epistle
to Titus testifies, that wills him, to ordain in every City, etc. They
know the primitive C^ur^h had no such Bishops as we have, until the time of
Silvester the first.

The conclusion.
Therefore, if a Bishop and a Minister be all one; if Bishops were to be where
Deacons are who were in every congregation; if Paul enjoyne^ Titus to ordain
Bishops in every City; and if every Church had her Bishop a long time after
the Apostles, as appears by the testimonies of Councels, Histories, and
learned Writers, both old and new: t^en mu^^ it needs follow, that there ought
to be a Bishop in every Congregation.

CHAP. II.
FOr the further revealing of the truth, God has ordained, that there should
be in the Church Doctors, whose office is to be employed in teaching of
doctrine, and is an office different from that of the Pastor.

The latter part of this proposition, is the thing which especially they do
deny, which is thus prooved to be true.

1. Those which the Apostle (in speaking of distinct officers) does distinguish
one from another, are several and distinct one from another: But the Apostle
does distinguish the Pastor and teacher, one from another, Romans 12.7.8. and
Ephesians. 4.11. Even as he distinguishes man and woman. Gal. 3.28. See the Greek
of them both: Therefore the office of pastor and Doctor are distinct one from
another.

2. As are the gifts that adorn offices, so are the officers themselves, for
the execution of the office, consists in the employing of the gifts: But the
gifts of the pastor and Doctor are diverse, as appears 1. Cor. 12.8. And by
experience, for some has an excellent gift in doctrine, and not in
application, and others excel in application and exhortation, that ^re very
mean, in delivering of doctrine: Therefore the office of a pastor and
teacher, are distinct one from another.

3. Those that are to take a diverse course in teaching are diverse, and
different in their functions, for else why should they be enjoined to take a
diverse course: But the pastor is to take one course, and the Doctor another,
for the one is to direct himself principally to exhort, and the other to
attend upon doctrine: Romans 12.7, 8. Therefore the office of pastor and Doctor,
be distinct offices the one from the other.

4. The Ecclesiastical stories (especially speaking of the Church of
Alexandria) do usually make a difference betwixt the Bishop and the Doctor.

5. Cathedral Churches have yet some show thereof left in them, who (besides
the Bishop) have also one that reads a Lecture in divinity.

6. If the distinguishing of them, make more for the building of the Church,
then the uniting of them; then are they to be distinguished, and not made all
one: But the form^^ is true, as appears by this, that hardly is a people
brought to asound knowledge of godliness, by him that inst^ucteth in doctrine
continually, and as hardly are we stir^ed up to a zealous care of our duty,
th^ugh we be ex^orted contin^ally; which both should be with less continuance,
if one man were to perform all: Therefore they are to be esteemed distinct
offices, and not parts of one office, which one is to perform.

Therefore, if the Apostle Paul distinguishes them one from another; if God
do^ usually bestow doctrine and exhortation upon several persons, where in
each is found to excel, and to be no body in the other; if the pastor be
commanded to take one course in teaching, and the Doctor another; if
Ecclesiastical stories do usually distinguish them; if Cathedral Churches
have yet some steps left of the distinction; if to distinguis^ them; makes
more to the building of the Church, then to unite them: then must it needs
follow, that the office of pastor and Doctor be distinct, and different the
one from the other.

CHAP. XII.
EVery congregation ought to have Elders to see into the manners of the people,
and to be assistant unto the ministers, in the government Ecclesiastical. T.
C. book 1. page 174. Disc. fol. 120. which they deny, Whitg^ft p. 627. And
their practice in keeping them out of the Church: but it is proved to be true,
by these reasons following.

1. That which the Apostles established in every congregation, ought still to
continue, seeing the Church must be ruled by the same laws, that it was ruled
by then, and needs as great furtherance now, as it did then: But the Apostles
established Elders in every congregation, Act* 14.23. Which cannot be
understood of preaching Elders only; considering that the scarcity of them was
such, as Paul was constrained to send Timothy and Titus to great cities, which
he could hardly spare, as he often testifies: Therefore ther^ ought to be such
Elders, as are only to assist in government i^ every congregation.

2. Those which God has ordained to help forward the building of the Church,
ought to be in every congregation, unless it may appear that some
congregation needs not so much help, as Christ has appointed: But Christ
has ordained Elders in the Church, for the helping forward of the building of
the Church 1 Cor. 12.28. Therefore such Elders ought to be in every
congregation.

3. That which being wanting, the body cannot be entire, that same must be in
every congregation: But the Elders cannot be wanting, and the Church be an
entire body Romans 12.8. Which every congregation should be, Romans 12, 4.
Therefore there ought to be such Elders in every congregation.

5. If the word of God do describe such Elders in the Church, then ought they
to be in every congregation, which is clear by this, that every congregation
has need of them, as well as any: and that every congregation must have all
the other officers of the Church: and that every congregation is of equal
dignity in the body of Christ: but the word of God describes unto us such
Elders. 1. Tim. 5.17. Therefore they ought to be in every congregation.

5. There is no Church, Ignat. ad Trail.
that can stand without her Eldership or council.

6. It belongs only to the Bishop to baptize, Tertul. de Baptist.
and the Elder and Deacon may not do it, but upon the Bishops license.

7. Neither Elder nor Deacon have right, Jerome contra Lucif.
but upon the Bishops commandment (so much as) to baptize.

8. Elders fell away thorough the ambition of the teachers. Ambros. upon 1 Timothy
5. Possidonius in vita Augusti^i


9. Valerius the Bishop did contrary to the custom of the Apostolical
Churches, in appointing Augustine to preach, being but an Elder.

10. After that Arrius was convicted of haeresie, Socrat. libr. 5. cap. 22.
it was decreed that Elders should no more preach.

11. The number of the Elders of every Church, Bucer de regno Christ's book 1
ought to be increased, according to the multitude of the people.

12. Speaking of the Elders that were to assist the Minister, P. Martyr upon
Romans 1^.
he lamenteth, that it is so fallen out of the Church, that the name does
scarce remain.

13. Certain of the people were joined with the pastor, The same upon 1. Cor.
12.
in the government of the Church, because the pastor was not able to do all
himself.

14. There were Elders, that did assist the Minister, Calvin Institu^ lib 4.
cap. 3.
in the government of the Church. etc. sect. 8.


15. Whitgift confesses, that in the Primitive Church, they had in every
Church certain Seniors, page 638. Let it then appear out of the word, to
satisfy the conscience, how it may be left out.

16. If the platform set down to Timothy and Tit^s be for all Churches, then
must Elders be in all; for these Elders are there described: but it is a
platform for all Churches, and that to the end of the world, 1 Timothy 6.14.
Therefore they ought to be in every congregation.

17. That which is contained in every minsters commission to teach and
practice, must be in every congregation: but the ordination and practice of
that office, is in every Ministers commission, Mat. 28.20. Or else they
ordained Elders without warrant from Christ, which none dare affirm: therefore
there must be Elders in every congregation.

18. Wheresoever a bishop must be, there must also the Elder be, which
appears by this, that where the one is described, there is the other also:
but a Bishop must be in every congregation, as I have proved sufficiently in
the 10. Chap. Therefore there ought to be Elders in every congregation.

19. If the Apostles labored for uniformitie in the least things, and
established in all Churches one order, then must there be Elders in every
congregation, for they were in some, as all men do confess: but the former is
true, as not only the view of their practice declares, but also the Apostles
express words* Thus I teach in all Churches: Therefore the latter is true
also, that in every congregation there must be such Elders.

Therefore if the Apostles established Elders in every congregation; The
conclusi^n*
if Christ has esteemed their help needful to further the building of his
Church; if without them a congregation cannot be entire; if the word of God say
that they ought to be in the Church; if it was continued so long after the
Apostles time: and be approved by the testimony of many very learned, both old
and new writers, and confessed by the greatest adversary unto them; if they be
within the compass of every Ministers commission; if they are to be,
wheresoever a Bishop must be; if the Apostles established uniformity, even in
the meanest things; then must it needs follow, that there ought to be such
Elders in every congregation, as are to assist the Minister in the government
of the same.

They confess it was so in the Apostles time, but seem to say somewhat that
it cannot be under a Christian magistrate thus:

1. Object. God has given the Sovereign authority over his Church to the
Christian magistrate, which these Elders would abridge.

Answ. No more then the eldership abridged the soveraigntie of David over
Israel, for his government is temporal, and theirs spiritual.

2. Object. Gualter upon the 1 Cor. 5. denies it to be needful under a
Christian Magistrate.

Answer. Gualter denies excommunication under a Christian Magistrate, he is
as partial in this argument at Whitgift.

3. Objection. The Prince has the authority that the Elders had.

Answ. That is no truer, then to say the Prince has authority to preach the
word, etc. for these be things, that his high authority must see done, but he
may do none of them himself.

But there be many reasons which may be alleged, Reasons prooving Elde^s as
necessary under a Christian Magistrate, as in the Apostles time.
to prove that they are (at the least) as necessary under a Christian
Magistrate in these days, as they were in the time of the Apostles, as namely
these:

1. The less able that Ministers are to direct their people in the ways of
godliness, the more need they have of the assistance that God has allowed
them in his word: But Ministers are now less able (especially under Christian
Magistrates, when men are overtaken with ease and peace, which quench go^d
things) then they were in the time of the Apostles: Therefore there is as great
(if not greater) need of Elders now, then was in the time of the Apstoles.

2. If Christian Magistrates be to maintain the order that Christ has set
down for the government of his Church, then must there be Elders in it under
a Christian Magestrate, for Elders are appointed of 1 Cor. 12.8. But Christian
Magestrates are to maintain the order that Christ has set down for the
ruling of his Church, Isai. 49.23. Therefore there must be Elders in the
Church, under a Christian Magestrate.

3. If the rule of Christ cannot be perpetually observed, tell the Church,
unless there be Elders; then must there be such under a Christian Magestrate:
But the former is true, for by the Church is there meant the Seanate of
Ministers and Elders, as shall be proved in the chapter of Excommunication:
Therefore there must be Elders, under a Christian Magistrate.

4. If the whole government of the Church described in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, be to be observed until the end, then must there be
Elders under Christian Magestrates, for they are contained in those Epistles:
but the former is true 1 Timothy 6.14. Therefore there must be Elders under a
Christian Magistrate.

5. Where sinners ate more outrageous, and the best most subject to wax cold,
there is greatest need of all the helps that God has ordained to punish
sin, and to cherish well doing: But so it is under a Christian Magistrate
especially in the peace of the Church, as Whitgift confesses, page 643.
Therefote there is (at the least) as great need of Elders (seeing they are
helpers uppointed of God) under a Christian Magistrate, as at any other time.

The conclusion.
Therefore if Mininisters be less able now, then in the Apostles time; if
Christian Majestrates must maintain the order prescribed by Christ; if else
the rule of Christ, (till the Chru^ch) cannot be still observed; if the whole
government described by Saint Paul, must be kept for ever; lastly if there be,
(at the least) as great need of all the helps that can be, as ever there was:
then must it needs follow, that Elders are as necessary in the Church under a
Christian Magestrate, as in the time of persecution.

CHAP. XIII.
THere ought to be in every congregation certain Deacons, endued with those
qualities, which the word of God describes; whose office is only in receiving
the liberty of the Saints, and destributing it unto the needy, T. C. 1 book,
page 190. Discip. Eccles. fol. 119. The first proposition.


This assertion has two branches, which both are gain said by our
adversaries, the first whereof is this. The office of the Deacon, consists
only in receiving and distributing unto the poor, the liberality of the
Saints, which they deny Whitgift page 582. The book of ordering, etc. that
makes (...) a degree of the Ministry: but the proposition being proved true,
makes their opinion and practice appear false, which is thu^.

1. That wherein Stephen and the rest were employed, is the office of a Deacon:
for the first institution of them by the Apostles, is in that example: But they
were only to attend upon the provision for the poor, Acts 6.4 etc. Therefore
the office of the Deacon, is only to attend upon the distributing the poor,
from the libe^alli^y of the Saints.

2. That which the Apostle makes an ordinary and distinct office from others
in the Church, must be attended upon by them, that are in the same office* and
not be mingled with any other; but the Apostle Romans 12.8. makes destributing
in simplicity, such an office as it is expounded by M. Calvin, Beza, Bucer,
Martyr. etc. Therefore the Deacons office must be attended upon, and
consequently, it consists only in dist^^buting, etc.

3 That which the Apostles found themselves insufficient for, that can no man
now discharge in any tolerable measure, for they were more adorned with gifts,
then any be now: but they found themselves insufficient for the Ministry of
the word, and destributing unto the poor also, Acts. 6.2. Therefore no man can
in any tolerable measure, discha^ge the office of a Minister and Deacon also,
and consequently, the Deacon is to attend upon distributing only.

4. If the Ministeries of the word be perfect, without the Deacon, then may
^ee not meddle in the same, for how may one lawfully labor, in that wherein
there is no need of him: But such is the ministry of the word, where the
several Ministers thereof are named, Ephesians. 4.11. wherein the Deacon is not
contained, as Whitgift c^nfesseth, page 308. and 309. Therefore the Deacon may
not meddle with the Ministry of the word, and consequently must be employed
only in destributing etc.

5. If there be no quality required in the perfect description of the Deacon,
which is proper to the Ministry of the word, then is not be to meddle with the
same: But the former is true, as appears, 1 Timothy 3.8. Therefore the latter is
true a so, and consequently, he must attend only upon distributing, etc.

6. If it belong to the Deacons office, to meddle with the Minestery of the
word and Sacraments, then it is greater, then that of the pastor, for that the
doing of both, requires greater gifts then the one: But it is not a greater,
but inferior office to the pastor, as appears by all those places, wherein
they are described, that the Deacon is described after the Bishop: therefore
his office is not to meddle with both, and consequently he must attend upon
distributing, etc.

6. Council. constant. cap. 16.

2. Council. vasens. Can. 4. Chrisost. upon Acts. 6.


7. Deacons are Ministers of tables, and not of holy things.

8. In the Ministers sickness, the Deacons shall road the Homilies of the
Fathers.

9. The Deacons have need of great wisdom, although the preaching of the
word be not committed unto them: and further, it is absurd that they should
do both the office of Preaching, and caring for the poor, concidering that
they be not able to do both thoroughly.

10. Although the (goods of the CHVRCH increasing) there were besides the
Deacons, Pulling* decard ^. Ser. 2.
subdeacons and Archdeacons, and yet the Deacons remained still in their charge
for the poor, and were not as yet mingled with the Bishops or Priests, and
with the order of them which taught.

11. The Office of Deaconshippe, was religiously kept in the CHVRCH, Bu^er de
reg. Christ* 14.
until it was driven out by Antichrist.

The same de reg. etc. and upon Ephesians. 4.
12. This Office must of necessity be restored as it is described, Acts the
Sxth, if England (for he speaks it in the behalf of our Church) will
receive the Discipline of Christ.

P. Mart. rem. 12
13. Speaking of these Deacons, lamenteth that this order, is so fallen out of
the Church that the name does scarce remain.

Calvin Insti. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 9.
14. Describing the Deacons of the Apostles time, says, that we after their
example, ought to have the like.

15. The office of distributing the goods of the Church, is an ordinary
function in a CHVRCH lawfully constituted; Beza Confess. cap. 5. sect. 23.
the which Section thirty, he calls the Deaconship.

Therefore if Stephen and the rest were employed, The Conclusion.
only in distributing the goods of the Church; if the Apostle makes the
Deacons office, an ordinary and distinct office from all others in the Church;
if the Apostles were not sufficient for the ministry of the word, and
distributing; if the ministeries of the word be perfect without the Deacon; if
in the description of the Deacon, no quality be required, that is proper to a
Minister of the word; if to deal in both would make the Deacon a g^eater
officer then the Pastor; if the Councels, ancient writers, and the sound
writers of latter times, do declare that the Deacons were to be wholly employed
in the distributing of the goods of the Church; then must it needs follow, that
his office is not to meddle with any part of the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, but to attend only upon the distributing of the liberality of the
Church, unto them that stand in need thereof.

Their objections hereunto, be these two that follow.

1 Objection. Philip one of the seven Deacons did preach, Act. 8.8. therefore
Deacons may preach the Word.

Answer. Philip was a Deacon of the Church at Jerusalem, while they abode
together, but now he was not any more so, but an Evangelist, as he is ever
termed after, by virtue of which office he did preach.

2 Object. Steven, being a Deacon, preached, Act. 7.2.

Answ. He preached not; for all that is there, was but his Apology at the seat
of judgment, which every man in the like case may do, and which many of the
Martyrs have done.

So that the former proposition being true, upon the grounds alleged,
notwithstanding these objections, we are to proceed to the second, which is
this.

There ought to be such Deacons (as are described in the former proposition) in
every congregation, The 2. proposition.
which is thus proved.

1 That office which every congregation has need of, ought to be in every
congregation: But every congregation has need of the Deacons office, which
appears by this, that they have poor to provide for (or else they must
regard the necessity of others) and the liberality of others to distribute:
Therefore Deacons ought to be in every congregation.

2 That which is indefinitely appointed for the good of the Church, belongs
unto every congregation, as well as to any one: But such is the appointment of
the Deacons. 1. Tim. 3.8. Therefore there must be Deacons in every congregation.

Ign^t. ad Philadelp.
3 Every Church ought to have their office of Deaconship.

4 All the reasons (or the most of them) that are alleged, chap. 10. for a
Bishop in every congregation, and chap. 12. for Elders in every congregation;
are forcible hereunto.

Therefore, if there be the like need of Deacons in one congregation, The
Conclusion.
that is in another; if they be appointed indefinitely for the good of the
Church; if every Church must have their office of Deaconship, and L^^tly, if
there be like reasons to prove them belong to every Church, that be for Bishops
and Elders: then must it needs follow, that there ought to be Deacons in every
congregation.

CHAP. XIIII.
THere ought to be in every congregation, an Eldership, consisting of a Pastor
or Pastors* Doctor (if there be any) and Elders, whose authority Christ has
ordained to be perpetual in his Church, to govern the same only by the rules
of Gods Word: T.C. 1. book, page 175. Discip. Ecclesiast. 123. which contains
these 3. particular propositions, defended by us, and gainsaid by the Bb. and
their adherents.

1 The Eldership ought to be in every congregation.

2 The office of the Eldership is perpetual.

3 The Church must be governed, only by the rules of Gods Word.

The proof of the 11. proposition.
The first is denied by them, Whitgift page 627. and by their practice, in tying
the government of many Churches to the Bb. sea, it is thus proved.

1 Whatsoever Christ has ordained, as a means, to keep men in obedience to the
Gospel, that same must be in every congregation, for particular men are in
particular congregations: But Christ has ordained the Eldership for that end,
as appears, Matthew. 18.15. etc. where Chrysostom* expounds: Tell the Church:
that is, says he, the governors of the Church: Therefore the Eldership ought
to be in every Church.

2 Where all sorts of Elders ought to be, there must be also the joining of
their offices in one, for the good of that congregation over which they are
placed: But all sorts of Elders ought to be in every congregation, as is proved
in the 10. chap. for Bishops, the 12. for Elders, etc. Therefore there must be
an Eldership in every congregation.

3 If no particular congregation have greater privileges given thereunto by
the Word of God then others have, then must there either be no Eldership at all
(which is false, in that Elders are proved to be by the Word of God in the
Church) or else it must be in every congregation: But every congregation is of
like privilege, which appears by this, that it is a perfect body of it self:
Therefore there must be an Eldership in every congregation.

4 The same warrant that is in the Word of God, for to have an Eldership in one
place, is a warrant for it in all; for the Word of God tyeth it, not to
Churches in cities, but indefinitely to the Church: But there is warrant for it
out of the Word to be some where, as appears by this, tha^ the Apostles are
said to establish it, and make mention of it: Therefore it must be in every
congregation.

Therefore, if the Eldership be ordained by Christ, The Conclusion.
as a means to keep men in obedience unto the Gospel; if all sorts of Elders
must be in every Church; if every congregation be of equal privileges; lastly
if there be the like warrant for it in every Church, that is in any: then must
it needs follow, that there ought to be an Eldership in every congregation.

Whatsoever is objected against this, that has any show in it, is answered in
the 12. chap. of Elders.

The office of the Eldership is ordained by Christ to be perpetual, and
ordinary for the government of his Church, The 2. proposition.
T. C. 1. book, 177. denied by them* Whitgift, 627. and by their practice in
keeping it out: but the truth of it appears by these reasons that do follow.

1 If the causes why Christ would have an Eldership in his Church be
perpetual, See the answer to D. Bridges, page 132.
then must also the thing it self be perpetual: But the causes are perpetual,
which be to govern the Church by the rules of his Word, and that
ecclesiastically: Therefore the Eldership is perpetual.

2 If Christ be the author of the Eldership, and left it by the Apostles to be
established in the Church, then it is perpetual; for his commission given to
the Apostles, is to be observed unto the end of the world: But Christ is the
author of it, as appears both by his giving of the gifts for the particular
members thereof, and the whole body of it; as also in that the Apostles did
establish it in the Church, who went not from their commission, 1. Cor. 11.12.
Therefore the Eldership is perpetual.

3 Whatsoever is the commandment of God, once delivered by him, is never
repealed again, and to be acknowledged of every spiritual man; that same is to
be received by the Church of God to be perpetual: But such is the government
of the Church by Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, and so of the whole Eldership,
as appears in that they are all mentioned in the writings of S. Paul, which
are so esteemed: 1. Corinthians. 14.37. Therefore the government of the Church by
an Eldership is perpetual.

4 That whose several parts is perpetual, and which has perpetual gifts
given, for the furnishing thereof for ever; that same must needs be perpetual:
But the several parts of the Eldership, as Pastor, Doctor* and Elders, be
perpetual, as is proved in the 10. and 12 chap. Therefore the Eldership is
perpetual.

5 Whatsoever is grounded upon the general commandments, and rules of the
Scriptures, that same is perpetual: But the governing of the Church by the
Eldership, is such, as has partly been proved in election and ordination, and
execution of the several Church officers, which is the greatest part of
government, and shall further appear, in the censures of the Church hereafter:
Therefore the government of the Church by the Eldership, is perpetual.

6 Whatsoever manner of government has sufficient power, and that from God, to
begin, continue, and strengthen, both the governors of the Church in their
callings, and the people in the course of obedience unto Christ; that same
government is to be perpetual: But such is the government by the Eldership, as
appears by this, that the Apostles used no other: Therefore the Eldership is
to be perpetual.

7 That government which the 12 Apostles, and Paul* before they consulted
together, did uniformly ag^^e in, that same must needs be of God, and
consequently perpetual, unless the repealing of it do appear: but such is the
government by the Eldership, (for all the adversaries thereunto, confess that
it was in the Apostles time:) Therefore it is perpetual.

8 Whatsoever has the same grounds, that the preaching of the Wo^d and
ministration of the Sacraments have, the same is perpetual: But such is the
government of the Eldership, for it is grounded upon the commandments of
Christ* and practice of the Apostles: Therefore it is perpetual.

9 That which has the like grounds to be perpetual, that the Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, had to be for a time, the same is perpetual: But
such is the government of the Church by an Eldership, which appears by this,
that they are therefore ceased, because their gifts of immediate calling, etc.
be gone, and the gifts of these, jointly and severally do remain: Therefore it
is perpetual.

10 Whatsoever is the perpetual and ordinary remedy to cure diseases of the
Church, and strengthen the health of the same, that same is perpetual: But
such is the government by the Eldership, as appears by the necessity, and
profit of the several offices thereof, and of this, that we are still to
observe in causes of extremities: Tell the Church, Matthew. 18.17. Therefore it
is perpetual.

11 That government which was in the Church appointed of God under the Law, and
continued (in respect of the substance) by Christ and his Apostles, and
bettered (in respect of the accedents) by them, that same is perpetual: But
such is the government by the Eldership, as appears in the 12. reason of the
1 chap. Therefore it is perpetual.

12 If there be any reason why this government should be alterable (being once
set in the Church by Christ) it is either in respect of the extraordinary
offices ceased, or the addition of the Magistrate: But not of the former,
because the Church has never had any need of extraordinary gifts, but God has
given them, and so will he ever: nor of the latter, for that the Magistrates
office is to defend the building of the Church by that order which Christ has
set down, and not to alter any thing therein: Therefore it is perpetual.

13 Either this government is the best and perpetual, or else there is none,
and so Christ should be thought to have left his Church without a government,
which is disproved in the 7 and 8 reasons in the first chap. for this was once
established by Christ, and so was no other: But some government must needs be
the best and perpetual: Therefore this is perpetual.

Conf. Helvet. T^^ur. Bern. Ge^ev^, Pelo^^^, H^rgari^, Scotland, cap. 18.
Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8. P. Martyr upon R^^. 3. Bu^er de reg.
Christ. 15.
14 No man may justly forbid (speaking of the Church Government) to return to
the old constitution of the Church of God, and to receive it before the custom
of men.

15 Experience teaches this order (speaking of the Church government) was not
for one age, but necessary to all ages.

16 Though the Commonwealth change her government, yet the Church must keep
hers still.

17 Lamenteth, that some were found among them that are esteemed forwardest,
which would not have the same discipline used now adays, that was in the
Apostles times, objecting the difference of times and men.

Mr. Whitaker against Duraeas.
18 The Apostles have written these Laws, (speaking of Discipline) not for a
day, or for the first age, but to endure for all times to come; and therefore
have ratified them with a most earnest obtestation: 1 Timothy 6.14. that these
commandments should be kept until the day of the Lord.

The Conclusion.
Therefore, if the causes of once ordaining an Eldership, be perpetual, if
Christ be the Author of it, and left it in the Church by the Apostles; if it be
Gods commandment, not yet repealed; if the parts of it, and gifts for it be
perpetual; if it be grounded upon the general commandments and rules of the
Scriptures; if it have sufficient power from God, to begin, continue, and
confirm a Church; if it was agreed upon by the twelve Apostles and Paul,
before they met together; if it have the same grounds with the preaching of the
Word; if it have as good grounds to be perpetual as the Apostles, etc* to be
for a time; if it be the perpetual remedy against all the diseases of the
Church; if it was under the Law, and enriched by Christ and his Apostles under
the Gospel; if it be neither alterable in respect of the extraordinary offices
ceased, nor the Magistrate added to the Church; if it be the only government,
that challenges authority from God; if no man may justly forbid it, if it be
necessary for all times; if the commonwealth may change her government, but not
the Church; if the difference of times and men be nothing against it; lastly*
if the rules that the Apostles gave for it, be confirmed with a charge, to be
kept until the coming of Christ: then must it needs follow, that the
government of the Church by an Eldership, ought to be perpetual.

They object, that many inconveniences would follow upon this government, which
are severally to be answered.

1 Objection. By this every Parish shall follow their Seniors, Objections
against the perpetuity of the Eldership, and answers to the same.
and then there will be so many Elderships, so many diverse fashions, seeing one
may not meddle with another.

Answer. The government desired is uniforme for every Church, and admits no
change, no not in outward ceremonies, without a Synod of the choice men of
several Elderships.

2 Objection* If they being all mean men, choose an Earl, he may not refuse,
but be at their bo^k and commandment.

Answer. No man that is chosen is compelled to an office against his will, but
he that despises to consult with others in Gods matters, because they be
poor, reproacheth God that made them, Pro. 17.5.

3 Objection. It overburdeneth the Parish, to provide for the nourishment of so
many Church Officers.

Answer. It is not necessary that they should provide for any more of them,
saving those that are exercised in the ministry of the Word, unless any of
the rest may need the liberality of the Church.

4 Objection. It brings in a new Popedom and tyranny into the Church.

Answer. It is blasphemy to term the government of Christ so, because we
refuse the tyranny of the Pope, shall we therefore do what we list, and ^o^
yield obedience to the Scepter of Christ.

5 Objection. It is a kind of Donatisme to challenge such authority over
Princes.

Answer. And it is flattery to suffer Princes to do what they list; this is the
objection of Gualter, who is a professed enemy to discipline.

6 Objection. It takes away Princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical.

Answer. No more than it did from David in his time, nor so much as the Bb. do
now* for the Prince requires but this, to see the Church well ordered, which
the Eldership allows and craveth.

7 Objection. It transformeth the state of the Commonwealth, into a mere
popularitie, and will alter the government thereof.

Answer. It neither transformeth nor alters any thing in it, for let it be
showed what damage would come by this discipline to any Magistracy, from the
Princes throne, to the office of the headborough.

8 Objection. It will breed contention and partiality in judgment.

Answer. Where can be greater contention than the Bb. maintain for their
kingdom, or greater partiality than in them, to their kinsfolks, servants,
Sycophants, etc.

9 Objection. It will be contemned, and so good order neglected.

Answer. None ever deserved more contempt, than the Bb. and their officers do,
for all their pomp: but God whose ordinance it is, will procure sufficient awe
unto it; mark how these Objections stand together, in the fourth it was
tyranny, and here it is too contemptible; these be contrary.

10 Objection. All alterations be dangerous.

Answer. Never (where we change from the obedience of Antichrist, to the
service of the living God) was it ever dangerous to amend things amiss, by
that course which is described of God: if it were, let the particular of it
appear, this might well have been Stephen Gardiners reason for Popery, in the
time of King Henry the eight.

The thi^d proposition.
The Church must be governed only by the rules of Gods Word, this is in effect,
the proposition of the first Chapter, whereunto all those reasons there
alleged may be referred; there is advouched generally, the certain grounds of
the whole discipline, against the imagined liberty left to the Church: here is
affirmed the particular direction of the Church Government, by the authority
of the Eldership, to proceed according to the rules of Gods revealed will, and
not by that cursed and monstrous Cannon Law, which is made manifest unto us by
these reasons.

1. All governors are to execute their authority, by the same warrant from
which they have it: But the governors of the Church of God, have their warrant
to be gove^nours only from the Word, 1 Cor. 12.28. Therefore they must govern^
the Church only by the Word.

2. The Church is to be governed by that which the Ministers may teach unto the
same, for they are taught to the end that they may obey, and so be governed by
the same: But the Ministers may teach nothing but the Word of God. 1 Cor.
11.23. Therefore the Church is to be governed only by the word of God.

3. That which makes the Church obedient unto Christ, must be the direction
whereby it is to be governed: Only the Word of God makes the Church obedient
unto Christ: Therefore it is to be governed by the rules of Gods Word.

4. Every kingdom or household, must be governed only by the Laws of the
King, or orders of the householder: The church is the kingdom and house of God,
and his Word is the only Law that he has given for the same: Therefore it
must be governed only by the Word of God.

5. That which was ordained to destroy the church of God, cannot be a good rule
to govern the same by: But such is the cannon law, for it was ordained to
strengthen the kingdom of Antichrist* Abstract. Therefore it cannot be a good
rule to direct the Church by, and consequently, it must be governed by the
Word, for no other rule is offered unto us, but the one of these twain.

6. That which was invented by the Dragon, that persecuteth the woman and her
child, that same cannot be good for the Church, which is that woman: But such
is the cannon law* for it was invented by Antichrist, which is that dragon:
Therefore it cannot be good for the ruling of the Church, and consequently, etc.

7. That which strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, cannot be
good to guide them, that must walk in light and knowledge: But the cannon law
strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, for it increases Popery,
as appears by this, that there is scarce an Officer toward it, in these
days of knowledge, but he is a Papist: Therefore it cannot be good to guide
the Church of God.

8. That which destroys the Church of God, cannot be good to rule the same:
But the cannot law destroys it, for it crosses every faithful Minister in
the discharge of his duty, and every go^d Christian, walking in the ways of
godliness, and nippeth in the head every good action, as experience teaches
us: Therefore it cannot be a good rule to govern the Church by.

9. That which has bred more traiterous Papists in England, than the Seminaries
at Rom^ and Rhemes* that same cannot be good to govern the Church of God: But
such is the cannon law, for it has kept out discipline, nourished ignorance,
and fostered superstition and popery, in all estates of people, that never came
at those Seminaries: Therefore it cannot be a good rule to govern the Church
of God by.

10. That which nourishes the hope of Antichrist to return hither again,
cannot be good to direct in the government of the Church: But such is the
cannon law, for it keeps the cages for those unclean birds; as Archb. and L.
Bb. seas, arches, cathedral Churches, etc. Therefore it cannot be a good rule
for the direction of the Church.

11. That which all the Churches have cast off, as unfit for the government of
the Church, cannot be good for the same: But all the Churches, that have
forsaken the Pope (yea they that have not received the discipline of Christ
wholly) have cast off the cannon law: Therefore it cannot be good for the same.

12. Yea, we our selves mislike it, as appears by a statute made under Edw. 6.

The Conclusion.
Therefore, if Governors are to rule by the same authority whereby they are
governors; if the Church must be governed, by that which the Ministers may
teach; if the Word of God only, make the Church obedient unto Christ; if every
Kingdom must be ruled by the laws of their King; and if the cannon law be
ordained to destroy the Church; if it was invented to persecute the Church; if
it strengthen the power of darkness and ignorance; if it kill the Church of
God; if it breed more traitorous Papists, than the Seminaries at Rome and
Rhemes; if it nourish the hope of Antichrists return: lastly, if all the
Churches that have forsaken the Pope, have cast it off also; yea, if we our
selves do mislike it: then must it needs follow, that the Church ought to be
governed, only by that golden rule of Gods Word, and not by that leaden lump
of the cannon law.

CHAP. XV.
THe office of the Church Government, is mere Ecclesiastical, and therefore
the Governors of the Church may not meddle, but only in Church Matters; as
for example, vocation, and abdication, deciding of controversies, in doctrine
and manners, so far as appertains to conscience, and the Church censures,
T.C. book 1. page 206. Discip. Eccle. 126. but they think that
Church Governors, may also meddle in civil causes: Whitegift page 749. and
their practice, that take upon them to be Councellers of state, to judge
civilly, as punish with imprisonment, etc. But this is disproved, and so the
former proved by these reasons.

1. That which our Savior Christ refused, because it belonged not unto him,
ruling and teaching the Church, that same is not lawful for any Ecclesiast.
person to do: But Christ refused to divide the inheritance, Luke 12.14. only
because he came to build a spiritual kingdom* for otherwise he being God, had
authority over all things: Therefore it is not lawful for Ecclesiastical
persons to be Judges of civil causes.

2. That which was forbidden the Apostles, is unlawful for every
Ecclesiastical Officer, for they were the chief under Christ, and had (after
a sort) all offices in themselves, until they could plant them in others: But
such dominion was forbidden them, as the Kings of the nations, and other civil
Magistrates have, Luke 22.28 which is, to rule civilly: Therefore they may not
exercise any civil authority.

3. If necessary duties are to be left, rather than our duties to the Church
should not be thoroughly discharged, then may not a Church Officer deal in
civil jurisdiction, which is less necessary unto him: But the former is true,
as appears by the words of Christ, to him that would have buried his father,
Luke 9.59.60. Therefore they may not exercise any civil authority.

4 If he that has an office must attend upon it, then may he not meddle in
another, for he cannot attend them both at once: But the former is true, Romans
12.7. Therefore may no Church Officer, meddle with temporal jurisdiction.

5 As the Soldier is in his warfare, so are Church officers, in the ruling of
Gods Church: But the Soldier entangleth not himself in the things of this
life, because they are of another nature to his warfare; which place Cyprian
alleges against a Minister, that became an Executor to his friends Will:
Therefore Church Officers may not meddle with Civill-officers, because they are
of another nature, then his calling.

6 Those things that in themselves are of contrary quality, cannot concur in
one subject: But the governments of the Church and commonwealth be such, not
only in this, that they are the next special members of one general, but
also, in that the one is spiritual, and the other temporal, the one
respects the soul, and the other the body. Therefore they cannot be in one
man together, and consequently, etc.

7 If the government of the Church, both in every particular man's office, and
in the general Eldership, be a matter of great weight, and the ability of man,
very small in every good action, then may not a Church Officer meddle in
another calling, whereby he is made less able to discharge his duty: But the
former is true, as all men may see, that look into the Word of God, what is
required of such men, and know by the same Word, the manifold infirmities and
untowardnesse of man: Therefore the latter must needs be true also.

8 If the Apostles (who were the most able of all others) found themselves
unfit for two offices, which were both Ecclesiastical; then is the best
Church-governour unfit for two, which be of more difference one from another,
as be the government of the Church and commonwealth: But the former is true, as
appears, Act. 6.2. Therefore the latter must needs be true also.

9 That which we justly reprove in the Papists, must needs (if we do like) be
found more unlawful and intolerable in our selves: But we justly reprove the
Papists, for having in their hands both the swords, that is, the
Ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction: Therefore it is more intolerable being
found in any of us.

10 If it be lawful for an Ecclesiastical person, to exercise the office of
the civil Magistrate, then (on the contrary) it is lawful for the civil
Magistrate, to exercise the offices of Ecclesiastical persons, for there is as
good reason for the one, as the other* But the latter is unlawful; for who
would like of any L. Major, to step into the Pulpit and preach, etc. Therefore
the first is unlawful also.

11 They may not entangle themselves with worldly offices, Canon. Apost. cap.
80.
but attend upon their Ecclesiastical affairs.

12 None of the Clarks or Clergy, Council. Calced^ cap. 3. and 7.
shall receive any charge of those which are under age* the cause of that
decree, is there said to be, for that there were certain Ministers, that were
Stewards to Noblemen; and in the 7. Canon, that none of them should receive any
secular honors.

13 The Bb. shall only attend unto prayer, 4. Council. Carth. ca. 20.
reading and preaching.

14 He brings diverse reasons to prove, Calvin. Instit. li. 4. ca. 11. sect 9.
Beza. confes^. ca. 5. sect. 32. and 42.
that Bb. may neither usurp, nor take (being offered unto them) any civil
office.

15 He shows how the offices are to be distinguished, and in what sort it is
said, that the Fathers dealt in the things of this life, and how the corporal
punishments by the Apostles were particular and extraordinary.

16 When both the offices meet in one man, P. Martyr upon Romans 1^.
the one hinders the other, so that he that exercises the one, cannot
minister the other.

17 There is no man so wise and holy, which is able to exercise both the
Civil, and Ecclesiastical power, Bucer upon Matthew. 5.
and therefore he that will exercise the one, must leave the other.

Therefore, if Christ refused to judge in temporal causes, because it belonged
not to his office; The Conclusion.
if civil dominion was forbidden the Apostles; if necessary duties are rather
to be left undone, then our diligence in the matters of the Church should be
lessened; if he that has an office, must attend upon it; if we may not be
entangled with any hindrance; if the Civil and Ecclesiastical functions, be
of contrary natures; if every office in the Church, be more then any one can
perfectly discharge; if the Apostles found themselves unfit for two offices of
like nature; if we justly reprove the Papists for their two swords; if a
Magistrate may not preach; if they may not meddle with worldly offices, nor be
tutors to Orphans, but attend only unto the ministry of the word, etc. if
they may neither usurp, nor take (being offered) any civil office; if they be
to be distinguished to several persons, or else one hinders the other;
lastly, if none be able to execute both, then must it needs follow, that
Ecclesiastical officers may not bear civil offices: and consequently the
office of the Church Government, is mere Ecclesiastical.

Their objections hereunto be these.

1 Objection. It countenanceth and maintains Religion, to have civil
authority. Objections for Civil offices in Ecclesiastical persons.


Answ. It is (in deed) the Papists reason for their two swords, which M. Calvin
confuteth: Instit. book 4. cap. 11. sect. 9.

2 Obj^ction. It is good to punish vice by corporal punishment, that Gods Word
may be the better obeyed.

Ans. It is good to preach Gods Word to men that they may obey their Prince for
conscience sake; may the Magistrate therefore preach? we may not do every thing
that is good, but only that which is agreeable to our callings.

3 Object. Eli and Samuel, were both Priests and Judges.

Answ. They were extraordinary (for God separated those two offices in Moses,
and gave the one unto Aaron) and so was Eliahs killing of the false Prophets*
and Christ's whipping of the buyers and sellers out of the temple.

4 Object. Peter killed Ananias, therefore Bb. may have prisone.

Ans. It was by his word only, and not by any civil punishment, if they can
do the like* Peter's example will serve their tu^n^, if not, then must it be
(with the former) extraordinary.

CHAP. XVI.
THe placing and displacing of Church Officers, appertains unto the
Eldership. This is proved in the 7. chap. and their objections are there
answered for the first part, which is the placing: but the latter part is to be
cleared by some more reasons, because the Bb. do displace the best Ministers at
their pleasure, which is proved to be a most wicked action, by these reasons.

1 Those that are called unto the Ministry by the Lord from heaven, and
outwardly by the means of men, so long as they are blameless in doctrine and
conversation 1. Tim. 3.10. cannot be displaced* without heinous wickedness
against the manifest will of God: But such are the Ministers that the Bb. do
daily displace, as they confess themselves, when (even) in their sermons they
justify their doctrine, in saying that they differ only in outward rites; and
as their greatest enemies will say, when they are asked of such men's lives:
Therefore they cannot be displaced without great wickedness.

2 Those that are careful to discharge the duty of Gods Ministers, both in
teaching* and giving example to their flocks, cannot be displaced without great
impiety: Such are these Ministers, that are daily displaced, as appears by
this, that they preach more diligently then any other, and that they follow not
the course of the world, in adding living unto living, but many of them (being
as worthy for their gifts, as the worthiest) live poorly, rather then they
will want the comfort of a good conscience: Therefore they cannot be put to
silence without great sin.

3 To deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort, is a grievous and
horrible wickedness: To put such to silence as are before mentioned, is to
deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort: which if any man will deny,
all the godly where such a one dwells, shall tell him he lies: Therefore to
displace such Ministers, is a heinous and horrible wickedness.

4 That which gives occasion to the weak to stumble and fall away from the
Gospel, is a heinous and horrible sin: But such is the displacing of those
Ministers, as appears by this, that many doubt whether that which he has
taught be true, whom the professors of the Gospel do display, and by this, that
many who had made good beginnings, by the discontinuance of their teachers, do
fall away: Therefore to displace those Ministers, is a heinous and horrible sin.

5 Those whose labors God does bless, cannot be displaced without fighting
against God, and consequently great impiety: But such are th^se Ministers that
the Bb. do daily displace, as all that love the Gospel in every country can
witness: Therefore to displace them is great impiety.

6 That action which gives the common enemy just cause to rejoice, and hope to
get the victory, is a heinous and horrible offense: But such is the displacing
of those Ministers, as appears in every country, where such Ministers are
displaced, and such enemies do dwell: Therefore to displace such, is a heinous
and horrible offense.

7 That action that causes the doers thereof to be esteemed enemies to the
Gospel, must needs be a heinous sin: But such is the putting of those Ministers
to silence, for it makes the people that have any love to Religion, think that
they are not of God in so doing, for, say they, he that loves Christ, cannot
cross the course of the Gospel as these men do: therefore the displacing of
them is a heinous sin.

8 That which lets in more wickedness at once, then the diligent preaching
of the Word could drive out in diverse years, must needs be a heinous sin: but
such is the displacing of these Ministers: for, profaning of the Sabbath, and
all disorder, comes into a congregation the same day that such a Minister,
that has long labored against it is displaced, as experience in such places
proves: therefore to displace such Ministers is a heinous sin.

9 That which interrupteth the course of the Gospel, without warrant either
from Gods Word, or the Laws of the land, is a heinous and horrible sin: Such is
the displacing of those Ministers, as is proved in all the writings on our
side; and lastly, in the answer to D. Bridges: therefore to displace such
Ministers, is a heinous and horrible sin.

Therefore if the Ministers that be usually displaced, be called of God; The
Conclusion.
if they discharge the duty of good Ministers, both in doctrine and life; if
the displacing of them, be to deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort;
if it give occasion to some to doubt of the Gospel, and to fall away; if God
give a blessing unto their labors; if the displacing of them give the enemy
matter to rejoice, and hope to overcome; if it c^^se the displacer^ to be
esteemed enemies to the Gospel; if it let in more wickedness in one day, then
preaching can throw out in many years; if it interrupt the course of the
Gospel, without warrant either from the Word of God, or Laws of the Land; th^n
must it needs follow, that the displacing of those Ministers is a most heinous,
and horrible sin against the Lord.

CHAP. XVII.
THe Eldership is to admonish every one, by whom offense appears unto them to
grow in the Church: There is no question between us, about admonition it self,
but this they deny, that the execution of any discipline (and therefore of this
point) belongs unto the Eldership; which point is proved in the several
Chapters going before: so that I need not say any thing of this, saving with (a
reason or twain) to show the necessity and benefit of it in the Church of God.

1 That which private men offended, are commanded to seek unto for the redress
of the offender, is a necessary, and an ordinary way for the amendment of
them that do offend in the Church of God: But such is the admonition of those
that are in authority, and carry the name of the Church, Matthew. 18.15. see
chap. 14. and the 1. proposition of the same: Therefore admonition in such
cases by the Eldership, is a necessary and ordinary way, for their amendment
that do offend.

2 That which is more available to bring the offender to repentance, than
private admonition* either by one, or more, that same is very profitable and
necessary in the Church of God: But such is the public admonition by the
governors of the Church, as appears by this, that Christ makes it a
remedy, when the other two will not prevail, Matthew. 18.15. Therefore it is
very profitable and necessary in the Church of God.

3 That which makes men more afraid to offend, then an^ admonition that
private men can give, is profitable and necessary in the Church of God: But
such is the Eldership, before whom men know they shall be brought if they do
not amend: Therefore it is very profitable and necessary in the Church of God.

4 That which has a greater promise to do good, then private admonition, is
very necessary in the Church of God: But such is the admonition that is given
by the Eldership, because it prevails when the former does not: Therefore it
is profitable in the Church of God.

5 That without which, all duties of charity cannot be exercised toward
sinners, is needful to be in the Church of God: But without admonition by the
Eldership, all duties of charity cannot be exercised toward sinners:
Therefore it is needful to be in the Church of God.

6 That which would bridle the outrageous sins of some, and keep in the
derision and mockery, that private admonitions do receive, is needful to be
in the Church of God: But this would admonition by the Eldership do; for if men
knew that they should answer unto the Church for their ill dem^^nour, to them
that rebuke them for sinning* they would refrain (at least for fear) from such
kind of outrage: Therefore it is needful to be in the Church of God.

The Conclusion.
Therefore seeing public admonition before the Eldership is to be sought, by
those that are offended, and cannot be satisfied; seeing it is more available
then private admonition; seeing it makes men more afraid to offend; seeing it
has a greater promise; seeing without it all duties of charity, cannot be
exercised toward the sinner; lastly seeing it would bridle the outrageous sins
of many; therefore it must needs follow, that it is very profitable, and
necessary to be in the Church of God.

CHAP. XVIII.
THose that be not reclaimed from their faults by admonition, are by the
Eldership to be suspended from the Lords Supper, or being officers of the
Church, from the execution of their office, until they do either give good
testimony of their amendment, or just cause to be further proc^^ded against.
Neither is there any controversy betwixt them and us, about this point; saving
that (as in the former) they will deny it to appertain to the Eldership, which
is proved before. I will therefore (for their understanding that desire
direction in the truth) first, show that it is a course that has warrant in
the Scripture^; secondly, that it is of very profitable use in the Church of
God: the first is thus proved.

1 Whatsoever is enjoined, as a duty to be done by every Christian, if he
leave it undone, Suspention warranted by the Word, being upon such grounds as
the Word sets down.
he is to be compelled by the governors of the Church to do it, Luke 14.17.23.
But if a man's brother have any thing against him, and he make no conscience to
leave his gift there, and be first reconciled, Mat. 5.24. he is to be compelled
to do it: Therefore separation from the Lords Supper is warra^ted by the Word.

2 If that commandment of Christ, Matthew. 7 5. give not that which is holy unto
dogs, can neither be properly understood of them, that were never of the
Church, nor them that be excommunicated; then it is a warrant for such
separation of the unworthy, and consequently, that separation is warranted in
the word: But the former is true, as appears by this, that the meanest of the
Jews did know, that holy things belonged to neither of them, and so the
commandment had been needless: Therefore suspention is warranted by the Word.

3 If there be sinners that are not to be excommunicated, and yet it were
offensive to give them the Lords Supper, then is this course warranted by the
Word, for else should Christ have left his Church destitute of direction, in
common and usual difficulties, which is proved in the first chapter to be
otherwise: But such s^^ners there are as the notorious sinner repenting; men
mainly suspected of notorious transgressions, etc. Therefore suspention has
his warrant in the word.

4 The course that God prescribed in the shadow, for corporal purifyings, must
in the body (in respect of the substance) be observed in the spiritual
clensing of every member of the Church: But many were separated from the
public sacrifices for a season, by reason of their corporal uncleanness,
who, yet were not worthy to be excommunicated* Therefore must also some be kept
from the Lords Supper for a season, who yet appear not so hainously to have
sinned, as to deserve excommunication.

5. The Church cannot without great offense, suffer one that has fallen into
some open sin, or that is vehemently s^spected, to have hainously offended,
continue in the administration of any public function: But the Church cannot
justly displace such a man at the first, making show of repentance, or standing
upon his purgation: Therefore he must be separated for a time.

6. That which was commanded under the Law to be done to the Priest, that was
unclean in body, or suspected to be a Leaper; that same must much more under
the Gospel, be done unto the Minister, or other Church Officer, that has
sinned, or is suspected to have committed a great sin. But such a Priest was
to be separated from offering of sacrifices for a certain time: Therefore much
more must the like be done to a Church Officer in the like case.

The Conclusion.
Therefore, if the Church be to compel a private man to do his duty; if, give
not holy things to dogs, be understood of them within the Church; if there be
sinners that cannot without offense be admitted to the Lords Supper, and yet
deserve not excommunication; if for corporal uncleanness under the Law, they
were to abstain a certain time; and if the church cannot without great
offense, suffer him that has committed an open sin (though he repent) or
that is vehemently suspected of a notorious sin, continue in the execution of
his office, until the congregation be satisfied; Lastly, if the Priest that
was unclean, or suspected of leprosy, might not offer sacrifices: then is it
plain, that both the separation of some men from the Lords Supper, and other
from the execution of their public function for a time; is a thing warranted
by the word of God.

The us^ of suspention profitable in the Church.
The latter part, which is that this kind of suspention has a profitable use
in the Church of God, is thus proved.

1. That which keeps the godly in more careful obedience, and keeps in the
hypocrites, that they break not out, is very profitable for the Church of God:
But such is the use of the separation from the Lords Supper, and from executing
public function in the Church: Therefore it is profitable in the Church of God.

2. That which removes (even) the appearance of offense, from the Church of
God, is very profitable for the same: But such is the separation: Therefore it
is profitable for the Church of God.

3. That which declares unto the world, that the Church of God is careful to
practice that which it professes, is very profitable: But such is this
separation, for it shows that they cannot away with ungodly life; no, not
among themselves: Therefore it is profitable for the Church of God.

4. That which gives occasion to the church, to be exercised in the actions of
Religion, with more sound comfort, is profitable for the same: But such is this
separation, for every one shall see thereby, the unworthy (for whose sakes, God
might be angry with them all, Josh. 7.11.) weeded from among them: Therefore it
is profitable for the Church of God.

5. That which is a special means to procure the Lord (in mercy) to continue
his Word unto his Church, is profitable for the same* such is this separation;
for it is a notable means to keep men in obedience to that which they profess:
Therefore it is profitable for the Church of God.

Therefore, if separation of the known or suspected sinner, The Conclusion.
from the Lords Supper, and such a Church officer from the execution of his
public function, do keep men in obedience that be godly, and restrains
hypocrites from outrage; if it remove the very appearance of evil; if it let
the world see, that the Church labors to practice that which it does
profess; if it make every member of the Church to be exercised in the actions
of Religion, with greater comfort; lastly, if it be a special mean to procure
the Lord in mercy, to continue his Word; then must it needs follow, that it is
of very profitable use unto the Church of God.

CHAP. XIX.
WHen neither admonition, nor suspention will serve to reclaim the offender,
but that it does appear, that he abides in impenitency, and is incorrigible,
the Eldership, after mature deliberation, and commending of the party unto the
prayers of the Church (he yet remaining obstinate) is to proceed to
excommunication: which contains these propositions in question betwixt us and
the Bb.

1. It may not be done, but upon great and weighty occasion.

2. It may not be done by any one man, but by the Eldership, the whole Church
consenting thereunto.

The former is holden by us, T. C. 1 Book, page 183. Discip. Eccles. 130. and
denied by them in their practice, that send it out (many times) for not paying
of six pence. But our assertion is thus proved, and their godless practice
disproved.

The proof of the first proposition.
1. That which Christ has ordained for the last remedy against sin, and only
to be used when neither admonition, reprehension, nor separation from the
external communion of the Saints for a time will serve; that same is not to be
used, but upon great extremity: But such is excommunication, as appears,
Matthew. 18.15. Therefore it may not be used, but upon most weighty occasion,
that is, in the case (only) of extremity, when no other means will serve the
turn.

2. That which cutteth a man off from the Church of God, and gives him over
unto Satan, as one in a desperate case, that same may not be used, but in
greatest extremity: But such is excommunication, being used according as God
has left it unto his Church, 1 Cor. 5.5. Therefore it may not be used, but in
greatest extremity.

3. That which a man will do in the cutting off, of his hand or his foot, that
same must the Church do, in excommunication; for it is the cutting off, of a
member: But a man will try all other ways, and will never cut off his hand or
his foot, until he see it incurable, and ready to infect the other parts of
his body: Therefore excommunication may not be used, but in case of greatest
extremity.

4. That which is contrary to natural affection, and works that which a
loving heart does tremble to think of; that same may not be done, but in
greatest extremity: But such is the excommunication, for it depriveth the
party excommunicated of our love, and throws him into the most wretched case,
that can be fall unto man in this life: Therefore it may not be done, but in
cases of greatest extremity.

Therefore, if excommunication be ordained of Christ, as a remedy, only when
all other helps will not serve; The Conclusion.
if it cut the party from Gods Church, and give him over unto Satan; if it
must ^e proceeded unto, (...) a man does ^o the cutting off of his hand (...)
^oote; lastly, if it be a work contrary unto the natural affection of man,
and (...) that which a loving heart does tremble to think upon: then must it
needs follow, that it is to be proceeded unto, only in the cases of greatest
extremity, and af^^^ that all other means have been us^d* and do appear
not to (...).

The latter point (which is, The proof of the second proposition.
that excommunication may not (...) done by one man, but by the Eldership, the
whole Church consenting thereunto) is holde^ (...) as, T.C. book 1. page 183.
Discip. Ecclesiast. 130. etc. and denied by them, Whitgift, page 662. and their
continual practice; But our a^^e^tion is th^^ proved, and their opinion and
practice, found to be erroneous and ungodly.

1. That which Christ command^d to be done by the Church, may not be done by
one man, unless you take my L. Grace for the Church, (...) Whitgift does, page
662. which needs (...) confutation* But Christ commended that excommunication
should (...) done by the Church, Matthew. 18.15. Therefore it may not be done by
one man.

2. That which Paul enjoined the Church, when they were met together, to do,
may not be done by one man: But he commanded them (...) the incestuous person,
when they were met together, 1 Cor. 5.5. Therefore it may not ^^ done by one
man.

3. That which has need of greatest advice, and greatest authority, may no be
done by one man* But such is the matter of excommunication, being the
denouncing of that against a man, which he will most hardly believe, and being
the waightiest point of discipline: Therefore it may not be done by one man.

4. Those must excommunicate, that are to deal in the other parts of
discipline, as shall appear in the Reasons following, and (a^ I think) no man
will deny: But the other parts of discipline are exercised not by one, but by
the church, as has been proved: Therefore not one, but the Church is to
excommunicate.

5. As it was ministered among the Jews, so must it be in the Church forever;
which appears by this, that it is translated unto us from them (as the Greek
word Synedri^n, being by a corrupt imitation, called Sanedrim, by the Rabbis,
does import) and had nothing ceremonial in it: But it was executed among them
by the Church, and not any one, Joh. 9.22. Therefore the Church is to
excommunicate, and not one man.

Cyprian lib. 3. epist. 10.
6. Says, he would never do any thing in his charge, without the counsel of
his Elders, and consent of the people.

7. The Elders, and other Church Officers, have as well power to absolve,
Epist. 14.
as the Bishop.

Epist. 19.
8 For so much as absolution belongs unto all, I alone dare not do it.

Tertul. Apol. cap. 39.
9. If there be any that have committed such a fault, that he is to be put away
from the partaking of the prayers of the Church, etc. There do bear rule,
certain of the most approved Ancients or Elders of the Church, which have
obtained this honor, not by money, but by good report.

August lib. 3. cont. epist. per^^^.
10. It helps much to make the party more ashamed, that he be excommunicated
by the whole Church: also in his Books of Baptism, against the Donatists often.

Jerome. ad Demetriad. Epist. 1. Bucer de regro Christi lib. 1. cap. 5^.
11. The Elders have interest in other censur^s of the Church, and the Church it
self in excommunication.

12. S. Paul accuses the Corinthians* for that the whole Church had not
excommunicated the incestuous person.

13. The Elders had the government in excommunication. P. Martyr in 1 Cor. 5.


14. It is very dangerous to permit so weighty a matter to one man, and
therefore that tyranny may be avoided, The same upon the same place.
and this censure executed with greater fruit and gravitie, the order that the
Apostle there uses, is still to be observed.

15. He shows that it pertains not to one man, Calvin Instit. lib 4 cap.
11. sect. 6.
that it is a wicked fact that one should take the authority to himself, that
is common to others; that it opens a way to tyranny; takes from the Church
their right, and abrogateth the Ecclesiastical Senate, ordained by Jesus
Christ.

16. The Bishops, Chap. 12. sec^* 6
when they excommunicated of themselves alone, did it ambitiously, contrary to
the decrees of godly Cannons: See Bucer against Gropper, and upon Ephesians. 4. De
animi C^ra, also Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.

17. It is plentifully forbidden (even) by that filthy puddle, the cannon law,
See Abstract. page 165.
and therefore it must needs be a heinous sin, when it finds fault with it.

Therefore, The Conclusion.
if excommunication be to be executed (by the commandment of Christ) of the
Church; if S. Paul enjoined it unto the Church; if it have need of greatest
advice and authority; if it belong to them that may execute the other parts of
Discipline; if it was so executed among the Jews; if to absolve, be as well in
the Elders power, as the Bishops; if Cyprian durst not do it alone; if it was
the action (in Tertullians time) of the most approved Elders; if to be by the
whole Church, helps much to make the party more ashamed, if the whole Church
have interest in it; if the whole Church at Corinth was reproved, for not doing
it; if it be too weighty a matter for one man; if the executing of it by one,
overturneth the order appointed by Christ; brings in tyranny; maintains
ambition; and lastly, be forbidden by the cannon law it self. Then must it
needs follow, that it belongs not unto one man to excommunicate, but unto the
Eldership, and that with the consent of the whole Church.

Their Objections hereunto in defense of their own practice, be these:

1. Objection. The right of excommunication, was in S. Paul, and not in the
rest.

Answer. He gave only direction in that, as in all other matters, which he
wrote of unto them, but if they had not thrown out the incestuous person, he
had remained still unexcommunicated, for all that which S. Paul had said unto
them.

2. Objection. Christ gave Peter and every Apostle power to bind and loose in
earth and in heaven, which Interpreters expound by Matthew. 18.15.

A^^wer. That power was of denouncing Gods judgments* or pronouncing his mercy
in preaching, and not of this action: they are expounded one by another,
because of the ratifying of them both in heaven alike.

3. Objection. Paul did excommunicate Hymeneus and Philetus.

Answer. That is, being moderator of the action, he pronounced it, not that he
did it alone; The same answer, is to be made unto the Fathers, as Ambrose, etc.
who are said to excommunicate.

The Conclusi^n of the w^^le b^^ke.
Therefore, upon these grounds of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, Emperors,
Laws, Histories, new Writers, and clear light of reason. I conclude, that
Chap. ^.
Christ has prescribed unto us an exact, and perfect platform of governing
his Church at all times, and in all places; which is this, Chap. 1^. and 11.
that there ought to be no Ministers of the Word, but pastors and teachers,
which are to be Chap. 4.
called by the people, and Chap 7.
ordained by the Eldership, are of Chap 10.
equal authority in their several Congregations, must Chap. 10.
with all faithful diligence employ themselves, in the Ministry of the Word
and Sacraments, Chap. 12.
that there are to be in every Congregation certain Elders, whose office is to
oversee the behavior of the people, and assist their Pastor, in the
government of the Church; Chap. 13.
also Deacons, who are to be employed only in receiving, and bestowing the
liberality and goods of the Church to the relief of the poor* and other
necess^ry uses: Chap. 14
Lastly, that there must be in Congregation an Eldership of pastor, teacher
(if they can have any) and Elders, who are in common, to see that the Church be
well governed, not only in maintaining the profession and practice of the Word
in general, Chap. 17.
but also in admonishing, reprehending, or Chap. 18.
separating from the Lords Supper, them that walk offensively; and Chap. 1^.
lastly, in excommunicating them, that by no other means can be reclaimed. So
that all and every government, contrary or besides this, whether in part or in
whole, swarveth from that order, which Christ has set down in his Word, and
therefore is unlawful.

FINIS.

