13 clergymen sitting around a table C. di Fionnza. ^3m^zifio di Barbarini.
Antonio di Barbarini.
Tutto ^ta mal;


THE PASSIONATE Remonstrance Made by his Holiness in the Conclave at ROME:
Upon the late proceedings, and great Covenant of Scotland, etc.

With a reply of Cardinal De Barbarini in the name of the Roman Clergy.

Together with a Letter of Jntelligence from the Apostolic Nuntio (now
residing in London) to Pope Urban the 8.

Ridentem dicere verum nil vetat. Printed at Edingborough. 1641.

To the Author his well-beloved Friend.
SPrings nigh their Source into a brook extended
Prove Rivers great before their course be ended.
Flowers which their beauty in the bud have show'n
Are found much fairer when they are fully blow'n
The Lions paw, a Lions whelpe descries;
The great Alcides in his Cradle tries
The Combat; And confounding his Assailour,
Gives a Heroic Presage of his Valor.
Thy Spring, Bud, Paw; This Cradle-Master-peece,
Say, thy Ripe Age, shall yield a Golden fleece.
Sub Foed. Sp.

In gratiam Auctoris.
NVlla Cupressus adest, dempta hic de Culmine Pindi est
Laurus in Auctoris danda Corona Comam.
Non opus est Elegis in funere Praesulis, ipsa
Melpomene querulum nil tacitura sonat:
Gratior huic Musae mage dia Urania, and illi
Basia Castalio mista liquore dedit:
Hinc, Velut Alcides Clavo, plura horrida monstra,
Hic Vates calamo nobiliore necat.
Ma^e fo^^ decus Arcto^, nam funere ab isto
Vita perenna tibi, fama perennis erit.
DURAEUS:

De Aureo Libello.
MEllea quam sit res oration, quamque rotundo
Agmine decurrat, blando glomerata susurro;
Quam veneranda novo nunc verrat syrmate terram,
Nunc sublime volans caput inter nubila condat,
Aspectus fugiens terrena mole gravatos;
Quam rapido torrente fluat, quam Suada venusta,
Quam modulis numerosa suis facundia praeceps
Abripiat celeri mentes super astra volatu,
Audieram dudum: prius at non cognita Pythus
Eximia and virtus and blandimenta fuere,
Ante oculos donec dederat Scintillula flammam,
Claramque ingentemque simul; quae and purior illa
Quam praebere solet Phoebus de vertice coeli.
Quae simul emicuit, concusso vertice coelum
Intremuisse putes, talesque dedisse sonores,
Quales Pythagorae finxere oracla renati;
Angelica aut credas fudisse choreumata cantum,
Cantum, quale melos mulsit terramque polumque
Cum cecinere Dei pueri praeconia, lauds
Et cecinere hominis de aeterno patre perennis,
Sponte sua in terras qui coelo lapsus ab alto,
Vt posset miserans coeli reparare ruinas,
Et nos mortales superas attollere ad arces.
At nonnulla meam subit admiratio mentem,
Qui potis Angelicas infernus reddere voces?
Ni lateant furtim dulci sub melle venena:
Sed latet, and gelidum sorbent cum melle venenum
Aurea qui Scorti Babylonis pocula sugunt.
V. A.

De Vate, Authore Libelli.
OMnia Samariae regi narravit Elisha,
Quae Syrus occulta gesserat in camera:
Scotorum regi hic vates arcana revelat,
Papanae celat quae penetrate domus,
Elisham Syrii, vatem hunc papana requirant
Agmina, sed pariles par quoque poena premet:
Papanis pariter Syriisque scotomate caesis
Lucida pro tenebris spicula solis erunt.
V. A.

In gratiam charissimi sui amici.
PRaesulis Invisi jam infamis fama superbit
Authoris Genio splendidiore coli.
Strata jace^ prorsus tam insurgens gloria, nulla
Gente Caledonia nom^nis umbra foret;
Si non hic vates celebrasset funera, Papam
Illius Ambrosio dum facit ore loqui.
Foecundo ingenio certat facundia linguae,
Nobile materiam sic superavit opus.
Materies Praesul te indigna est: praestat amatae
Vraniae Roseis basia far genis;
Aonidum immortale decus, tibi serta parantur
Laurea, temporibus non peritura tuis.
Inferiae tantae mittent per saecula famam
Dum super aethereo volvitur axe Polus.
Jo. Morus.

On the same.
THy dear Urania fits thy soaring Quill
To nothing that is below the Artick Waine:
How comes it then that with such pretty skill
Thou do decipher Romes infernal Train?
It Is that she may from Thee make spring a Rod
To whip the Prelates, and their Mitred God.
She Will spare some time (to thy Immortal praise,)
To Ironize upon their damned Plot
For thy Refreshment, that with purer Lays
Thou may her sound from thy melodious throat:
How can thy Muse, but choose to be divine,
When sweet Vranias lips in-Nectar thine?
Io. More.

To his ever most esteemed friend, the Author.
THis Pope here lim'd is said to flourish fair
In his Nurse Idiome and the Latin Tongue:
But here is the wonder, that a Sprit so young
Should blow him North to breathe our Native Air,
And personate his speech, as here is show'n,
That he and his Impostors must admire
His Raptures and embellisht grief to hear
Powered forth in sweeter accents, nor his own.
It He and all his Consistoriall Train
Had in a Lymbick all their Brains distilled,
It would out-reach their skill, thus to have filled
Those sugared Pages with so rare a Strain
Of flowred speeches, so this Generous Spark,
Has made a light to shine throughout the dark.
Da. Prymrose. J. C.

To his all-beloved and hopeful friend the Author of this Book.
THou hills so sweetly, with thy darrest words,
With powerful lightnings, and two-edged swords
Which thou elances from thy thundering pen
That those who challenge over souls of men
A tyranny, must humbled all forbear
To reach thy Garlands, or attain thy Sphere:
All other relishes like aloes be
Compared with those sweet flowers which here we see,
Thine high-bred Quill, which breathes so gentle fire,
Drink with Elixar of Castalian Ire,
Proclaims the honor of the Graces love;
But most thy sweet Urania, like a Dove
Fraught with her purer raptures, does take pleasure
To nurse thee with the influence of her treasure,
Yet here is but a flash; What can be said,
When this Aurore her full beams has displaid?
T. C.

The Author to Zoilus.
BUt spare to martyr Ingenuitie,
Bold sons of Censure; Blessed be Authority,
I kiss the Scepters shade, and stand in aw
Rashly to dally with the Lions Paw.
It Is those base Tapers, whose Incendiarie breath
Stifles the purer Light, poisons to death
The nursing Raves of sacred Majesty,
And kills our love sick souls with Jealousy,
Which I blow at; Let Soveraigntie appear
The full delight of every Eye, and ear:
It Is those usurping spots, which do profane
The Moons sweet face, The Persians adored the Sun
her comely beauty stain,
I wish were wyp't away, and every Ray
Of Royal power, kiss't by Persian Ey.
THE PASSIONATE REmonstrance of the Pope in his Conclave at Rome, Upon the
disasterous disappointments given to the Roman cause, by the late proceedings
and great Covenant of SCOTLAND.
YOU that are the Light of the world, the Beauty of Truth and Zeal (Most holy
Assembly, to which the title of Candor does properly belong) You fathers of
Integrity, sons and heirs, as well of my Institutions, as Designs, whom my Holy
Benediction has erected to be the Ornament of the Church, throned in all
Catholicall graces; If natural compunction touch you truly, you have found how
your most dear Primitive Mothers heart, has received a late Wound from the
Adversaries, and how a number of Impostors are risen up, preaching a new
Sedition, and drawing her very Lifeblood, her blood of Honor from her sweet
tender Sides; The fearfullest Blow our Cause ever felt, the lowdest Tempest
that ever Heretical Schism could rouse, does now rage most furiously, and
threatens to pull up our Sacred Throne by the very roots; It has made S.
Peter's tremble, Shook the very Altars and Statues, and affrighted the ashes of
sleeping Popes: We have certainly gotten a Master-check, never felt extremity
like this; Amazement covers us, our infallible staff does fail us, and for
very fear our Mysterious Miter is turned Paralytick; Thick darkness dwells
upon this Hour: Integrity, like one of Heavens bright Luminaries, by Errors
dull Element interpose, suffers a black Eclipse; the Locusts of Hell are let
loose, and if they be not swept away, we may resolve to make Bone-fires of all
the Books of the Vaticane, and let all the Religious turn Knights errant; It
is to be feared (my Disciples) lest this newfangled Heresy, pervert Nations,
and Realms, to an open Revolt from our spiritual Scepter, and these
Innovators, spread over the world, cover the Earths face, and make dark the
land like Egyptian Grasshoppers.

The affront which our Holiness receives, does the more afflict Us, because it
comes from that Kingdom of Scotland, the most unfortunate and inconsiderable
Angle in the World, a people not worthy to be beloved nor sought after: Yet our
conscience bears Us witness, how affectionatly we have offered unto them our
Apostolical Embracements, but they hated to be reformed. And to the end that
rebellious Nation, might be brought under, You know, how I have most
laboriously bestirred the strength of Machiavell, and diligently solicit
Jgnatius subtilties, who, like a glittering serpent with his resplendent
Poisons, can most divinely creep into the very Souls of the most impregnable
Commonwealths and teach them how to derive Life and Motion from Us; What great
proofs we have had of their dexterities in such Convoys, the whole Christian
World can this day bear record; how nimbly likewise those Emissaries,
(fraughted with the same Excellencies) went about the great work called The
possession of the World, to make it Ours, you have learned by the informations
of our Secretaries, and addresses of our Nunncio's, and may likewise judge by
the Records of the Articles and assurances which they duly dispatch from these
parts. The continual Current of that Primates Intelligence, who for his active
zeal deserves well to be called, The Genius of the distressed Church in
England, did sweetly refresh our longing souls with glad tidings, and
conceived fair Hopes in our Hearts. We have justly ripened him with the beams
of our favor, and we must all confess, that howsoever We laid our Commands
both thick and fast upon him, his allegiance notwithstanding was ever devoted
to Us in a boundless obedience, the humblest, yet mightiest of all filial
duties; full well he knew the language of my Intent, and moved by my
Sanctimonious breath, He has propined most abundantly to that Nation (and I
hope effectually too) (for the business of the Universal Monarchy went well
on, I saw it in an Egyptian Glass) the most Pure Waters which run from the
threshold of S. Peter's Sanctuary: Which makes this good Ghostly Father, amongst
those yet unhallowed Heretics, to be branded as great and Prime Incendiary of
all Christendom, who with the French Cardinal, tosseth Kingdoms like
Tenisbals: We heard he can negotiat most handsomely, and factiously, with
pleasant subtilty, and bewitching Courtship, abuse the Infatuate State with
delight; He muzles the barking Tonguemen of the Time; and as cunningly as ever
the Florentine Monster could poison the fairest Commonwealth of Europe with his
Politics, so has he most Episcopally exalted our Church Hierarchy, and
established a Spiritual Government there, and now happily, advanced the
opinion of our Glory, to that Eminency, that the two Tutelar Angels of
Cambridge and Oxford, stick not almost to maintain the Myter, of equal
dignity with the Scepter; Nay, so good proficients were they in his
Apostolical Canons, Two Germain brethren; the one whereof maintained the Popes
honor above the Emperor: the ^ther sustained the Emperors dignity above the
Popes: whereupon they fought, and the one killing the other, their quarrel was
spread throughout all Italy.
that as boldly durst they kick against the one, as spurn at the other: Thus
were we hopeful to see the old quarrel of the Gwelfes, and Gibellines,
inflame the swords of Potentates, and die the Copes of English Cardinals, with
the blood of Heretics. For the course which he ran, seemed to be infallible, as
the prophecies of the old Testament, immovable as Fate, and tollerat by
Heavens connivance: And thus like a cunning Catholic, burning with zeal of the
great Cause, and desirous to bring that fatal, and Neighboring Nation under
our banner, and within the bosom of the Church Catholic, he fastened upon the
most promising and apparent means, which our Conclave could teach him, and put
the same to as assured execution, as if Ignatius spirit, had made Pythagoricall
Transmigration to his venerable brains For the truly Aequivocall Father of that
Church, with his Fellow Laborers, the Scottish Prelates, caused compyle a
Service book, (to the great service of our Church) wherein were most divinely
couched, the true Orthodox Tenets, of the Ancient, Apostolic, and Catholic
faith; but ever opposed by the Enemies of the Truth in that Land; And in this
Web of their composure, they had so ingeniously interlaced, (for though the
Generals were given out from Us, yet we committed the particulars to their own
discretion, respective in Times and States,) the sweet Embellishments of our
Art, and the Majesty and Decency of our Missall, that none could well discover
at the first glance, the girnes of our Holy Treason, by which we would have
surprised the Heretic Souls, nor the Mystery of the Work, unless they had
the benefit of Gregory the Great, and Bedaes Spectacles, or Calvines
Perspective, by which he saw the Antichrist say Mass within the walls of Rome.
S'il est vray peut bien est r^
And those Reverend Presbyters of these Northern Churches, who sought not
themselves, nor the glory of this present world, that they might elude the
People always jealous of Novations, and dally with Princes, they advocate
Authority, and caused animat the Book with the strong Influence of a Secular
power.

This drift walked a pace uncensured, never questioned but in thought, with a
whifle, or whisper, and what ever disappointment it has met with since, what
ever misfortun has stopped the current, and very spring of these Advancements,
and overflowings; it ought not to be imputed to that never-enough-deserving
Prelat who is of the true Champ, and perfectly sincere: But these other of
Scotland, who were but his (...), and Neophytes, have given a little weak
evidence of their good breeding in their profession. For the Politic
institutor had shown them the true and Catholic paths, and mounted them on the
Chariots of Dignity, and Power; But once elevate to a sphere too high, and not
able to sustain such happiness, Powder was not more ambitious when the match
met it, than their minds to mount: which emboldened them to press our holy
will, a little immaturely; Their preposterous zeal, blown up with
supererogation of obedience, did anticipate the maturity of our Designs, with
an unluckie discovery, to the eternal disaster of those Politicians, and
backsliding of the great Cause; Had they gone more softly, they had come more
swiftly to Rome; but (good souls) presuming on the fair Path of their meaning,
went a little rashly on, and brought within the wilderness of an Heretical,
though National Law, by some lines or words dropped unadvisedly out, did
innocently hurt the good Cause, and gave the Adversary advantage by it; Had
they with an insinuating distance, played a while with the Ear, and grop't the
Peoples minds, and found to what point their blood most inclined, and by
strong Episcopal reasons violented their souls; had they prepared them with
Purgatives, before they adhibited the Book of Missall, too strong for the
Puritanicall complexion of the Scots, this day we might have gone in
Procession, and sung Te Deum, whereas we now shrink under an abortive wound,
and are met to celebrate the Funerals of the most important Members of our
Church, and most considerable soldiers of that Northern Conquest. The sooner
they dispersed their Novations, and the more imperiously they urged obedience,
the sooner they hastened to the displaying of all, and loosed the fair
advantages of Times and Plots. If they had not tempted the Eye of Jealousy too
much, they should quickly have gained, no question, the Laics, Sons and
Daughters, of their meritorious Seducements.

But when before the fullness of Time, the Book pointed out his unknown head,
O how it was most profanely persecute, and how the sharp Invectives, like
points of spears have rent and discovered his bowels! It was abhorred as a
leprous brood, and every Parret in the Land was taught to rail reproaches, the
very Children to preach against it, and every mouth could most profusely vomit
forth his blasphemies. The uncatholical multitude, like the spectacled
inquisitors of Venice, durst pick out syllables of Heresy, against the
Canonical liberties of our Church Discipline; The Laicall Judgments durst
canvase the Mysteries of our Conclave, and question our Infallibility: But if
our Holiness had doubted their skill in cheating of souls; If we had not
thought they had been more Spaniolized Gamesters, We should have taught them
the Times and secrets of State, and wrought out our Holy purposes more softly,
and at length found means to make the^ swallow it over as greedily, and with as
implicit obedience, as ever the Turks did their Alcoran: but we thought, it
was no matter of difficulty to reconcile that silly Lunatic Church with ours,
especially since they began to have a Communion of words with Us, and used
familiarly that Idiome, which once heard of before amongst them, would have
made a whole Churchfal a swound, so much did we confide the continual
assurances of our Attourneyes amongst them as the Cabinet of my Intelligences
can well instruct: And therefore our diseased Prelates would have done well,
sometimes to have thrown into the peoples Ears, out of Pulpits, the authority
of Councels, and gilded over the Rudeness of their Pillules with the Homilies
of Fathers; yet faithful souls, we know their Intentions were merely and
purely Catholicall; but the affectionat passion to approve themselves
obsequious to our Holy desires, made them prove too Herculean, that offered to
strangle Serpents in their Craddles; for sooner could the Segniory of Geneva,
embrace the Missall, and the abject Valdenses assent to our Supremacy, than
that cursed Crew, could be moved to welcome that book of Reformation, which we
out of our Holy and Fatherly care, as supreme Head of the Church on Earth,
conceived to be the Sovereign way to convey the beams of our purity, through
the darkness of those Islands: but they had al drunk in such a Mortal dislike
against it, as no authority was able to restrain the strong inward thoughts of
the disloyal subjects, and the hot murmurings, from coming to outward
Resistances, which all the Ecclesiastical Canons could not beat down, nor
Secular power overcome; Thus being a People without wisdom, given over to the
spirit of Delusion, and Heresy, which wrought most powerfully in them, and
laying aside all subjection of their Execrable wills and judgments, infected
with that Leprosy which they sucked from the Arch-enemies of the Truth, with an
Immovable Resolution, they combine against their own Anointed, and those
likewayes whom by the Oil of Punity we have consecrate to be the Bishops of
their Souls; And not knowing the principles of Implicit Obedience, they begin
to sift those undoubted Verities, which are as old as the Sun and Stars,
and do arraigne our Catholic Apostolic Truths, before their Tribunal,
where our Venerable Clergy (being the Character of our own Image) in whose
hands we have absolutely put the Reigns of Ecclesiastical and Secular
Government, must stand to their determination, and wait upon the discretion of
an usurped and Heretical Censure. O high Impiety! The last of all Nations,
(whose Revenues could hardly afford Us Oil to our Sallads,) Is it to them we
owe account of our Infallible ways? Shall not they take of our Hands, which
Multitudes, Nations, People and Tongues, more regarded by Heavens than they,
have kindly accepted? Shall they refuse to drink of that Cup wherewith we have
inebriat the powers of the World?

No, Counselors and Rulers of the Earth, though hitherto we have sailed with a
very prosperous wind, and were hopeful to arrive at the Port of our Desires,
yet now certainly our Designs seem to be scattered by a Thing which they
call, a COVENANT, Hinc dolor lachrymae.
even as the fired Ship put in, severed the Fleet in the 88. For when this
black Heresy had displayed the Ensigns of that Covenant, then whole
Squadrons, Legions, and Numbers of Heretics, like Frogs, were so espoused in
their Souls to the devotion thereof, that sooner might you blow away the light
from the Sun, than pull them from their Covenant, or work up their festered
Judgments to right reason. This accursed Covenant, the King of all Monsters in
Religion (which is able to make all other Monsters to be unadmired, and draw
all number to this only) out of whose womb, like the Trojane Horse, are like
to come a furious Crew of Undaunted Heretics to brash the walls of Rome) gives
name to a Sect, which no Nation ever heard of, and if we were to translate, we
could not find a word to express the same in any Language, The strength of
our confidence and life of our hopes, all those rank insinuations and alluring
snares wherewith we had enlived, and informed that Book of Service, like a
Serpent has got his Head bruised with a bolt shot from that Covenant, Nature
seems to debar us of all means of help, and if the sublimated Inventions of
our policies, could serve to restore, yet fortune likewayes seems to thunder
all, and threatens to shiver our Machinations; for out of the Gates of Hell do
all the Infernal powers rush like a River, whose current cannot be stopped, and
who can stay their course? Indeed as the God of Truth in all the Exigencies of
the Church, does stir up the spirit of truth, to vindicat his purity from the
aspersions of the wicked, who love Darkness better than Truth, so have we found
a most gracious and true witness amongst themselves; for their own
Countreyman (in whom all courtly and Catholicall graces do reign and throng
most eminently) has with a very good success, un brave homme tout a faict,
and miroir qui ne flat point.
drawn his victorious and triumphing Pen against them and their Covenant, We
had sufficient hopes that his Magnifick MANIFESTO should have curbed the
Insolences of these phanatick Covenanters, laid open their shame to the World,
or restored their diseased Judgments; But he has fallen so many Bows short
of his Reforming Intentions, that like Oil thrown into the flame it has
begotten whole Generations of Covenanters, who will impeach the advancement of
our Kingdom, more then ever Mahomet, and his fellow Sergius did obscure
Boniface; Yet the man has put forth great strength of wit, his Reward does
most duly attend him, he must have some round preferment and corpulent
Dignity, that he may lead a Lordly life, Honor est praemium virtutis.
and rail at ease; We must let a Beam fall upon him, by which our Highness
uses to keep desert warm, and entertain the Life of a Holy Zeal to the great
Cause. Certainly he must be Exalted, a Masterpiece of Man, This may turn
Prophetical.
composed by Heavens for a great Princes favor, and Kingdoms Love: Exact
Envy cannot find a place, to stick a blot on person or fame; We do ordain
that never-enough admired-Book, the whip and shame of Covenanters, for the
Glory of his most doctorall indewments, and reverence of his loyal pains in
our Service, be translated in all Tongues and Languages, that his renown may
pass from one end of Heaven to the other; for truly he has most valiantly
stood in the Gap to hold out this Schism and Heresy from encroaching and
prevailing: But the practices of these Demoniaques are without exemple, and all
Language is too narrow to express their virulent and aculeat Humor; for they
have torn these Reverend names of Archbishops, Prelates, and Presbyters, which
ought to be used with Holy Ceremony. They have lybelled, arraigned, sentenced,
banished, and O I Am drunk with rage, that their Impiety might appear in its
perfect dye to all after-ages, they have Excommunicat the Right Reverend
Fathers in God. Sic erat in satis.
Now my Episcopal dignity lies panting at this Wound; Here Modesty suffers,
all that is Virtuous blushes, and Truths self like the Sun vexed with mist,
looks red with anger, Mine honor is cast off as the Olive shakes off her
flower; It is all swept away at one cast: My refined nostrils, do smell a
distracted hurry, great things are a-working either in Heaven or Hell: Here is
a State puzzell, this execrable Impudency has given a damnable check to our
Apostolic Designs; It has Damped up the way of our Catholic Stratagems:
And if our undaunted Power, with the help of our Sons, and Executioners, the
Princes of the Earth, do not obviat the Thunder cracks of this glorious
Ostentation, and ushering storm of Truths Triumph, it will certainly advance
with a shrewd Insolency to our own Throne, and confound the Glory of our great
Name: Nay, we may make our selves ready for perdition, lay by our Purple
Roabes, let Kings and Emperors return to their own Sacrilegious Possessions,
and drink in the honor of Martyrdom with open throat.

They have placed also Prophetical confidence in that their Covenant, as David
did in his little stone which he sunk in Goliahs brains, and do certainly
believe (such is the strength of the spirit of Delusion) that it shall prove
like Daniels stone, hewn out of the Mountain without hands, which filled the
Earth with the greatness thereof: We do not dissemble, but the fame of it
has made the whole members of our Hierarchy tremble and shiver. And if the
adjacent parts to the affected places be not timely anointed with the Baulme of
Gilead, which flows most luxuriously (both for our service and pleasure) from
all the Commonwealths of Europe, to our Cabinet, as the Center of their
Tribute; It may fortune to endanger the whole Body of the Church. For it is a
most usurping poison, mortally searching into all the Veins: We do not
esteem that desperate Church of Scotland, We abhor to waste a thought upon
that loss, which we value no more, than the Carbuncle which Clement the fifth,
transferring the Seat from Avignon, did lose by a fall from his Horse. But
these our holy Children, Paterns of Piety and Sanctity, the hope of our
Consolations in these Northern Islands, the Great Officers of our Church,
ordained before time to propagate the saving Light to a Land that dwelt in
darkness, these loyal and faithful Ministers of the Truth, who have devoted
their lives, and neglected the World for our service; these We do justly
bewail with our Apostolic tears: It cuts out hearts, that those Holy
Patriarchs, should have received the Crown of Martyrdom in so dangerous a
way; for now We do, as it were, stand over a Vault of Powder, where the Match
lies a-kindling below. And which is the bane of our grudgings, we begin almost
to apprehend, that the business of the Covenant shall prove a Leviathan
scandal, to lie rolling and troubling the crystal waters of other Nations
devotions, and to the English especially (which was wont to be our Puteus in
exhaustus) prove as great a stumbling block as the altars and Idols of Rome are
to the Jews conversion. Here is the true matter of grief, and here lies
equally engaged the life and state of our Church. These Tragedies will fill the
Adversaries mouths, and blow the Lutherans cheeks till they crack again: Now
the whole liberty of our Church does suffer, Perniciosa consilia plerumque in:
Authors redundant.
the Hope of absolute Monarchy begins to be Eclipsed; all things move
portentuously a strange way: For what ever gracious services, and worthy the
fair reverences of their places these Venerable souls have done, yet have they
nothing effectuat, but wrought out their own death, even as the blind Moall in
casting his ambitious hills up, is often taken and destroyed in the midst of his
advanced work. Thus while they were raising the Glory of the house of Candor,
they are suddenly thrown down, and their building levelled to the dust; And
that Iniquity might ruin them with a more plentiful confusion, Magni viri,
and been meriti de Republ. tandem obruuntur magnis procellis.
and waste the treasure of revenge upon their harmless Souls, they have
excommunicat them, and delivered them up to be buried under the heap of shame,
never to apear again.

Yet all peace be multiplied upon their most Episcopal Souls, We heartily
accept their unfeigned zeal, and pronounce them the well beloved Children of the
Roman Church, though they did not well know how to personate the business
entrusted to them* and work out the Salvation of the Cause with subtilitie and
patience. They ought not to lose their Souls in his Holiness service, though
they have spoiled their fortunes.
And here by the power given to Us from above, as the Universal Bishop of the
Catholic Church, We do absolve them from all dangers of such Impious
sentences gone forth against them, wherewith they would labor to stain the face
of Truth, which they call Excommunication; And upon the contrary, as really and
truly, as ever Constantine the great gave to Sylvester the City of Rome, with
the Territories thereof; so in all sincere profession, fatherly and effectual
love, do we most heartily bestow a free and plenarie Indulgence, for all their
Venial and Mortal sins, to their departed Souls, and ordain them by the
Authority of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to be related amongst the
number of Canonized, who have lost their life, for the liberty of our
Kingdom; And We do solemnly appoint days of Commemoration to be set apart,
wherein a Requiem to be chaunted in all the Cathedralls of our See to their
blessed Souls, though the whole Artezans of Italy should sterve; never had
the Calendar of Saints a more noble accession; never had the Adversaries more
just reason to erect Trophies upon our Disasters; Let the spirit of division,
of shame, and confusion, rage amongst them unmercifully. We do absolve that
Indocile People, from all oath of allegiance, and proclaim a free liberty, to
any Catholic King or Republic whatsoever, to invade that Kingdom securely.
That it may be Primi occupantis; For certainly we have as just reason to power
out the Phialls of our Indignation, and fulminate our extorted Excommunication,
against both Prince and People, as ever Alexander the third our Predecessor of
holy memory had, when he excommunicat his stubborn Vassal, Henry the second
of England, and brought his Royal and haughty pride to that ebb, that he was
constrained to receive his Crown and Confirmation thereof from Us.

But what? (Invincible Soldiers in our spiritual warfare) though there be a
deadly overthrow given to our best Resolutions; Though the King of that scurvie
Covenanting Land, like a Lion Rampant, with a daring courage, hold out his
inexorable sword for the advancement of that fatal Reformation (as they call
it) though those wanton Heretics do now insupportably insult to see him an
arrant Covenanter, and glory more therein the^ all the Gold of India; though now
they triumph most profanely, and think they have victoriously banished all
Novations and barred out all dislikes, with the Rampard of an everlasting
Civil Sanction, and have enthroned their Heresy by a Municipall Law to be
Idolized for ever: And though likewayes it were almost as easy to blow up the
whole I Will of Britain to the Moon with a Powder Train, as to divorce the
Princes abused soul, Consiliariorum impetus, saepe abr piunt bonos and
moderatos Principes.
from those inward and mal^gnant Heresies which have been propagate to him from
his Uncatholicall Ancestors; though the most pregnant Insinuations have proved
almost ineffectuall; and though the dazeling pomp of the neighboring Churches
and Kingdoms of the World, can nothing invite him to be mollified, and,
sweetened toward U^; but, like an Adder, he still stops his Ear at the voice of
the charmer; And though the Alliance with the most Potent and Christian French
King can nothing serve to inveigle the Eyes of his mind; Though (my dearly
beloved) all these heavy Verities discover to Us, many and huge mountains of
Impediments, which will be hard to remove, let us gird up our loins
notwithstanding.

Let not Us, who are the Soul and Light of the World, submit our selves and
our Cause to the Tyranny of despair: Recover our Game: That handful of
Heretics, are but as a Schismatic Pawn in the play: High Impiety and
Blasphemy it were against the Apostolic seat, Omne malum ab Aquilone.
to think the splendour and honor thereof could be interessed and clouded by
any thing from these parts; for though ordinarily all evil flows from these
turbulent Climats, and the Goths and Vandals have sundry times made inundation
upon our Patrimony, and most profanely trodden under foot our Domicel, Italy,
the Lady and Mistress of the World, though oftentimes Emperors and Kings of the
Earth, have shaken their Scepter upon Us, and offered to set bounds to our
unlimited powers and desires, yet I hope, we are as able to wind about the
sacrilegious designs of Secular and Heretical factions, as ever any of our
holy Predecessors.

We know perfectly how to beggar Kingdoms by dissimulation, unjoint the fair
frame of peace, and traffic, poison allegiance too: And the transferring of
Empires, the ruins of Kingdoms, the excommunication and deposition of Kings,
and devastations by fire and sword, are the ordinary marks and characters (you
know) of the great Statesmen of our Order, who do indeed most canonically
hold, that these practices are most lawful for them, conducing to the growth of
the Church, and vindicating our Temporal Jurisdiction over Princes. Let us not
therefore faintly give over, but solace our selves, with memory of great
Policies past, wherewith we have chastised Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and
redacted them to the Obedience of the Mother Church: What ever we shall happen
to lose by battle (as Matchiavel records of the Venetians who know all the
removes of their Game) Let us labor to recover the same by treaty, and be
still laborers in the great Work; Let us assemble all the powers of our
souls, and combat the Cause.

I Will alambique the Sorbone Genius, and squize the substance of all the
Commonwealths of Europe, ere I find not a Catholicon, and Sovereign Elixar
for this new sprung Poison, which, if the pride thereof be not counter-checked,
is able to defloure the glory of our whole Church: No, no, those who will not
gently resign themselves, to the embracements of the ancient Apostolic
Truth, which we are sent to offer and preach to the World, as the great Pastor
of the Church, must certainly be broken: And before our Miter be not adored by
all, amongst Nations, Tongues, and People, I will first thresh the Mountains
and Islands of the world with a fleale, I will beat them to powder, and fan
them before the wind of my wrath; I will arm the Princes of the Earth, and
cause them over-turne them, that they never appear more than the Monasteries
which are sunk about Venice.

Aliud.
CHaron have over, BB.
the Ghostly Fathers come
To thy torn Boat, and their eternal Home.
Who calls the Ferry-man of Hell? BB. Chapter
It Is we
Prime Statesmen of the Roman Prelacie;
Bring not thy scurvie Barge which looks so thin
As any Cloud, as old as Sun, and Moon,
Di'lles in these Prelates pride, Chapter
they'ave left the Earth
Into a fair combustion, after death
They Are come the very Hells for to confound,
And our Infernal Commonwealth to wound.
Enter right Reverend, many Catholic Kings,
Popes, Monarchs, which this nimble Vessel brings
Each hour, into these fatal Mansions, do
Embarque without a scruple: what are you?
Come, good my Lords, you must be ruled by me,
You had your Time, now take your Destiny.
Though your big-bellies could engrosse a Coach,
Yet if your souls sink, I Will bide your reproach.
To the Author of this Second most flowing, and praiseworthy Speech.
I Thought dear Frind, that first Essay of thine,
Which thou to me so kindly did propine,
Should prove the period of thy precious Pen,
And pause, to which thou could not reach again.
But higher still thou springst and I do find
This Second Birth, the Model of thy Mind
Like to a clear Spring pouring forth his drills,
Which sweetly glyding through two neighbor hills,
With fertile Motions Meadows overflow
Till they turn streams, and streams to Rivers grow.
So that transcending inexhausted vein,
From forth the Treasure of a fertile brain
Distills such Nectars of renewed store,
Are sweeter now, though sweetest of before.
And so no doubt, these Rivulets so clear,
Shall of full growth fair Rivers once appear.
M. D. Prymrose. J. C.

AN ANSWER To His Holiness Remonstrance: BY Cardinal Antonio Di Barbirim in
name of the rest of the Roman Clergy, in the Consistory at Rome.
MOST HOLY FATHER, to whom we convert our humblest duties and sacrifices of our
devotest thoughts, Great Monarch of the Church, to whose Glory do all our
actions bend as the last scope of their advantage. We do most passionatly
condole the just anguish of your afflicted heart, certainly our Imaginations
are so strongly seized, by the shaking of these turbulent times, that we have
almost resigned the whole powers of our Soul to fear and wonder; Our tongues
are captived, and chayned up without a sound.

We can bear record, that your Holiness, like Heavens glorious Luminarie,
has bountifully diffused the warm beams of Purity, through the whole Church
Catholic, and every place thereof, You have not only gilded the tops of the
Mountains and made the tal Cedars of Lebanon to laugh, swelling them with the
graces of your nursing favors; but has likewaise daigned to visit the humble
Valleies, and made the Marjoline, and Myrrh find the benignity of your
favorable aspect, and the influence of your Apostolic entertainments.

Thus like the Sovereign Good, who delights to communicate his al embracing
sweetness you would extend the skirts of your favor upon the most neglected
parts of the World, even that fatal Kingdom of Scotland buried in darkness
and ignorance. We that are the cabinet and Depositary of your secret workings
in the Mystery of your Episcopizing, do well know how you have been (as it
were) hotly courting that silly people, and with what a fatherly zeal you have
wooed that rebellious and gainesaying Nation, which has answered the hopes of
your long-wished Joy, with the high Anatheme of a cruel Covenant, and a
furious Combination never to be dissolved against your Holiness, the great
Officer of the Church, Christ's Vicegerent on Earth, and all the Mainetainers of
the Articles and Ceremonies of the Romain faith. We wish our heads were waters,
and our Eyes fountaynes of Tears, to weep for the calamities of our mother.
The fears of Heresis increase and all our dissastrous disappointments, which
your Holiness out of the plenitude of your wisdom, and spirit of sagacitie,
has most divinely laid open to our weary souls. We are fallen into the ends
of the world, and persecution must come for the elects sake. Now the wicked and
Heriticks do hold the Church by the throat, and now we must move every Oar,
strain all assistances, solicit all our devoted Crowns, and send forth the
Kings of the Earth like victorious Hercules, to destroy the pullulating heads
of this terrible and Herittical Serpent, and to suppress that al-spreding
Covenant of Scotland, the most horrible Invention, and usurping Monster that
ever hell hatched: It has appeared like a blazing Comet in the North (with
themselves may the event dwell of the portentuous presage) and has in many, who
were otherways in a pretty aptitude, and maturity to be good Catholics,
stirred the spirit of Curiosity, which may mar Implicit Obedience, Qui male
fa^it, odit lucem.
the subversion of which Article, will make the whole frame of our Mystery to
crack: A dangerous perspective for Laics to look into our Consistory Per
Madonna santissima di Loretta. When we fall upon the business of that
Northern League, and the Ensign of the Covenant displayed, we loose our
selves, and cannot plumb that deep, It has affrighted us like a lightning,
made all the Christian Kings start up on their feet with an, What is it? It is
surely a Thunderbolt, broke upon the very head of S. Peter's, and proudly
entering, has overturned the Alters, thrown down the Images, dismantled the
Beauty of the Church, astonished the whole Ligators of our Mosaic Works, and
profained the whole glory of the Temple. A spear it is, which thrust through
the bowels of State Catholic, has dared the very heart of Spiritual
Monarchy.

Your Holiness, whose Vigilant Eye, does most laboriously survey the conditions
of Times and States, and with a fatherly care watch over the crowns and
Scepters of Nations, has in truth and strength of passion, most Episcopally
discovered the Monster begotten by the nimblest witted devil, nursed up in these
Northern deserts, and destinat to measure the world with his quaint paces. We
do fear that by the sting and tail of a Scorpio^, it shall nail the tender
Church throw with shame and torment. Let us provide it cast no venom beyond
Seas, for then shall it mount over the Alps, and with his poysonable attempts,
presume to assault your Holiness own Domestics: Neither shall the proud
Pirennees keep it from thrusting in to Spain, the most intemerate and
immaculate place of the Church body; It will mock the spectacled Fathers of
Inquisition, and creep there invisiblie like Fratres Roseae Crucis. And no
index Expurgatorius (which like the Purgatory fire, we have ever with
Cathollicall Lenity used, either for mollifying, or eradicating other
Monsters) will serve to correct or banish this one. Truly, those diseased
prelates (Holy Father) have spun us no fair thread, nor have they proven grand
Sophies, when by the conquest of that poor Kingdom (which would never make any
considerable accession to your Revenues, but was like the drop to the Bucket,)
and promoving immature Novations, they have occasioned too innocently the loss
of our Game, and endangered the Myters reputation.

If these perturbations do once come unto a deep working, and begin to
extend their prophaine Petulancies, We fear, your Holiness, whose all adored
Miter, made Prostrate Crowns to tremble, and Scepters shake, may be glad to
be sheltered in S. Angeloes Castle, or run to the horns of the Altar; And we
the Suns of Harmony, who are the Carbuncles which add splendor to your
Spiritual Crown, must betake our selves to the favor of Times and Fortunes,
and leave our goodly Dignities with the fat of their corpulent affluence, to
the devotion of sacrilegious Soldiers.

Nay certainly, if this swelling Combustion do but offer to stain the serenity
of our Heavens with any smoke, and stiffle our purity, we are all confounded,
we are all blown up, and the Kings of the Earth, the powers of the World, and
every Soul of Man, even the begging Capuchine, who can glory of nothing but
his Venerable Beard, his Chappler, and torn Breviarie, shall regard your
Holiness no more, shall give you no more bended knees, nor sacrifices of Real,
and Spiritual Tribute, then to the man of the Moon. And you know, most
Catholic Monarch of BBs, If those golden floods, which do most proudly play
upon the Philosophal stones of your Vatican, be once withdrawn and called back
to their Tributary Sources, By the right of mer^te, and the Salique law
(to which you have as undoubted and irredeemable a right, as to those very
omnipotent Keys, which you carry, and to the Monopoly of all Benefices, which
you have happily engrossed to your most Archiepiscopall person) We cannot but
faint, who are fed by the refreshments of those streams: Our Cardinal Caps,
bestowed upon us by your Holiness as Garlands of our Honor, and Eminency,
must needs wither and fall away, and remove the Suns beame^, where shall his
glory be? If we, as so many Earth-treading Stars, who adorn the Sky of your
State be stripped of our Beauty, if we shutt and fall, in what Primum Nobile
shall your Sanctity shine! We are set about the Seat of your Majesty, as
Summers speckled flowery Garment, and if we be blasted by the Jnjuries of
tempestuous times, what shall embellish your Holiness? These are heavy trueths:
but under the Rose be it spoke Santissimo Padre. Some blows we have received,
more are feared: Heavens and Earth do know, and all Courts, all Churches are
filled with the fortune, Vno dato absurdo, mult^ sequuntur.
or misfortune of the great business; that abortive Service book, and those
Canons, have shamefully disobliged the Church Catholic, and with their
roaring, have awaked and disturbed all Christendom, and turned their
sulphurious throats against their Makers. There are certainly some ungracious
uncathollicall planets raging, who have powered forth the malignitie of their
venomous Influence upon your reforming and Fatherly Undertakings. The Heavens
distill their sterner frowns, and threaten us with their baddest Aspects. We
were ready to tear the clouds with Bells ringing, and priests singing, and
thought the smoke of our Bonfires should shortly ascend to Heaven, Your
bellement Messieurs.
and stain the Suns face: But holy Father, It Is no time for quaint
speaking, we ought not dissemble nor use Jndulgence to our wound Let us
mittigate and rectify our woes as cunningly and quietly as we may, the spate
of disastrous calamity has almost drowned our fair Hopes in despair. A cold
fear sits black on each of our Hearts; We have not been well inward with the
Mind of Destiny in the business of these Northern Negotiations. It seems
we have not been sufficiently assisted, but deserted in this particular;
Consult the Prophesies, Set your Astrologitians a work; may be you find, (
but Heavens bless the Church Catholic, and avert) that some of these
Northern Princes have Capricornum ascendentem in Horoscopo, which is, and has
ever been the most fatal and malevolent sign to the Roman Empire in all the
Zodiaque: Imp Carolus 5. Frans. Rex Galliae Carolus Corbonius. Cosmus Med.
Florentiae Dux.
And for the truth hereof, We call the Times never to be forgotten, and
Histories of all Ages, to witness: From thence indeed do the first clouds
appear: And as in your Holiness Remonstrance was piously observed, all
Propagations of Empyres, all Irruptions and Effusions of People, Assyrti
vicerunt Chaldeos. Assyrios Medit Graeci Persas: Romani Poenos: Gothi Romanos:
Turcae fregerunt Arabes: Tartari Turcas: Angli Gallos: Scot* Anglos.
are ever found to have been from the North to the South. If this be the
inclination of our averse Spheres thus unkindely to use Us: If this be the
purpose of him who beholds the Ends of the World, to present this cup to the
Roman Prelacie, and put our spiritual Kingdom, which we believe shall
prosper so long as the Heavens cover the Earth, thus in Jeopardie: Certainly
those Uncircumcised Lions, will tear Us to pieces, and make Banners of our
Catholic Skins, and scratch your Myter, (whose shadow was reverenced by
Princes of the Earth) to very contemptible and forgotten Atoms, and powder
your Supreme self in Luthers Barrel: They will Sack Your City, the Queen
of the Earth, tread upon the Worlds Trophies, and fill the Holiest place with
Abomination of desolation.

Where ever we send forth our enquiring Eyes, they report nothing from all
the corners of the World, but sad entertainements of these fears, and
appearances of mutations from that Kingdom of Scotland, (which is now most
desperately diseased of a swelling Tympanie or some Pluresie, incurable but by
the voyding of that prevayling blood which overrules or offends the Head, and
choakes the Heart,) As the source of our reproach, the fountain of our shame,
do we deryve, the streams of our injuries and calamities, and and to those
all despised Heretics like ways do we justly impute the advancements of the
same. Your Holiness ever solicit to gain that which is lost, had emitted your
faithful laborers, and planted a Vine, The Service book, which produced most
sovereign, and generos grapes
which for the time was very luxuriant, and did proudly spring like Jonas
Gourd, but alas, that unexpected poysonable worm of the Covenant, has
encroached upon the Heart thereof, and vowed to suck out the very soul of it.

Eheu quam levibus pereunt ingentia causis! Nay, this worm is like to be
metamorphosed in a flying Dragon, and infest the whole Christian world. Your
Holiness did mercifully elance a saving Beam upon that Cimmerian Land; which
was kindly welcomed by those who had submitted themselves to be doctrinate by
our fomenting suggestions, Their Eyes were anointed with omnipotent Baulme.
and it did most effectually animate them to great performances, We were made
hopeful to see the day break forth gloriously, for the Cocks fell a crowing,
which told us the nights departure, Light is sown for the righteous.
yet have they maliciously closed their Eyes, rejected the lights comfort, and
most bitterly banished those faithful Evangelists, nay with a more perfect
hatred and meritorious violence than ever Loyala's Tribe was turned out from
among the straight-lac't Venetians; And now they think (reprobate souls) that
they have reproachfully mounted them as it were on the Asses of Jndignitie, and
send them to the land of Nod with an Ecco la fico, Yet nothing so, but the pale
Horse of a Civil, and Temporal death at worst; upon which, Triumphing
Martyrs, they have entered Paradise, and necessary it was, blessed Father, that
they should be removed from the Contagions, and conversation of the wicked,
that when the deserved devastations and devourings shall break forth in the
fulness of their rage, they might laugh at their persecutors in the day of their
destruction: Thus was the good Josias called to his eternal home before
Babilons captivity, And the most Catholic Bishop S. Augustines death, like a
gentle stars fall, did fore run and point out the subversion of the city of
Bone. Those are the rampards of the Church, which must be taken down, that the
Inundation of desolation may burst in and swallow the Trophies of insulting
Heresy. For even as the sagacious Swallow, does retire her young ones, before
the approaching fall of the crasie Vault: so are the blessed souls, Heavens
Mignons promiscuously confounded with the tumultuous Heretics, singled by,
and lift above the reach of danger, before the public ruins. All these
impieties and Oppressions have no more harmed, the^ if a man out of his fury
and anger would think to afflict and drown the harmless captived fish by
throwing it in a river; For we are bold to persuade in the courage of
victorious spiritual Soldiers, that all these sentences, Excommunications,
Extrusions and other furies, whereby sacrilegious Blasphemy has exerced the
height of Tyranny against Trueths Heralds, shall prove in end like Sampsons
Lion, Out of the strong shall come sweet, Their Righteousness shall spread as
the morning, and their Glory shall be terrible as an Army with Banners: though
they now sleep, yet it is not to the death. Indeed fortune for all this, has
dealt Us a very bad Game at this Tour, but yet a little, and the Cards shall
be shiffled; they have refused our saving and Catholic courtesies, and kicked
again, they have affrighted Us with Lightnings; But may be, we shall crush
those Terrestrial Heads with Thunder and blow away their Designs as chafe
before the wind; And though the Lutherans and our Adversaries do fatten
themselves with their Insultings over Us, and think we have so deeply tasted
the bitterness of that last Overthrow, which our Catholic friends, The
Spaniards and Italians
your Holiness nimble Executioners, and those like ways of your Holiness own
Family did lately suffer by Sea, in advancing your Evangelical Intentions;
and though they stick not to flater their abused souls, with this confidence,
that now there are no more Co^sta^tines to be found who dare hold up the banner
of the Cross, nor any to march under the same, yet must we be espoused to new
resolutio^s of recovery, and let the triumphing snakes duly find that our Arms
are not shortened, our wings are not clipped, and that neither are the Kingdoms
subjected to our two all commanding swords, exhaust of the true faiths
defenders, Nor India, and Peru yet pompt of Red and white Earth; which shall
produce Us Children to maintain Truths Garland, even in the midst of our
Enemies, for our Chemists are excellent Operators, and can ex^ract the
Sovereign Baulm, and very effectually apply it to the suspect places, which
being cunningly adhibite with the concurrence of your Apostolic Benedictions
and Encouragements, we have seen have such a powerful Operation, that it
has never ceased till awaking an Intestine discord, at length it has cast out
al redundant and noxious humors, and expelled the root of the disease. And as
to that little sniffle which our Apostolic Navy has received, partly by the
Indiscretion of the Sea, and uncurtesie of the Winds, (for amongst these
Hugenotes, the very air and water are Puritans) and partly by the neglect and
connivance of Princes; Be it known we have already digest that little
tickling Pill of misfortune, as clearly as we have eclipsed the memory of
the Crescent in the 88. The Armado which came displayed in form of the Moon
Crescent.


But here we spare to stretch our selves on these regrates, your Episcopal
providence will smell the storm afar, look to the prevailing thereof, and
find out the most powerful means to elude the dangers of these tumbling
times, that the afflicted Church, as the Lilly among Thorns, may look sweet
and glorious as the Moon in her full pride: Yet by the presumptions of Times,
one thing seems to be sure, If we might see Fates book, The Senate house of
Planets has at no time been more unfriendly set for the acting of some
strange Trage-comedie in Europe.

Which makes Us call to mind the pernicious prophesies of those Unchristian
Dames, those Sybilles, who like phanatick Syrenes, have intoxicate the world,
and so strongly possessed the souls of those who are conversant with curiosity,
that many good Catholics, and of high endowments, poisoned with their Greek
Music, do entertain secret opinions and fears of a very fatal period,
ordained for our spiritual Kingdom; for in those their profane Invectives,
and hell-blowne Satyrs, wherewith they have persecuted your Holiness Throne
(as the spirit of delusion does cheat the worlds belief) and your Seat, this
City likewayes, (which looks like the Moon amongst the lesser Stars) though
she be stellified to Heaven, yet those unpure Spirits, with their usurping
uncatholicall pens, In the second book of the Oracles of Sybilla^, at this part
-- hominum tu^ denique seclum, Existet decimum.
have presumed to lay her horn in the dust; And they have presented the Map of
aftertimes (to those who will Idolize their Oracles) so far to the
disadvantage and shame of your Holiness high Calling, that all the resplendant
Rays of our dazeling pomp, wherewith we have obfuscat, even at a great
distance, the rest of Nations, must be drowned for sooth in the smoke of an
utter ruin and endless confusion, Your Holiness purple, and our scarlet roabes
wherewith we darkened the Eyes of beholders, and enamoured the admiring
stranger, by a profane and poetical fury they have turned over our heads, and
rejoice to have our nakedness displayed to the world. Surely a strange
Enthusiasme in these Feminine Brains; yet these Times may fortune to renew the
Idea's which those Chimerick Impressions have given to the more facile souls,
who are easily carried about with every wind of belief; for now there is a
great unconstancie and certain kind of Branktings in many parts, even amongst
the sons of your Institutions, Heirs of your unmeasured Designs, expectants
of the Blessed Chair, Spiritual and Temporal Counselors.
and those on whom Ignatius and Matchiavell, the two Genius of the Myter, had
powered a double measure of their spirits.

Every alteration in States, even to the better, your Holiness knows, is
dangerous: And whether the news of this great Change, of a patriarch to be
set up in France, have arrived at your Holiness Ghostly Ears, or not, we are
ignorant: You may descend to view what face the purpose has, and try the
pedigree from whom it came, and whither it goes. Out of the profundity of your
infallible Judgment, your Holiness can obviat the impertinencie of any Event,
and devance the consequence of this springing. You best know, what conduces
both to the Glory, Grouth, and Indemnitie of the Church, and for the Honor and
Majesty of your own Throne: But truly, We the Fathers of the Conclave, do
think it to be a very strange Boutade, and a laboring design pregnant with
many monstrous productions; And that his vehement and Polypragmaticke spirit,
through the insolency and indulgence of a swelling fortune, cannot rest, but
making eruption beyond the limits of his Vocation, with an inordinate appetite
of Glory, shall aspire to the top of the Pyramide. Such exorbitant humors are
most apt to confound the order of Geometrick proportion, and being void of a
Politic Mansuetude, indocile or blind Obedience, Lovers of Mutations, are
most fertile of Emulations, and Civil Wars, and oftentimes involve all in a
doleful conflagration. This (as many other Emergencies of these Times) seems
to be the beginning of a deviation, which cannot end but in Apostasy,
especially among that Nation, which does ever please it self in changes: Could
not (Holy Father all the Crowns in France serve, to stay his vast ambition,
unless he had something above his Cardinals Coronet likewayes? Press into
the inner Cabinet of these Designs, there your Holiness may well find, which
cannot be consistent with your Myter.

For though your Holiness has now obscured the brightness of the Patriarchs
of the East, and has erected your Apostolic Crest to that unparrallelld
height of Preeminencie, from whence you do stately overlooke them, and all
other Churches, even as the Mountains of Ararat, whereupon the Arc rested,
lifted up their welcome, and triumphing tops, above the decreasing waters, yet
the appearing of this Patriarch, as of a new unknown Star, may beget a desire
in the Laics, to study the motion of our Heavens too officiously, and so run
the hazard of revolting Heresies, in their Supererogatory contemplatio^s. For
your Holiness cannot forget to remember, that howbeit by the Florentine and
Laterane Counsels it was unanimously and Canonically concluded, that the four
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antiochia, Alexandria, and Jerusalem should
receive their mantle, the sign of plenitude of their pontifical dignity,
from your Holy hands, and after the order of the assigned precedencie, tender
the Oath of allegiance to the Roman Prelate, at whose appearance in his
fullest Grace, they must put up their beams and disappeare; yet they have
always had Protestations of reluctancie, and rebound to the title of their
patriarchall Dignity, holding themselves iso-Presbyters, composed of that same
stuff whereof Popes are said to be made, and can hardly be induced to humble
themselves to the dependence of a derivation, or restrained from transcending
the Category of subordination: Nay certainly, it does relish too much of an
exemption from the Roman Sea and study of Monarchy: We should not have
wondered so profusely to have seen such Hierarchicall Ambition, point out his
presumptuous head, in the remoter parts of Britain, and Ireland, being so
far distant from the Influence of your pacificke Scepter, (the advancements
being there but very green as yet) not attained their flourishing luster. For
even as the Winds and Raines do exerce a mutual rage, shooting forth their
luxuries in the lower parts of the Air, where they reign in their turbulent
Kingdom, but in the higher Regions thereof, nigh to the Fires Orb, and
approaching the Sun, no motion, no agitation, but a gentle calm does
continually dwell: So certainly in those forgotten and barbarous places, not
apt for the spirit of Obedience, the true Author of peace; No wonder there be
commotion and scandals: but in France the very Myters Eye to build Altars of
offense, it may beget a storm, which will force Us pull down our Sails, If
we escape shipwreck: And if the Pagan Soldiers, made scruple to use Christ's
Reverend Roabe so rudely, as to tear the same; how deservedly ought they to
be redargued, who prepare the renting of his sacred Body, the Church, with
their ambitiously swelled zeal?

The crying necessities of these Times which look too sullen, and the
Exigencies of the affronted Church, if there be pity amongst Us, and Holy
zeal to vindicate her credit, would wring from us poison to kill all the
policies of Europe. Yet (Holy Father) though the powers of Heresy should
combine and concentrate their malice, though the frame of the Universe should
be disjointed, we have a never-failing promise, that the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against us. Heavens great Substitute, Absolute Father of the
Church, if ever power did show a Masterie in you, let it now appear, and make
the redacted World stand amazed.

O nimium dilecte Deo cui militat ether,
Et conjuratae curvato poplite gentes
Succumbunt --
Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.
There Is Elixar of brain and spirit amongst Us, and the God of riches lies
imprisoned in our Cabines and Monasteries. Eccleasist aevolunt esse Monarchae.
Let Us do any thing to rule alone, though it be very rare to see the World
ruled by one: The most proud and obstinate Resistances are aloft, and now a
days women's soft souls are wrought up to a masculine malice and resolution;
for persecuting Truth, and hugging Error: Therefore make your wrath likewise to
swell. Extend your mighty Arms, call up the Princes of the earth, let the
sounds of your Alarm be heard from one end of heaven to the other, and
straight behold the Kings and potentates, like children of obedience shall
forsake their palaces, out of a filial submission; and leave their stately
Magnificence to be possessed of solitude, inhabited by Bats and Owls, and
entrust their dearest Queens to the benevolence of Churchmen, and Eunuchs;
Then will they muster their forces, employ their Scepters, and strain all the
Nerves of their Kingdom for the well of the Cause Catholic.

Let it always be the chiefest of our cares, the first of our desires, to hold
up war immortal, ever to trouble the calm of peace, Flectere finequecunt
superos Acheronta m^ vebunt.
to shut up the Seas, to disable, to dis-joyne, to inspire our Emissaries, and
Incendiaries, with the spirits of dissimulation and division, to infold all
State policies in confusion, to choke all, to inflame all with a most
Catholic combustion; for certainly some cruelties are better and more
necessary, than silly improfitable Mildness, which like a cold and barren
quality, can never mature the Churches growth. No, no, the braying of Canons,
the dawbing of Drums are good Catholic Music, by which our Apostolic
expeditions use to advance the Spiritual kingdom, and go in procession
through the world; Our motions must be restless and busy, like that of the
heavens, every one bestirring himself in his own sphere. And your Holiness
with most grave, and venerable alacrity, will give the strong impulse. We in
the Consistory, and those ministering and subtle spirits of that rich seed-plot
of Sorbone, shall come such riddles, and shall so inveagle the Heretic souls
and Churches, that Kings shall find themselves enough puzzled. From this holy
Citadell, this impregnable Capit^ll, our spiritual Engineeres, who are most
Canonically bred, and authentically practiced, shall throw such fiery Bals
among Nations and People, From the Conclave.
as those that dare oppone Truths Candor, shall be put in a terrible damp.

Go to (holy Father) move strongly, as becomes the state of your courage, and
in a high sweld Metropolitan confidence, blow down the strong holds of Error;
Remove the Isles out of the sea, and shake the mountains that stand up so
heretically against the promised, the prophesied Reformations to the faith
Catholic; Never unbend your infallible Bow, till you have hit the conquered
mark of your most Euangelick Intentions, our adversaries must not erect the
Trophies of their ambition upon the ruins of our reproaches. We will first
fetch the compass of the World, and conglomerate our undaunted forces, like a
destroying and inexorable tempest, to sweep away Truths Enemies. All our
Convents shall first be turned into Fence-schooles, before the Great Cause be
disgraced. We will defend mainly, engage our very Crucifixes, and Hypothecat
our Cardinals Caps before the Mitres honor be any whit touched.

But now because many Incumbencies advertise us to dissolve, and some strange
Ambassadors attend your Holiness from whose bosom they come to receive
Apostolic directions, to lead them as a Star in the way to the hill of
Greatness, where the Laurells of triumph do condignly attend them: We forbear
to presume on this Times importance, only daring represent to your Holiness,
how necessary it is to employ pens, policies, and power, to rack all our might
for advancing our holy intentions, and breaking the clouds of Error and
Heresy, which are like to overspread the whole World: Consider how the crying
necessities of our bleeding Primitive Mother do implore the same: In the mean
time (till your Holiness have more precious leisure to bestow upon further
Catholic Resolutions) let let there be a grand Apostolic Nuncio dispatched
upon the wings of speed to the Isle of Britain, (if there be any courtesy to
receive him there worthily) Even strongly assisted with the spirit of Truth,
which your Holiness Predecessors did usually send to the Tridentine Council
for the actuating of those infallible members, and extirping of Heresy.
Instruct him deeply how to proclaim to the world, Well blown Seignior.
and write it on the sky with Letters of gold never to be forgotten, and print
it in the Records of Histories to all after ages, that though Religion be the
common pretense of discontent amongst these untamed Heretics, wherewith they
use to mask their unbridled license, their affronted boldness, their high
contempt of Soveraigntie, and dare commit any Impiety, gilded with the luster
of Sanctity: Yet nothing is so strongly desired, nothing so truly intended by
them, abhorring the order of subjection, than to shake off the yoke of
Monarchy, and break the Cords of Spiritual and Temporal jurisdiction, with
the swing of their desperate frenzy.

It will not be inexpedient likewise to cause some others; who are enriched
with the strength of more subtle abilities, and do cunningly know how to creep
into the minds and Cabines of princes, and take dominion there, be sent forth
with all convenience, for subverting the Machinations of these Matchiavilian
Calvinists: Let Authority, Lords of Power, and Masters of Time be taught (for
Clemency is the Nurse of Rebellion) how to press them down with weight,
though the conspiring Crew that breaths nothing but fire, and vomits
blasphemy, who has consecrate their Estates, and espoused their neglected
lives to the lust of Revolting, should cry out violence, and rigor, and
cruelty, and tyranny, and craft, and malice; for those things have been the
Sovereign and effectual ways of our enlargings, and it is the Mystery of
greatness to hold the Inferiors still ignorant of it, and strike like
Lightning and Thunder.

Moreover, Because the seditious fury of unruly multitude (even as a tumbling
flood acquiring strength to it self by moving, carries all it meets before it
in a precipice) does wax to such a prevailing strength as none can hold out
against the bitterness of the tempest: Therefore let us work wisely, and as
men use to disappoynt the over-flowings of undaunted Rivers, by branching them
in little weak Rivulets, thus to extenuate the impetuositie of the maine
stream, by diverting the fullness of indocile waters, and turning them aside.
So must we (in a degree more than becomes Supremacy to stoop) flatter a
while, and nourish the hopes, and entertain the desires of Conspirers,
distract the minds of the multitude, weaken them by the breach of Union, and
delude them most egregiously; for so long as those Conventions rule, whereby
the consent of the abused People receives most poisosonable Aliment, and they
become fortified in their Error, than each provokes another, even as the
Billows of the enraged Sea are driven forward by their urging and importune
fellows.

Therefore must it be amongst the first of the Articles of your Atourneyes
Instructions, exceedingly to labor this point, that those their great
Counsels, infallible Assemblies, Well remembered.
and unwarranted Synagogues of Hypocrites, be most divinely impeded; and that
Parliaments be broke up, and crushed in the bud both in Scotland, and England
for those confluences of demure devils, have ever given Us the greatest dash,
and been the very bane of our agonies.

We hope withal, your Holiness out of the bowels of pity, cannot forget the
miserable prelates, your faithful Laborers. It is indeed their fortune;
(through too eager and unadvised zeal, to the glory of raising Altars to your
Holiness purposes, in that land where they lived) and not their fault, that thus
they are left in the wilderness of Times and Poverty, make them taste
therefore of the sweetness of your Remembrances; for it were high indignity to
your Holiness, the Prince of Bishops, to let those silly Souls engage their
Surplis, and Service-books, for the maintenance of their laborious lives.

Amongst all other expediencies, here is one likewayes which cries extremely,
that since we had very justly anchored our best Expectations upon the Northern
Cities of that rigid and unfortunate Island of Scotland, where indeed the
Religion pretended was never perfectly welcomed, and that by our last
intelligence we have learned they have likewise joined hand with Impiety, The
City of Aberdene honored by embracing the Covenant.
and divorcing themselves from the loyalty of the great work, have entered the
dance with the rest of the giddy Heretics, neglecting our resentments of most
Catholic Services done, and our encouragements to persevere, that yet
notwithstanding there might be some zealous Invention and spiritual stratagem
found how to regaine them, and to redeem them from that deserved perdition
which follows Heresy.

The Lords of the parliament
And as to the Parliamentary stage-men, who do now personat so bravely, we hope
before they come to the last Act of the Play, where they trust to bring in your
Holiness as a Mytred Boufone, if there be any soul amongst us, we shall do our
best to make their dalliance Epilogue in a Tragedy, and overturn the Stage upon
the Actors.

THus spoke the Monstrous Beast, whose voice is thunder,
Whose Poyson's Mystery, whose ways are Wonder:
Thus Babels Statesmen, and the purple train
Did blow their fiery zeal, and did complain,
Giving their Laws to times and destinies,
Subjecting Heavens will to their policies:
But He that dwells betwixt the Cherubins,
Does look, and laugh, and mock their hid designs:
Dear Isreal's watchman, and the King of Kings,
From whose fierce mouth an angry smiter springs,
Shall incontrolled come inflaming Ire,
Armed with just plagues, and pouring floods of fire:
He knows his Church is torn, He sees her woe,
He knows her griefs are full, Her tears ore-flow:
Her renting cries have wound great Judah's Lion,
Her heavy moanes have moved the Lamb of Sion:
Great treasures of revenge he has in store,
To waste upon his foes, who alas so sore
Have bruised Her with a cruel Iron rod,
And thrust Her through, and on Her glory trod.
Vengeance descends from Heaven, she does display
Her angry fury; No, she cannot stay,
Sh'hath brimm'd her Vialls full of bitterest wrath,
That e're annoyed the afflicted earth:
Lo Justice bows the heavens, and sweetly daignes
T'espouse her cause, and hear what she complains,
That Incense smoke, which from the Saints does rise
Has mounted up, and entered through the skies.
And now the painted Monster who did ride
Upon the Temples Pinnacle, and guide
Abused Republics Reins, she before whom
The people of the earth did gladly come
Prostrate to pay their Worship, must be thrown
Into the Sea, great she must be cast down
From that resplendent Thrones insulting glory,
Which was the pride of times, and the worlds story.
She Is drunk with laughter, and did tyrannize
Over all the parts where Phoebus casts his Rays.
But now the fatal period comes, and those
Who by the living Gods seal do rejoice:
(The Glorious Covenant, which distills a shower
Of valiant Champions, girt with Heavenly power)
The sons of wonder, lo they come, they come
With threatening Banners to the walls of Rome;
With Crowns upon their heads, Palms in their hands,
They Will shake the seven hills where proud Babel stands.
Tremble, O tremble, Queen of Nations, now
Thy walls, which did disdain to stoop, and bow,
Must humbled be at Gods great Covenants call,
Thy Crown is withered, now thy Garlands fall:
Thy stately towers which did insulting rise
To over-looke the earth, and threat the skies,
Do quake and hide their palsy heads for fear,
When this triumphing splendour does appear,
As thou have made all Nations to be drunk
With thy debauches, so thou shall be sunk.
Upon the wings of speed thy ruin flies,
Ripe are thy woes, ready thy miseries:
Thou Wilt bid the Alps and Apennines fall on thee,
And keep thee from the hills that rush upon thee.
All thy inveagling Rays, like clouds of error,
Shall drowned be with lightnings and with terror
Of that prevailing Beauty; whose sun-like face
Does all the world inflame, and sweetly chase
Disloyal thoughts, this warmes, The cardinals and the Roman clergy.
and does allure
Our chaste desires unto a love more pure.
Ah cruel Counselors and inhumane,
Ye paint the Clouds, ye do combine in vain,
Ye blow but at the Sun, while ye presume
In vain to vex the truth, your souls consume.
O spare the afflicted Lilie, O forbear
Your cruel pungent thorns, which do the fair
And Heav'n-blowne flower of Jesse wound: No pity
Upon the harmless Dove, so sweet, so pretty?
Great He that holds the Times, and the Worlds end,
Does hear your Blasphemies, He'll'gainst you bend
The angry arrows of his Indignation,
And recompense your high abomination.
Your Rabbis, Sophies, Matchivilian Crew
Forsake your Counsels: What think ye to do?
Would ye confound the Heavens, and people hell,
Drown the poor world in blood, and trouble all?
Must ye like Tennis-balls thus canvasse Crowns,
Must Scepters stoop t'usurping Myters frowns?
Shall flour'shing Kingdoms, shall proud Monarchies
Be the humble footstool of your Hierarchies?
Are ye the Ocean unto which they pay
Their tributarie streams? Tell me I pray
(You spirits of truth and meekness) why ye swell
To such a furious tempest? I pray you tell.
Is't'cause our Covenant shall Epilogize
Your joys, and Fortunes in sad Tragedies?
Are all the secrets of the Prophesies,
Powered forth upon your naked Mysteries?
Is dire destructions black hour come? Has light
Betrayed your shame unto the worlds delight?
So so it is: and hence do spring your fears:
These days do speak, and multitude of Years
Might teach you wisdom. Now the powers of heaven
Are shaken, and our Redemption shall be seen.
The glorious morning spreads upon the Mountains,
Salvations Wells are open, and all the fountains
(Which ye, alas, had poisoned) now burst forth,
With joys redundant floods to fill the Earth.
Oh that ye would return! Oh that ye would
Once tear the Mask of Error, and behold
How superstitions face does look awry,
And so divorce you from Idolatry.
To Us the light is sown, and you must yield,
T'Eternall Truth: Gods Scepter wins the field.
No, no, ye must give ore. Can you but stay
The sweet Aurore from giving us the day?
Or hold the heavens? forbid the winds to blow?
Or stop the thunder? and the flowers to grow?
Then may ye mock the dread Jehovahs blast,
And build your Glory when he down does cast.
His conquering sword shall valiantly control
The Beasts designs, and reign from Pole to Pole:
Even as the darkness all amazed retires
When welcome and victorious light appears,
So shall the Antichrist confounded be
With brightness of this killing Majesty.
Sperandum, and ferendum.
Intelligence from the Apostolic Nuncio Il Conte di Rozzetti, now residing at
London, to Pope Urban 8.
May it please your Holiness,
THe humble Zeal to acquit my self loyal to your Apostolic employments, and
the perfection of that great work for which I was sent hither, made me hasten
with my trembling Pen in hand to drop out some advertisements to you, in
behalf of Truths Candor, who never in greater extremity then this, does make
her pitiful address to your Holiness, by whose protection she is secured from
the insolent affronts of the Vulgar: Being distressed, she makes you her fair
sanctuary; being wounded, she makes you her sovereign balm. I know this
unfortunate Paper of Intelligence, shall swell your vexed soul mightily, and
affright all Italy with fear, and wonder. Yet if your heart be not split
asunder with grief, and terror; or if there be any counsel, or courage left
in your Conclave, look to the Agony of the Miter, which is now sick, even
sick to the death: Lift up your weeping eyes, consider the Times, and Seasons;
and let the spirit of Prudence preserve us from utter perdition, least this
reprobate indocile Island make us very quickly a reproach and opprobry to the
world.

It would certainly burn the hearts of all true Catholics with consuming
anguish to look upon the present distempers, and to think how glorious your
Kingdom had looked by this time, like a Colossus upon the columns of strength
and policy; scorning Thunder, and out-lasting tempests: if We had never angled
in that abominable Kingdom of Scotland, nor solicit the return of that
stubborn people to us so hotly: for surely belike they will awake all
Christendom, and pervert the world. Your Holiness did behold them with the Eye
of disdain, looked asquint upon them (as the Sun does) and conceaved these
Northernes to be but dull, and half spirited souls; who could not discover
plots, resist the Majesty of your intentions, nor mount to their wishes in a
direct line without stop, or hinderance; but let me tell your sanctity, They
resolve to go on (armed with their Princes smile) and destroy your very name,
your memory, your ashes, with as easy a freedom, as rough winds demolish
crasie buildings.

Not content with that great disgrace they have done your Apostolic dignity,
in their own Church, (now indeed deserted, and desperate) by that Covenant,
(which We thought a silly shrub, but is now grown a sturdy Oak; and waxes
stately like the proud Cedar) They have moved a banner against the residue of
our hopes in England: for the Episcopal expedition, and holy war against the
Heretics, and Rebels most damnably succeeding (which will make a black, and
shameful history to embellish the Vatican Library) they have come forward
incensed, and with strange pretenses (as brave men, who in their awful palms
do bear about better destinies, and command even fate it self) advance our
destruction strongly; for albeit We did little regard their harmless
simplicity, and mocked all their sayings, which they distilled soft as Oil;
yet We have now found their sting, sharper then two edged swords; for they
have so poisoned the world, with their Pamphlets, their Papers, and new tricks
of a Reformation (as they call it: a thing as contrary to the mystery of your
kingdom, as light to darkness) that now nothing can compose the fury of the
Obstinate people, nor smooth the commotions, unless Episcopacy first of all be
thrown over board; and then having given the swinge to the wheel of their
fancy, no hopes of rest.

Your Holiness had wisely, and effectually too established your right, and
continued your possession in those parts, by that Hierarchy: But now the glory
is departed from those mighty Champions; They are chased too and fro as a
forsaken leaf before the wind, and know not where to pitch; And he also that
ere while was the great Primate of England, alterius Orbis Patriarcha, for a
Throne of eminency, is like to be brought upon the Scaffold of delinquency; and
the rest of the holy fathers of this Church, lovers of peace, and most
religious observers of the old Apostolic eminency, for the honor of the
Church, and glory of the Gospel, are likewise trembling, every day ready to be
offered up as a sacrifice to the public hate. The valorous Pens of your
Emissaries, and faithful laborers are now discouraged, lulled asleep, and
turned against themselves. The Authors of the most meritorious Pieces are now
arreigned before the heretical Tribunals, and shall hardly be brought off, if
the strength of your policy, and assiduity of your prayers do not prepare
their safety. Their shining virtues, by which they ought to have been so dear
to the Church of Rome, are now wrapped in clouds of shame. All things move
crosly; and now when our affairs were even ripening, and our just hopes
pregnant with conceit of wreaths, and tryumphs, behold We are filled with
nothing but disappointments, and apprehensions of farther reaching woes.

I know the portentuous news of the Scottish and English treaty (which fills
all Courts, and Kingdoms) has long ere now afflicted your most sacred ears:
for the estates of Scotland (which We can never name without shame and anger)
have given order to their Commissioners (Ambassadors of our overthrow) to
treat with the Peers of England for the production of an established peace
betwixt the two Nations, and so consequently for preparing worse days to us,
then the miseries of the most disastrous war: They are linked together like two
malignant powerful Planets in conjunction, who have such forceable influence
in the Times, that they cast forth a flood of fire, and animate every thing
against us with a dangerous temper. By the conference of this treaty (which
joins their interlaced minds in an individual league) and by the profane
canvassing and supercillious, contrectation of the highest mysteries of State,
We see how they have over-done us, and over-witted us in all our policies: It
shall be found (most holy Father) true as the eternal Verities, that their
union will prove our infallible confusion. And that ordinary remedy of a
division, which has oftentimes proved so effectual, in such exigencies will
likewise now forsake us: for all their purposes, their Judgments, their
affections, (Like as a nimble smiling flame
Meeting another, grows the same)


Are now but all one, pointing upward with their heads, not to heaven, but to
the top of their execrable hopes, being no other then to see your Venerable
Miter (which so long has been the terror of Princes) buried in the dust;
never did plots thrive like theirs; every day, and every circumstance of time
adds a new degree of strength to their machinations; fortifying themselves
against us most sensibly, even as by the continual revolution of the
approaching Sun We find the day is enlengthned, and the summer begotten. There
be greater considerations in hands then the curious rules of ceremonies, which
I confess did multiply most egregiously, after the Majesty, and decency of the
Jtalian splendor: certainly their actions do carry an unusual weight, and
suitable to themselves do fly at an unusual height. Their progress is swift,
and powerful, as is the progress of unlimited fire in a populous City; or
like winds, whose force do at their birth rend open the stubborn womb of the
dull earth.

I have skrewed my self as cunningly as I could in the bosom of their
intelligence, and found the pulse of the business, but I declare my sagacity
fails me if they do not thirst after the very heart-blood of your honor, and
combine for your final fall; and all this under the gallant name of Loyalty to
their King, and specious pretext of defending the faith. Oh the cunning
Heretics the Scots! they have besieged us most subtly, and sprung a mine as
it were under your Holiness own throne.

Amongst other inveagling devices, they have coined such a blasphemous way of
argumenting against Venerable Episcopacy, that it will prove most destructive
of that heavenly Hierarchy, by which your Holiness had anchored on the beauty
of this Church; and this malignancy is followed with congruity of humors so
easily elemented, that I doubt the miserable torn thing can escape shipwreck
in this hell-blowne tempest. They laugh at the authority of our Church, they
scorn the arguments of antiquity, saying that Truth did precede error; and
all the considerations of pomp and state, and external magnificence they hold
lighter then vanity.

As to the Assembly of the high Court of Parliament, here (upon which all
heretic Churches do gaze more superstitiously then the Indians look upon
the Sun which they adore) it is more terrible then many Armies with banners, and
by unmercifull ways intends a mighty vengeance against the Romish and Prelate
faction. They are in a strange motion, and run a tide clean contrary to our
standing; some wonderful assistance must prompt the times dangerously, and the
great body of this justly redoubted Parliament, is like to have a virtue too
immense for one region to contain, and moves with greater Majesty then as it
were resolved to confine its revolutions within the narrow limits of this
Island; for the policies are so many and transcendent, their resolutions so
firm and immovable, that they are easily powerful not only to banish the
Catholics out of their own Land, but do violence to the Romish faith in the
heart of Jtaly, and persuade the Turks and Barbares to become heretical
Impostors. It is able to make your Ancestors break their mabre lodgings, come
forth and quarrel this superlative fury, which riots so boundlesly. He that
would dis-compose this Parliament, must first overthrow a Kingdom, a Prince, a
Law; nay else as easily might he commixe with lightnings, or call back a
Thunderbolt, as offer to restore it: for it is diseased in mind, diseased past
recovery. All the Canons, and constitutions of that sacred Synod (which were
truly the Magazin of our spiritual strength) are here bitterly pestered, and
swept away; and the children of Policy, who made the advancement of your estate
and honor the greatest part of their study, are now most dangerously censured,
and made the deplored subject of the times. They take as little notice of your
offspring, the reverend Prelates, as the surly North does of the Snow; which
when it has engendered, its vild breath scatters through the earth forgotten.
If business take so hot a working, truly for what I can conjecture by the
purposes of heaven, or earth, all the Laurels growing on your Holiness Crest
will be turned to Cypres, serving to no use but to adorn your funerals; and
the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops of Italy shall be shortly sent to
visit their cold Urnes, and the Nuns left to keep warm their ashes with
their dearest tears.

Your Arch-officers, and friends, can be no more useful to your Holiness;
though they were indeed your ministering and faithful spirits, yet are they now
shut up in prisons, and groan under the martyring hand of impious and corrupt
Justice; resolve to compose their funeral Anthemes, and make ready condign
places for them in the Calender: for the blackest crime in their charge is,
that they have befriended the Romish cause (trusty souls!) and labored to
rectify a stubborn State too imperiously. The persecution is so hot here, and
the winnowing of men so exact, that sundry (out of conscience of humbling, and
weakening the State, to make it more capable of alterations, and and apt to
obey) not able to stand before such a sophisticat light, as is their Parliament
(which notwithstanding of our light esteem, has melted them as Snow) have
embraced a voluntar banishment, and transplanted themselves beyond sea, where
they may enjoy the safety of a more gracious shade, and under your Holiness
beams grow fat. We have not yet seen all the links of this chain of
providence, till the unwearied spheres, the dispensers of time, spin them out
one after another; but if your Holiness will cast your eyes about you, and
look to the commotions, and earthquakes in Kingdoms, and Commonwealths; We
dare almost be bold to say that your Kingdom is now at the age of consistence,
and can grow no further. Your Sunbeams have past the meridian, and chased
with the stifling mists of error, like smoke out of the pit, are swiftly
declining, and that without hopes to arise again; so they take it universally
for granted, and believe with strong confidence that now upon the stage of
Europe, there is a strange Comedy acting, whose Epilogue shall be in Rome; for
matters cannot stand at this point, but our enemies who have their desires
strengthened, will strive to encompasse what yet remains.

May it not well be feared that the English Majesty with his two puissant armies
in the fields (ready for all undertakings) shall espouse the cause of the
Hugenots in France, and now when the French King is offering to set his foot
upon that little republicke of Geneve, shall appear most terribly for their
relief, and lift up the Heretics horn now lying in the dust, and finally
confound all the pioning policies of the Cardinal Richilieu, who has so
prosperously triumphed in his garlands of Lillyes, and Floure-de-luces. What
should hinder him from becoming the head of all these pretended reformed
Churches? and display an uncontrolled banner, till he have sprung over the
Alps upon the wings of renown, and as full of success, as hopes spread fear
and love through the world; and having forgotten your right to the Patrimony of
the Church, by the benevolence of Constantine the Great, he strip you naked of
all your riches, and eminence; making you miserable as the poorest Capuchin:
and armed with zeal, tear down the walls of Rome like a ramping Lion? I
think We should be sufficiently puzzled, and the most generous Armies your
Holiness could command, would take them to their last abilities, and have use
of all their Counsel, and strength, if these motions should be followed.

It is here likewise reported to the great encouragement of our enemies, that
there be strange and dangerous Novations in France, which lead to an open
revolt, and the powerful prevailing of heresy; for if their Church Service be
received in a known tongue against the practices, and constitutions of the
Church (as the same flies) and that by the advice of the Hugenots, who will
never move beyond their Line, to meet us (not a hair breadth) certainly you
may then make the Myters Epitaph, and persuade your self of greater
inundations of evils then ever was thought to have sprung from the Covenant of
Scotland, or the Trienniall Parliaments in England; You may see then the
combustion which began in Scotland, and threatened but weakly at a great
distance, is now come to the skirts of the Holy Land almost, and that you had
need to look to your own building.

Our evils multiply, as the heads of Hydra; for what consequence may We
apprehend from the Marriage of the daughter of England, with those who be
Arch-enemies to your most Catholic Son, the right hand of your execution?
and can the Prince Palatine be arrived here for any thing which will bring
either happiness to the common cause, or divert the calamities which are daily
emergent, like swollen clouds of infection arising upon the Horizon and
darkening the sky? No, our evils are preparing as the Arrows are ready to
be sent from the bended bow.

Through this belief, the profane world do glory in most sacrilegious
insolences; for the dis-mantling of Churches, the pulling up of the railes
(which make the comely distance from the holy place) nay, the overturning of
Altars, (which in all the corners of the Kingdom did rise most bravely after
the Italian mode) are but the daily practices of the undanted, and
undistinguishing vulgar. We are come to such height of contempt, that Boys
sing our scandale in the streets; they tune Ballads to our infamy: and he that
can reproach us most handsomely, and deeply inform against us, has most
strongly demerited Church and State. I like not the complexion of our affairs;
strange symptoms of a most dangerous consumption, and many pregnant reasons for
the increase of our fears. The Pulpits have forgotten that gracious sound,
with which they were of late most entirely acquainted; the Books dare not
appear in the Romish dye, but come forth in squadrons; in strange habit, and
heretical colors. Our possession here is gone, it seems; and our hopes to
recover it, wholly blasted: nay if the pernicious Counsels, and the opinions
of the daring Scots prevail, We may as easily think to entice the Sun from
his Ecliptic, as work an alteration of their humors, or shake them from these
new grounds to which they are now so miserably wedded.

I dare not forget to show your Holiness, what great expressions of joy have bin
here in the City of London, tearing the clouds with the music of their
Bells, and condensing the air with the smoke of their Bonefires, as if they
had already seen their furthest desires crowned, and had bin ringing our
funeral knels; because the Prince has granted to the Estates a Triennall
Parliament, wherewith the people have been as strongly affected, as if they
had been delivered from Pest or Famine; or had received the spoils of most
important conquest: by this means they resolve to hammer us so flat, that We
shall never set up our heads, nor bud again.

If ever affliction could awake the Sons and Daughters of the Roman Church,
it is now, when the angry winds are let loose from the corners of the earth. We
have not indeed slept our time here, but practiced very laboriously, and
according as the Churches exigency did call us to a double care, so likewise
have We attempted all expediencies for deluding the purposes of our enemies,
and strengthening our selves. We have stretched our wit, and studied fitting
policies in all the latitude of a Catholic conscience; there remains nothing
in the treasure of invention which We have not solicit, and now in these
bleeding times with greater strength of wit; but I know not what has interposed
betwixt your Holiness influence, and a good effect: some thing of late has made
obstructions in the effectual derivations of your Apostolic Benedictions; all
has proved unprofitable: And (not to offend your Holiness) I fear least the
tide of your sorrows be but yet growing; for whereas We have ever magnified,
and exalted tradition above the Scripture, yet we know not how to fasten on
these Impostures, for they adhere so close to their Scriptures, in their
reasons, and opinions, that sooner may you divorce the light from the Sun, then
pull them from their grund slighting the traditions, and customs of the Romish
Church with as much disdain, as we neglect the Alchoran; and ever when they
oppone Scripture to our Traditions, We know not what to say, and have not bin
acquainted with other Authority then the Churches: therefore your Holiness would
do well to hearken to this, and consider that the times in likelihood are
coming, when the Scriptures (which have bin so highly esteemed by the
simplicity of that pretended Religion) will be the rule of faith, and
Church Government, and overthrow our subtilties: I hope your Holiness, as the
great Ghostly Father of the Church, will see that your building be firmly
seated upon permanent foundations; for if they be not sure and able for all
assaults, it may happily fall, and crush us all: and I assure your Holiness, if
your affronts increase, your strength do not convalesce, and this bad fortune
of the Miter continue, a panick fear will invade all your devoted Kings,
Princes, and Cardinals; they will betake them to the strongest side, and leave
you in the mire.

It is now therefore high time to summon up all that is virtue about you; What
ever any of the great Monarchs of the Church could ^oe, let it now appear by
your power most eminently displayed: your Holiness would do well to call a
Counsel, and consult with heavens, and learn how to stop these Heretics
mouths; convince them of the Truth, and heap coals on their heads: seek out
the end of these troubles that afflict the world; for it is indeed to be
feared, if Heresy become so insolent, and swell with so good fortune, that
shortly their Truth shall shine glorious as the Sun, and become as it were the
Idol of the world, extinguishing the life of our mysteries, under which We
have had such Halcyonian days.

Since then all the fabric of our Religion, the standing of the Apostolic
Empire, and all that is dear and splendid to the glory of the Miter is now
shaking; Rise up from your throne, put to your saving hand to the Helm, and
do not neglect one day, one hour, one minute to wear out with toil of plot,
and practice of conceit, your busy and fruitful wit; bestir like the first
mover, your inferior, and obedient Spirits, every one in their own sphere;
never take rest, nor force a smile which is not borrowed from a sacred, and
Papal vengeance, such as becomes the state of your disgrace, and unbounded
fate, till your Holiness know what way to satisfy fury and revenge; till you
and your successors, the undoubted Inheritors of the worlds Metropoliticall
throne, have touched the ends of the earth with your all conquering Scepter,
and has led Truth in Procession, triumphing over the ruins of error.

FINIS.
Pope's mitre The Daughter of Mystery, the child of Error,
Mother of Tyranny, of Wars, of Terror,
The Idol of Reproach, Rock of offense
To Jew and Gentile, Source of Indulgence
For all Impieties, and th'usurping Crest
'Bove Diademes, the State, the Churches Pest
Is now discov'red, and all the world awake.
Makes proud Rome, and th'opprobrious Myter shake.



