Strange and Remarkable Prophesies and Predictions Of the Holy Learned, and
Excellent JAMES USHER Late L. Archbishop of Armagh. and Lord Primate of
Ireland. Giving an Account of his foretelling

I. The Rebellion in Ireland Forty Years before it came to pass. II. The
Confusions and Miseries of England in Church and State. III. The Death of King
Charles the first. IIII. His own Poverty and want. V. The Devisions in England
in matters of Religion:
Lastly, Of a great and Terrible Persecution which shall fall upon the Reformed
Churches by the Papists, wherein the then Pope should be chiefly concerned.

Written by the Person who heard it from this Excellent Persons own Mouth, and
now published earnestly to persuade us to that Repentance and Reformation which
can only prevent our Ruin and Destruction.

And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do

Genesis 18.17. Licenced November the 16th

CORK, Reprinted by William Smith, in the Year 1677.

Strange and Remarkable Predictions of that Holy, Learned, and excellent
Bishop, James Usher, late Lord Primate of Ireland.
THe Author of the Life of this Excellent and Worthy Primate and Arch*Bishop,
gives an Account, that among other extraordinary gifts and graces, which it
pleased the Almighty to bestow upon him, he was wonderfully endued with a
Spirit of Prophecy, whereby he gave out several true Predictions and prophesies
of things a great while before they came to pass, whereof some we have seen
fulfilled, and others remain yet to be accomplished. And though he was one that
abhorred Enthusiastic Notions, being too Learned, Rational, and knowing, to
admit of such idle Freaks and Whimsies. Yet he prosest, That several times in
his life he had many things impressed upon his mind concerning future Events,
with so much warmness and importunity, that he was not able to keep them
secret, but lay under an unavoidable necessity to make them known.

From which Spirit he foretold the Irish Rebellion Forty years before it came
to pass, with the very time when it should break forth, in a Sermon Preached in
Dablin in 1601 where from Ezekiel. 4.6. discoursing concerning the Prophets
bearing the Iniquity of Judah forty days, the Lord therein appointed a day for
a year; he made this direct Application in Relation to the connivance at Popery
at that time. From this year (says he) will I reckon the sin of Ireland, that
those whom you now embrace, shall be your Ruin, and you shall bear this
Iniquity. Which prediction proved exactly true, for from that time 1601, to the
year 1641, was just Forty years, in which it is notoriovsly known, that the
Rebellion and Destruction of Ireland happened, which was acted by those Popish
Priests and other Papists which were then connived at. And of this Sermon the
Bishop reserved the Notes, and put a note thereof in the Margent of his Bible,
and for 20 years before he still lived in the expectation of the fulfilling
thereof, and the nearer the time was, the more confident he was that it was
near accomplishment, though there was no visible appearance of any such thing;
and (says Dr. Barnard) the year before the Rebellion broke forth, the Bishop
taking his leave of me, being then going from Ireland to England, he advised me
to a serious Preparation, for I should see heavy sorrows and miseries before I
saw him again; which he delivered with as great confidence, as if he had seen
it with his eyes, which seems to verify that of the Prophet, Amos 3.7. Surely
the Lord will do nothing but he will reveal it to his Servants the Prophets.

From this Spirit of Prophecy be foresaw the Changes and Miseries of England
in Church and State, for having in one of his Books, (called De Prim. Eccl.
Brit.) given a large account of the destruction of the Church and State of the
Britains by the Saxons, about 550 years after Christ: He gives this among
other Reasons, why he insisted so largely upon it, that he foresaw that a like
Judgment was yet behind, if timely Repentance and Reformation did not prevent
it: and he would often Mourn upon the foresight of this long before it came.

From this Spirit he gave mournful intimations of the Death of our late
Sovereign Charles the first, of whom he would be often speaking with fear and
trembling, even when the King had the greatest success, and would therefore
constantly pray, and gave all advice possible to prevent any such thing.

From this Spirit he foresaw his own Poverty in worldly things and this he
would often speak of with admiration to the hearors, when he was in his
greatest Prosperity, which the event did must certainly verify.

From this Spirit he Predicted the Devisions and Confusions in England in
matters of Religion, and the sad consequents thereof, some of which we have
seen fulfilled and I play God the rest which he feared may not also be
accomplished upon us.

Lastly from this Spirit he foretold, That the greatest stroke upon the
Reformed Churches was yet to come; and that the time of the utter Ruin of the Sea of Rome should be when she thought her self most secure: and as to this
last, I shall add a brief acount from the Persons own hand who was concerned
therein, which follows in these words.

The year before this Learned and holy Primate And Bishop Usher died, I went to
him, and earnestly desired him, to give me in Writing his apprehensions
concerning Justification and Sanctifi: cation by Christ, because I had formerly
heard him Preach upon those Points, wherein he seemed to make those great
Mysteries more intelligible to my mean capacity, then any thing which I had
ever heard from any other; but because I had but an imperfect and confused
Remembrance of the particulars, I took the boldness to importune him, that he
would please to give a brief account of them in Writing, whereby I might the
better imprint them in my Memory, of which he would willingly excused himself,
by declaring his intentions of not writing any more, adding that if he did
write any thing it should not exceed above a sheet or two; but upon my
continued importunity, I at last obtained his promise.

He coming to Town some time after, was pleased to give me a visit at my own
House, where I failed not to challenge the benefit of the promise he had made
me; He replied, That he had not writ, and yet he could not charge himself with
any breach of Promise; For (said he) I did begin to write, but when I came to
write of Sanctification, that is of the New Creature, which God forms by his
Spirit in every Soul which he does truly Regenerate I found so little of it
wrought in myself, that I could speak of it only as Parrots by Rote, and
without the knowledge and understanding of what I might have expressed, and
therefore I durst not presume to proceed any further upon it.

And when I seemed to stand amazed to hear such an humble Confession from so
great and experienced a Christian, He added I must tell you, we do not well
understand what Sanctification and the New Creature are; It is no less then for
a man to be brought to in an (...) ^signation of his will to the will of God,
and to live in the Offering up of his Soul continually in the flames of Love,
as a whole burnt Offering to Christ and how little (says he) are many of those
who profess Christianity experimentally acquainted with this work on their
Souls.

By this Discourse, I conceived he had very excellently and clearly discovered
to me that part of Sanctification which he was unwilling to write.

I then presumed to enquire of him what his present apprehensions were
concerning a very great Persecution which should fall upon the Church of God in
these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, of which this Reverend Primate
had spoken with great confidence many years before, when we were in the highest
and fullest state of outward Peace and Settlement. I asked him whether he did
believe those sad times to be past, or that they were yet to come, To which he
answered, That they were yet to come and that he did as considently expect it,
as ever be had done, adding, That this sail Persecution would sall upon all the
Protestant Churches of Europe; I replied, That I did hope it might have been
past as to these Nations of ours, since I thought, that though we, who are the
People thereof, have been punished much less than our sins have deserved, and
that our late Wars had made far less devastations, then War commonly brings
upon those Countries where it pleases God in Judgment to suffer it; yet we
must needs acknowledge, that many great Houses had been Burnt, Ruined, and left
without Inhabitants, many great Families impoverished and undone, and many
thousand Lives also had been lost in that bloody War, and that Ireland and
Scotland, as well as England, had drunk very deep of the Cup of Gods Anger,
even to the overthrow of the Government, and the utter Desolation almost of a
very great part of those Countries.

But this Holy man, turning to me, and fixing his Eyes upon me with that
serious and ireful look which he usually had when he spoke Gods word and not
his own; and when the power of God seamed to be upon him and to constrain him
to speak, (...) could easily discern much to differ from the countenance
wherewith he usually spoke to me; He said thus,

Fool not your self with such hopes, for I tell you, all you have yet seen,
has been but the beginning of sorrows to what is yet to come upon the
Protestant Churches of Christ, who will ere long fall under a sharper
Pers^cution then ever yet has upon them; and therefore (said he to me) look you
he not found in the Outward Court, but a worshipper in the Temple before the
Altar, for Christ will measure all these that profess his Name and call
themselves his People and the Outward worshippers he will leave out, to
be^rodden down by the Gentiles. The Outward Court (says he) is the formal
Christian, whose Religion lies in performing the outside duties of Christ
stianity, without having on inward Life and Power of Faith, and Love uniting
them to Christ, and these God will leave to be trodden down, and swept away by
the Gentiles; But the worshippers within the Temple and before the Altar, are
those who do indeed worship God in spirit and Truth, whose Souls are made his
Temple, and he is Honored and Adored in the most inward thou his of their
hearts, and they Sacrifice their Lusts and vile affections, yea and their own
wills to him; and these God will hide in the hollow of his Hand, and under the
shadow of his wings, and this shall be one great difference between this last,
and all the other preceding pers^cutions; For in the former, the most eminent
and spiritual. Ministers and Christians did generally suffer most, and were
most violently fallen upon, but in this fast Persecution, these shall he
preserved by God as a Se^d to partake of that Glory which shall immediately
follow and come upon the Church, as s^on as ever this storm shall be over; for
as it shall be the sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Persecution of them
all; and shall only take away the the gross Hypocrites and ^ormal Professors,
but the true Spiritual Believers shall be preser^^d ^ill the Calamity be over
past.

I then asked him by what means or Instruments this great Trial should be
brought on, He answered B^ the Papists, I replied, that it seemed to me very
improbable they should be able to do it, since they were now little
countenanced, and but few in these Nations, and that the hearts of (...) People
were more ^et against them then ever since the Reformation. He answered again,
That it would be by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden Massacree;
'and that the then Pope should be the chief Instrument of of it.

All this he Spoke with so great Assurance, and with the same serious and
concerned Countenance, which I have before observed him to have, when I have
heard him foretell some things which in all humane appearance were very
unlikely to come to pass, which yet my sell have lived to see happen according
to his Prediction, and this made me give the more earnest attention to what he
then uttered.

He then added, That the Papists were in his Opinion the Gentiles spoken of in
the 11th of the Revelations, to whom the Outward Court should be left, that
they might tread it underfoot; They having received the Gentiles worship in
their adoreing Images, and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many
Mediators; And this (Said he) the Papists are now designing among themselves,
and therefore be sure you be ready.

This was the Substance, and I think (for the greatest part) the very same
words which this Holy man spoke to me at the time before mentioned not long
before his death, and which I writ down, that so great and noble a Prediction
might not be lost and forgotten by my self nor others.

This gracious Man repeated the same things in Substance to his only daughter
the Lady (...) and that with many tears, and much about the same time that he
had expressed what is aforesaid to me, and which the Lady Tyrril assured me of
with her own mouth, to this purpose.

That opening the Door of his Chamber, She found him with his Eyes lift up to
Heaven, and the tears running a pace down his Checks, and that he s^emed to be
in an Ex^asie, wherein he continued for about half an hour, not taking the
least notice of her, though she came into the Room, but at last turning to her,
he told her, That his thoughts had been taken up about the Miseries and
Persecutions that were coming upon the Churches of Christ, which would be so
sharp and bitter, that the contemplation of them had fetched those Tears from
his Eyes, and that he hoped he should not live to see it but possibly she
might, for it was even at the door, Therefore take head (says he) that you he
not found sleeping.

The same things he also Repeated to the Lady Basse, Wife to the present Lord
Chief Baron of Ireland, but with adding this circumstance, That if they brought
back the King, it might be delayed a little longer, but (said he) It will
surely come; therefore be sure to look that you he not found unprepared for it.

To conclude in the words of Dr. Barnard, speaking of this Excellent Person,
Now howsoever I am as far from heeding of Prophesies this way as any, yet with
me it is not Improbable, tha^ so great a Prophet, so sanctified from his youth,
so knowing and eminent throughout the Universal Church, might have at some
special times more then Ordinary Motions and Impulses in doing the watch-mans
part, of giving warnining of Judgments approaching.

FINI^

