EIGHTEEN SERMONS PREACHED IN OXFORD 1640 Of Conversion, unto God. Of
Redemption, and Justification, by Christ. By the Right Reverend James Usher,
late Bishop of Armagh in Ireland.

Published by Jos: Crabb. Will: Ball. Tho: Lie.
Ministers of the Gospel, Who writ them from his mouth, and compared their
Copies together. With a Preface concerning the Life of the pious Author, by the
Reverend Stanly Gower, sometime Chaplain to the said Bishop.

He being dead yet speaks. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for Will: Churchill
Bookseller in Dorc^^ster. 1660.

Pietate aeque ac Doctrina Praecellenti Viro Henrico Henley de Coleway in
Comitatu Dorcestrensi Armigero, (...).
EXimium illud quod semper exhibuisti (vir pientissime) Religionis specimen
subsequentes hasce conciones sub nomiminis tui vexillo haud immerito evocavit.
Chara adeo Tibimet and cordi sunt Sacrosancta Dei eloquia, ut quod tenuitas
nostra and facultatula amanuensis in hac repraestiterit, nequaquam dubito quin
pro singulari tua and Pietate and humanitate boni consulere digneris. Authorem
quod attinet, Panegyrin ille nullatenus nostram desiderat, quippe omnia quae
meditemur Elogia multis parasangis superavit. Excelsum adeo and Sanctimoniae
and doctrinae apicem attigit, ut elaborata illa and subsequens Praefatiuncula
non immerito ad caelos ipsum laudibus evexit, and encomiis sacris decoravit.
Nostrum est interea^ Te, Te inquam (vir Ornatissime) candidu^ librorum
aes^imatorem appellare, qui singulari and pietate and peritia praeditus, de usu
illorum and emolumento, aequo calculo statuere didicisti. Sagaci igitur has
Tibi dicatas conciones dum introspicias oculo, facessant precor and impuri and
haeretici illi codices qui indies in lucem gregatim prodeunt, e quorum faetidis
myrothecis vitiorum non remedium sed irritamentum, non salubre Alexipharmacon
sed exitiale toxicum quam plurimi hauserunt; Imo facessant miselli isti
Authors Daemonis impuri spiritu afflati, ut pote qui Reipublicae and Ecclesiae
detrimento sat consuluerunt. Non decet liberorum panem canibus objici, nedum
canum offas sic liberis ingeri, ut Circaeo quasi fascinati poculo in canes
ipsos, in boves, in hircos, in lupos transforma rentur. Interea temporis,
tametsi ego (vir colendissime) imperitiae and tenuitatis meae probe conscius
sum, minime tamen dubitem quin and Tibi and aliis eximie piis, congesta hocce
in codicillo apprime arrideant: spiritualibus enim fidelium palatis, tam
aptissime conceptus animi Doctor hic admodum. Reverendus and vere
Ecclesiasticus accomodavi^, tam dilucide tradidit, utque pater nutricius ita
praemansum cibum in os, and in aures fidelium verba sua inseruit, ut merito
primas sui Ordinis tenuit, and sublimi sua emicuit sphaera -- veluti inter
ignes I una minores. Non equidem ignoro quae regerent prodeunti huic parum
propitii libello, lubricis scilicet Amanuensium memoriis plurima excidisse,
veluti ex pertuso dolio effluxa: nec sane inficias ire ausim. Nihilo tamen
secius -- Est quiddam prodire tenus, si non detur ultra. Nec adeo mediocrem
hunc nostrum existimamus conatum, ut judicium cujusvis (...) praecipitatum non
leviter rejiceremus. Parum forsis digna tam eruditi Concionatoris authoritate
and eloquentia aliquibus quaedam videantur, at illis qui divina sapiunt, valde
consona and gravitati and veritati sacrosanctae Scripturae reperientur. Luce
clarius patet quid in causa est, omnes omnium aetatum, omnium ordinum
homunciones, tantam pervasisse morum corruptelam, nimirum quod nec vitia far
possumus nostra, nec remedia. Lavacru^ Dei plane rejecimus, ideoque a
faedissimis vitiorum inquinamentis nondum repurgamur. Quae auribus nostris
excepimus, animisque caelitus impressa persensimus (quicquid homines, vel
Daemones contrasentiant aut loquantur) non possumus non palam divulgare, ne aut
propriae stolidissime experientiae, aut Gratiae divinae petulantissime
refragari videamur. Ah! quoties and Religio and timor (illo concionante)
auditorum animos subierunt? Quot mentibus fracti, and alto maerore adeo
correpti and exanimati inter depingendos Salvatoris nostri cruciatus evaserunt,
ut nullas lacrymarum inducias admitterent, sed spiritus suspiriis, and dolori
pectora sua devoverunt, donec ille, ille inquam, qui vulnera divino auxilio
fecerat, quasi spiculis and aculeis caelitus transfixos animos, sanguinis
Christi applicatione tempestive allevasset? At! at! coelestis hic cecidit
Praeco, eode^que ictu ne corruerent etiam conciones illae quam mellifluae,
tantique plurimis auditorum Emolumenti, ab interitu and oblivione post tot
retro and elapsos annos quibus delituerunt, vindicantur. Et revera (absit
jactantiae crimen) audacter hoc omnibus editioni harum concionum parum
faventibus reponere audemus, non alia usquam extare exemplaria majori
Amanuensium diligentia and labor collecta; ideoque nescii, imo dubii annon
post tantum silentium alia parum genuina and ascititia proserperent, Deo (uti
speramus) auspice in publicum hoc emisimus. Tuis interim (vir dignissime)
manibus haec chartulae dicatae posteris tradentur, nomenque tuum futuris
saeculis non injuria praedicabunt, and cum illae sileant -- Quod been feceris
mercedem tuleris. Deus opt. max. omnibus ingenii and gratiae dotibus magis
magisque indies cumulatum, pietatis and religionis orthodoxae, literarum and
literatorum Patronum te diutissime incolumem praestet, obnixe ex animo vovet

Tibi (vir Ornatissime) omni observantia addictissimus JOSEPHUS CRABB.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader.
THese following Sermons are such, as several years since were taken from the
mouth of that Man of God the reverend Armagh. When by reason of that bloody
Rebellion in Ireland, this star of the greatest Magnitude, was forced to quit
his proper Orb, it pleased the Lord, to fix him, as a shining, burning light,
for some time in Oxon. Whilst there, he constantly spent himself, and was
spent in preaching Christ and him crucified. This he did like himself, with
that soundness, diligence, Evidence, faithfulness, and zeal, that he seemed not
only willing to Impart the Gospel, but his own Soul unto us. To this day, we
seem to see how the Bowels of that Elisha the (Charets and Horsemen of our
English Israel) even ^ern'd upon the sons of the Prophets. Poor ^reatures, at
that time, how was our English (...) A film of superstition, and profaness was
there then grown over one of the eyes of this our Island! Our pulpits turned as
it were into stages; and sadly prostituted to froth and jerks at godliness. As
for truly learned, soul-searching, soul-saving Preaching, it was that which the
most of us either knew not, or scorned. The mode of our then Sermons, was more
to please the fancy, then to pierce the Heart; to tickle the Ear, rather then
wound the Conscience, or save the precious the Immortal Soul. At that time,
when we lay thus weltring in our Blood and Vanity, was the Lord pleased to
Cause this star to arise and shine in our Horizon, and by his light and
influence to guide us to Bethlehem. A time of love it was, an accepted Time, a
Time never to be forgotten, specially by those who through grace can from
thence date the Era of their sound Conversion. The persuasion of Armaghs
incomparable Learning, the Observation of his awful Gravity, the Evidence of
his Eminent and exemplary Piety, all improved to the height by his
Indefatigable Industry, drew students to flock to him as Doves to the windows.
It joys us to recollect how multitudes of Scholars, specially the heads of our
Tribes, thronged to hear the sound of his silver Bells; How much they were
taken with the voice of this wise Charmer! How their ears seemed as it were
fastened to his lips, that were like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh. How
did many, very many at that time, Galatians-like, receive this Aged Paul, as an
Angel of God, yea even As Christ. Surely if ever, it was then, that the Gospel
ran and was glorified in Oxon. Then, then it was that the Lord seemed to lay
the foundations of his spiritual Temple there with saphires, and the
Corner-stones thereof with Agats. Here might you have seen a Sturdy Saul
changed into a submissive Paul, a persecutor transformed into A preacher. There
A tender hearted Josiah lamenting after the Lord, and with Ephraim smiting on
his thigh, saying what have I done. Others with the penitent Jews so stabd at
the Heart, as that they are forced to cry out in the Bitterness of their
souls, Men, Brethren, Fathers, oh what shall we do. These were some of the
blessings from on high, which attended These Sermons when preached to the ear,
oh that a like or a greater might follow them, now they are printed to the eye.

These Notes, it is true, were taken by such, who All had the pens of ready
writers, and after that completed by A strict comparing of several distinct
papers. This is the Body, the Bulk of these Heavenly sermons. The gloss, the
Spirit, The Energy of them, was and must be wholly from Above. We Trust, the
publishing of these Notes will not be interpreted by any in the least to
reflect on the unparalleld worth of the Preacher, to whose very Dust we owe A
sacred Reverence. If any thing seems not to speak him let it be charged not on
him, Male dum recitas, etc.
but the Publishers, who have only this to add, viz. Their fervent prayers,
That these sermons may find the like influence on the hearts of others, in the
reading, that they had on their own in the hearing, then will Both have
Abundant Cause to bless the Lord.

Thy Servants for Jesus sake, Jos. Crabb. Will. Ball. Tho. Lie.
Imprimator Edm. Calamy
A PREFACE Concerning the Author, and these NOTES.
THough I might be silent, concerning either the most famous Preacher of these
Sermons, or these notes now published which were taken after him, yet such is
the high esteem I have of him, and the due respect I hear to them for his sake
chiefly, that I could not withstand the request of diverse who Importuned some
Lines from me upon this occasion, both concerning the one and the other.

First I commend unto the Reader a diligent perusal of the life and death of
the most Reverend and Learned Father of our Church Dr. Jam. Usher late
Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of all Ireland, put forth by Reverend and
Learned Dr. Bernard where he shall meet with many delightful passages
concerning, His Stock and pedigree. Great parts, Gifts, and Graces. Ingenious
Education. Admirable Proficiency. Timely Conversion. Rare Learning.
Indefatigable Industry. Strict and holy Conversation. Pious Government of his
Family. Amicable correspondence with Foreign Churches. Prophetic Spirit.
Learned writings. Comfortable Visitation. Lord in special forgive my sins of
omission, see Dr. Ber. Life and death of the Arch. Bp. of Armagh. p. 110
Dying words, never to be buried. Blessed Death. Ever to be lamented Loss. Fit
Parallel to Samuel among the Prophets, to Augustine amongst the Fathers.
with many other things worthy Observation: and when he has pondered these
well, he will the less wonder that his name has filled the Christian world as
much as ever did Augustine or Athanasius of old, or Whitakers and Reynolds of
later times.

Secondly I tender these spices gathered to the Embalming of this Rare Phoenix
out of his own ashes, holding my self engaged as much as any to cast my mite
into the treasury of his blessed memory, as having had my Been esse most from
him.

Dublin in Ireland, his native City and Country above forty years ago.



ordained (or to use the Apostles word) put into the ministry, (...).
and the same day admitted his Chaplain in ordinary, now two and thirty years
ago: though then able to do him little service; being called to a Sheffeild in
Yorkshire^
Congregation in another nation: which call his Grace did then approve of.

Having given this account to the Reader I shall only mention three things
Concerning him, and forbear many more that might be added.

First, to the testimonies concerning him from Spanhemius, Ger. Vossius,
Buchartus, Simplitius, ^ud. de dieu. Paulus Testardus, Blessensis, Arnoldus
Bootius, Mr. Seldom, Dr. Prideaux, Bp. Davenant, Bertius, Mr. Cambden, Sir Rog.
Twisden, and the whole University of Oxford, beside the forced testimony of his
adversaries, Moranez. Beaumont, (Alias) Rookwood, Challoner, Hen. Fitz-Symonds,
for all which I refer to the book aforesaid; give me leave to add the testimony
of Dr. William Chapel, sometimes fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, and
afterward Provost of Trinity College near Dublin: which from such an acute
man as he was, may amount to the like equivalent testimony from the Universitie
of Cambridge. He gave me once three reasons why he thought Doctor Usher (then
James Mead Anagram, I am the same. See Dr. Bernard page 52.
Bishop of Mead) was in his esteem the greatest Scholar in the Christian world.

1. One was, because of his rare natural parts, the foundation of his other
Learning; having a quick Apprehension, a prompt Wit, a strong Memory, a clear
Understanding, a piercing Judgment, and a ready utterance: Seldom (said he)
shall you meet all these in an Eminent degree in the same person, but in him
they so concurred, that it is hard to say in which he most excelled.

2. Another was, because few men though they had such parts were either able or
willing to make so rich improvement of them, by choice Libraries, unwearied
studying in them, and searching out the Rarities of any other: few men's bodies
and brains (he believed) would bear it.

3. The third was, because he was so esteemed both in these Universities, and
in those beyond the seas: and indeed whosoever conversed with him, found him
(if they pleased to try it) a skilful Linguist, a Subtle Disputant, a fluent
Orator, a profound Divine, a mighty Antiquary, an exact Chronologer, and indeed
a living and walking Library; The greatest professors have admired the
Concatenation of so much and such variety of Learning in one person.

Learned to read of two of his Aunts that were both blind. Was converted from a
state of Nature into grace at ten years old. Was admitted the first Scholar
into the College at Dublin, and that upon design, by reason of his pregnancy
and forwardness, at thirteen years of age. Made an exact Chronology of good
part of the Bible, and of some other Authors he had read, at fifteen years old.
Encountered a Jesuit at 19. years old, and afterward was called by him (of
such as are not Catholics) the most Learned. Was Master of Arts, answered the
Philosophy Act, and chosen Catechist of the College, when he went through a
great part of the body of Divinity, in the Chapel, by way of common place, at
nineteen yeears old. Commenced Batchelour of Divinity at twenty seven years
old, and immediately after was chosen Professor of Divinity in that University.


Do but think I say how mighty he was, when beside his promptness in School
Divinity, he had read over all the Fathers, and trusted his own eyes in the
search of them by that he was thirty eight years of age, and was Master of all
other Learning also.

which they stand from Prelacy, or by reason of their Engagement in the late
civil and unhappy differences between The late King and Parliament; claiming to
themselves Liberty wherein soever they differ from others, both in matters of
Church and State, but allowing to others as little concerning either: to such
as these (if they be such as deserve satisfaction) give me leave to say,

A Divine and Apostolical Bishop he was, and next to the Apostles, Evangelists,
and Prophets, as great a Pastor and Teacher, and trusted with as much of Gods
mind, as I believe any one since has been.

An Ecclesiastical Bishop he was also, and the most able Moderator in Church
assemblies: To him pertained the double honor for ruling well, and for
Laboring in word and Doctrine: Famous were two of his Predecessors in that See
Dr. Ber. Epist. to the Reader in his life and death, etc.
See of Armagh, in their Generations, the one for his sanctity, the other for
his Learning, but both these Eminently met in him; John the Divine commends
the Angel or Bishop of Ephesus, etc. and Ireland will do no less for this
Angel or Bishop of Armagh.

But for Popish Bishops, none was further off then he: Witness his Learned
Writings against the Romish Synagogue, his Judgment within the bounds of a
moderated Episcopacy; and when the Reader has perused that See the Reduction
of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Government Received in the Ancient
Church: published by Doctor Bernard, in a Book entitled, The Judgment of the
Late Arch Bishop of Armagh, etc.
frame of Church Government drawn up under his own hand and now published, he
will see what a good Bishop Doctor Usher was.

The last thing which I shall propose to the Reader, is The Crown God set upon
the head of this Humble Saint, both in the Conversion and Edification of very
many. Indeed 2 Samuel 1.22.
his bow seldom turned back, nor his sword returned empty. God was mighty in
him, which way soever he bent himself, either in Conviction, Conversion, or
Consolation, wherein he had Isa. 50.4.
the Tongue of the Learned given unto him; Witness the many Souls who were,
and are his 2 Cor. 3.2.
Epistle known and read of all Men; Witness again the success God gave to
diverse of his Encounters with Adversaries to the true Religion: some instances
whereof the Learned Doctor that writes his Life has given, to which many more
might be added. Witness also such as were his frequent hearers, how mightily
the hand of God was with him, so that Acts 11.21.
a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. If Dan 12.3.
they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as stars for ever and ever,
then this famous Evangelist is a star of the greatest Magnitude, and will be
able in the strength of Christ to say after him, Heb. 2.13.
Behold I and the Children which God has given me.

And though the work of the Ministry is ours, the success Gods, yet who so
expects blessing from God upon his Labors, I cannot commend to such, a
pattern more exact to be imitated amongst the men of this Generation, then this
good Bishop, especially in these three things.

Tim. 4.12.
an example in word, in Conversation, in Love, in Spirit, in faith, and in
purity. Many there were who in that respect Reverenced him, though of the
Romish Synagogue, as Mark 6.20.
Herod did John the Baptist, knowing that he was a just and an holy man.

This blessed Preacher did Live all his Sermons, and had learned of Jesus who,
Acts 1.1. (...).
began both to do and to teach. Nazianzens Epitaph on the life of Basil was
true in him, His words were Thunder, his Life Lightning.

Secondly in making Christ and the Apostles the pattern of his preaching, this
great Master in Israel was the most self-denying man in the pulpit, and the
most Reverend and Christ advancing Preacher.

He preached Mat 7.29.
with great Authority as did our Savior to the Conscience 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
his speech was not with enticing words of Man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the spirit, and of power: that their faith might not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. How often have I seen my self, and heard from
others, whilst he thus prophesyed, some that believed not, coming to hear him,
1 Cor 14.24, 25.
go away Convinced of all, Judged of all, and the secrets of their heart made
manifest, and so falling down on their face they have worshipped God, and
reported that God was in him of a truth. He was an Acts 18.24.
Apollos an Eloquent man and mighty in the scriptures: he was another Paul in
the preaching that did Collatis scripturae locis Probans, nempe sicuti solent
artifices aliquid Compacturi, singulas parts inter se comparare, ut inter se
alia aliis ad amussim quadrent. Bez. In Act. 9.22. Efficere condescensionem ut
sic dicam id est argumentis propositis efficere, ut aliquis tecum in eandem
sententiam descendat. Mr. Leigh. Critic. sacr. In verb. (...).
compare Scripture with Scripture, and so make demonstrative Proofs from the
spirit speaking in them Some that affected a frothy way of preaching by strong
Lines (as they call them) after they heard him in Oxford decry that Corinthian
vanity were much ashamed, and took up a more profitable way of preaching. Those
words of his in a sermon at the Court before the King, are worthy to be printed
in Letters of Gold, And oh! that God would print them in the hearts of all the
Ministers in the World. Ser. before K. James Wansted. June 20. 1629 page 34, 35.
Great Scholars (said he) possibly may think it stands not with their Credit
to stoop so low, etc. But let the Learned of us all try it when ever we
please, we shall find that to lay this groundwork right, that is, to apply our
selves to the Capacity of the Common Auditory, and to make an ignorant man to
understand these mysteries in some good measure, will put us to the trial of
our skill, and trouble us a great deal more, then if we were to discuss a
Controversy, or handle a subtle point of Learning in the Schools.

Solomon's styled the Preacher, Ecl. 12.10, 11
because he was wise he did still teach the people knowledge, yea he gave good
heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs, the Preacher sought to
find out (...)
acceptable words, and words of truth, and as our Savior that was greater then
Solomon he would let truths substantially proved into the understanding wish
apt similitudes: and would John 16.5.
Encourage any to move their doubts unto him in private: so that
notwithstanding his greatness, good Christians might be very familiar with him,
visit them in their sickness supply their wants, beg their prayers, and
Countenance them in whatsoever Condition: all men might see Psalm. 16.3.
his delight was in the Saints, and that he was (as that King Acts 13.12.
after Gods own heart) Psalm. 119.63.
a Companion of all them that feared God, in a word, he was a great proficient
in that Lesson of our Savior Math. 11, 29.
Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart. This (I say) was the reason he
grew so high in favor with God and man: he honored God, and therefore God
honored him. A great and good draw-net he was that fished for souls and
catched many: and let two sorts of Ministers gather from hence their respective
Instructions.

of holiness, painfulness, and Humility. Take notice of Gods Justice in dealing
with them as they have done with him. Mal. 2.4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
His Covenant is with Levi of Life and Peace, and he gave them to him, for the
fear wherewith he feared him, and was afraid before his name: the Law of truth
was in his mouth, and Iniquity was not found in his lips, he walked with God
in peace, and equity, and did turn many a way from iniquity, for the priests
lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: but says the Lord, ye are departed out
of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the
Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts. Therefore have I also made you
contemptible and base before all the people, according as you have not kept my
ways, but have been partial in the Law. Had we all the means in the world to
make us great, if we either do not teach, or do not make our selves Examples of
what we teach, it is just with God we grow contemptible and vile, for the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it. Esaias 43.27.28.
Thy teachers have transgressed against me, therefore have I profaned the
rulers of my Sanctuary. The Lord gives this for a general Rule, as 1 Samuel 2 30.
they that honor him he will honor: so they that despise him shall be
despised.

holy painful and humble Ministers who make it their design (as this fair
Copy did before them) to advance God and fulfill the work of their Ministry,
trust to his faithfulness for vindicating their esteem. No sort of men have
greater promises for provision, protection from, and in trouble, and for
revenge of wrongs done unto them, then they have. What a dreadful and
prophetical prayer is that Moses made for Levi! Deuteronomy. 33 11.
smite through the Loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate
him, that they rise not again. What though a generation of men Call even the
best of such, Antichristian Liars? false Prophets? and what not, did they not
after this manner use Math. 5.12 and 10.25.
Christ and his Apostles before them? They speak evil of the things they know
not. None of Gods blessed truths and holy Ordinances have been otherwise used
by them: their general outcry is upon all truths, Ordinances and ways of
Religion among us, as Antichristian: The Apostacy of the present age makes men
fall from all things in Religion, and with an impudent face to deny and deride
them all. But did God leave these Jewels amongst men to be trodden under feet
by such swine; shall they not dearly pay for it? Oh! that they would remember
what words came out of the mouth of him that is the very promptuary of all
sweetness, and how highly he is provoked when such words are drawn from his
blessed lips that drop honey: let them take them to whom they appertain, viz.
Math 21.44.
Whosoever shall fall upon this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it
shall fall it will grind him to pieces. If their own destruction will not take
them off from touching the Lords anointed, and from plucking the stars out of
his hand, let yet the Anguish and vexation that shall accompany their
destruction, either deter them, or confound them: for he has said it who will
make it good, that there shall be a Rev. 11.11.
Resurrection both unto Gods truths, and to such as bear Testimony thereunto:
Mean while, let this satisfy such as are faithful, whilst God and those that
truly fear God prize faithful Ministers, It matters not what the rest think
of them, As King David said in not much an unlike Case, 2 Samuel 6.22.
of those shall they be had in honor.

I have now done with the most famous Author of these sermons, of whom I may as
one very Learned said of Mr. Calvin, Calvino (illustri viro, nec unquam sine
summi honoris prefatione nominando) non assentior. Bp Andrews. De Vsuris.
That famous Man, and never to be named without some Preface of Honor. Or as
another of a Learned and Godly Man, God has so provided, that they who lived
in Heaven whilst on Earth, shall live on Earth whilst in Heaven: That they
shall leave their Names for a blessing, when others leave them behind them for
a Curse. Or rather with the Apostle of Demetrius, 3 John 12.
he has a Good Report of all men, and of the truth it self.

A word now concerning these Sermon Notes of his, by occasion of the publishing
whereof I have thus enlarged.

I suppose whosoever reads and well considers the two prefixed Epistles,
one in Latin, the other in English, and the Arguments therein contained, and
knows the Reverend Framers of them, (for such testimonies are as the Testes)
when he considers I say, 1. Their High Esteem of the most famous Preacher of
them. 2. The mighty power of God upon themselves, and many others when they
were preached, 3. The care they took to put them forth, 4. The ingenuous owning
of any infirmities which the Reader may charge that seems not to speak himself
in the Publication of them,
He will not think either the will of the most Learned Bishop broken, or the
Caution of the Learned and Reverend Dr. that writes his life not heeded, viz.
That if any sermon notes taken from him have been printed in his life time
under his name, Declarat. what books are his, what not. Dr. Ber. page 20, l 21.
or shall be hereafter (which diverse have of late attempted) the Reader is to
take notice that it was against his mind, and that they are disowned by him,
which as he endeavored to his utmost to suppress while he was living, so it
was his fear to be injured in it after his death; For



viz. That he preached these sermons, and to take to themselves that which is
theirs, viz. any thing that seems not to speak him in the publication.

Thirdly if in his life time when he endeavored to his utmost to suppress
such publications, there came out without his knowledge, and against his mind,
That book entitled, See Dr. Ber. Loc. Citat.
The sum and substance of Christian Religion, some of the materials with the
Method only his, collected by him in his younger years for his own private use,
but the rest Transcribed out of Mr. Cartwrights Chatechisme, and Mr. Crooks,
and some other English Divines, dissonant in diverse places from his own
judgment; he was yet very well content any industrious person that would cut
off what is weak and superfluous therein, and supply the wants thereof, and
cast it into a new Mould of his own framing, should make what use he pleases
of the materials therein, and set out the whole in his own name, Because he
perceived it had done much good: Then I say it may be supposed had he yet been
alive (as I hope his good name will never dye) he would have been contented
upon the same account to let these notes go forth. The publishers were high
honourers of him, men of Learning and Judgment, and though all be not taken
which perhaps he spoke, and something perhaps also himself would have pared off,
(as it is scarce possible for any man but himself to publish, either sermon, or
any thing else came out of his mouth, in that exactness himself would have
done it;) yet is here nothing added of their own, here is only (as they say)
See their Epist to the Reader.
the body, the bulk, not the Gloss, the spirit, the energy of them. These
things considered it is hoped (which they trust) Ibidem.
the publishing of these notes will not be interpreted by any, in the least to
reflect on the unparalleld worth of the preacher, to whose very dust they
profess to owe a sacred reverence.

I rather think it were a kind of sacrilege, had they not done it, if these
three things be well and duly weighed.

Dr. Preston, Mr. Bolton, and many others, some of their sermons printed by
themselves look not like those of their sermons printed by others; yet Learned
men and Godly, have blessed God that they were published. Mr. Cotton wishes See
Mr. Cottons Epist. to Mr. Hildersams Book on John 4.
that such sermons or Letters as happily have layen by many years might be
brought to light: such little things as the Author would hardly acknowledge
under his own name, might be of special use and esteem unto others. And his
reason is, why should any talent be buried in a napkin, or candle lie hid under
a bushel, which being set on a Candlestick might give light to all that are in
the house? yea those See Capt. Bell. Narat. before Luth. Mensal. Colloq.
divine discourses at Luthers table, etc. More loose than these sermons, did
much good in Germany, (as their translator testifyeth) and being by strange
providence preserved to posterity, and made to speak English, was judged by a
great Prelate of Canterbury, a work worthy of eternal memory, and that he had
never read a more excellent divine work: and that the more he did read them,
the more desire he had to go on therewith: and that he would make it known to
the then King, what an excellent piece of work was translated, and that he
would procure an order from his Majesty to have the book printed, and to be
dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, as it was in Germany. Yet is that
book censured by Polanus to be Liber ille ^onvivalium sermonum non est Lutheri,
nec Luthero approbante aut etiam vivente editus sed est Rapsodia sine Judicio
and Intellectu consarcinata. Polan. syntag. de canonic.

Authorit. script. page fol. 45.


neither Luthers, nor published by any approbation of his, but a rapsody
patched together without understanding or judgment, and printed after his
death. None such will be found in these sermon notes: something of Luthers
spirit may be discerned in these Colloquies, But much more of the Gracious and
heavenly spirit of this unparalleld Bishop. The Reader will miss in these
notes indeed the exactness of his Immanuel, or the incarnation of the son of
God so accuratly couched that you cannot find a word defective or redundant;
nor will he find these notes like the two sermons published by himself: but yet
they may meet with acceptance. by reason of the diligence of those that attest
them.

Secondly, That if God bless the reading as he did the preaching of them, none
of his surviving friends but may rejoice that in them Heb 11.4.
he being dead yet speaks. Indeed those worthy men do it upon an higher
account then some, others perhaps did like them from the Rhetoric, Language,
or Learning Couched in them, It was the heavenly Art, the spiritual Efficacy
and power, the soul-searching, soul-saving virtue that took with them, they
found them to pierce the heart and Conscience, more then tickle the ear or
fancy of their hearers. Bp. Andrews sermon 7. of Rep. and Fast.
The true praise of a sermon (says one of note) is some evil left, some good
done upon the hearing of it, one such fruit were a more ample commendation,
then many mouths full of good words spent, and copies taken and printing, etc.
and sure it is, on whom a sermon works aright, it leaves him no leisure to say
much, or use many words, but makes him rather full of thoughts. Thus did these
sermons the hearers, if you read the epistle prefixed, so that were it but for
this to let the world see how much this Master of all learning condiscended,
and sought to profit rather then please, it were reason enough for their
publication.

Some testimonies are left behind him under his own hand, how he could both
speak, and write, and preach; let these notes taken after him be testimonies
how much he condiscended; and let them serve for patterns to such as think it
below them (especially in such Auditories) to preach as he did, a Crucified
Christ in a Crucified style. I have heard Dr. Hoyle (my learned Tutor, who dyed
professor of Divinity in Oxford, after he had many years been the like in
Dublin) say, when this Famous Bishop proceeded Doctor of Divinity, He thought
Tully himself could not have excelled him (had he been alive) in eloquence at
that time, which appeared not only in his set speeches, but those which
occasionally fell from him upon the By: and he was one that could well judge.
But now that he preaches ad populum though in Oxford, you have this Eagle
stooping as low to prey upon souls to win them to God, proclaiming all along,
John 3.10.19.
I am not the bridegroom but the friend of the bridegroom. and (as Nazianzen) I
thank God I have a little learning to sacrifice to Christ. such a Precedent is
worth the printing.

Thirdly that had not this course been taken, a worse might have befallen,
directly contrary to the will of the godly Bishop: For some of these notes were
in the hands of diverse persons, who were much taken with them, and much
desired, (and it was feared might have endeavored) a private printing of them,
more imperfectly then now you have them. That faithful Minister mentioned in
the frontispiece whose Latin Epistle is prefixed, having with much ado got
this Copy out of their hands, thought (as the rest who have attested it 'twas
much better to publish these as now you see them, then to endanger the creeping
out of a more surreptitious Copy.

The general subject of these Sermons is of Conversion, and so mightily did the
Lord bless them, not only to the Edification^ and Consolation of very many,
but also to the Conversion (as we have good cause to judge) of some.

I will say no more, the Name of Doctor Usher, by which he is more known to
some, and the Name of the most Reverend and Learned Father of our Church,
Doctor James Usher, late Arch Bishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland, by
which he is more known to others, not only in these our Kingdoms, but in
foreign parts; his great and good Name I say, every where as ointment poured
forth, prefixed before this Book (though with some allay) is enough to raise
high Expectation of whatsoever comes after these words: and is argument enough
to invite the Reader to look within and read them over: and then he will find
the least filing of this Master workmans Gold very precious. Good Wine (they
say) needs no bush, and if this Wine was so sweet at first running, I presume
whosoever tastes it now, though he have it but at the second or third hand, will
find it has not altogether lost its strength, nor will he repent his labor in
reading what was taken after him, if he be one that desires to profit his soul
more then to please his Palate. That out of the ashes of this Phoenix, the Lord
would raise such successors as may by Pen, Life, and Doctrine, do as this
burning and shining Light has done before them, is the prayer, but scarce the
belief of him that prays for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, and
therein hops to have his share in the Concurrent prayers of every Godly
Reader,

Stanley Gower.
Dorchester, October the third, 1659.
Speedy Conversion the only means to prevent imminent Destruction.
Heb. 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day after so
long a time, as it is said, to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.
I Have entered on these words in the other University on a day of Public
Humiliation, as being suitable to the occasion, the chief matter of them being
the Doctrine of the Conversion of a sinner.

Forasmuch as Gods judgments are abroad upon the earth, and hang over our
heads, the only means to prevent and remove both temporal and eternal, is our
speedy conversion and return unto God. Else he will whet his sword, bend his
bow, and make it ready to our destruction, Psalm. 7.12. God did bear a deadly
hatred against sin in the time of the Psalmist, and so he does still, for his
nature cannot be changed. If we return not, we are but dead men. The eternal
weight of Gods wrath will be our portion, both here and in the world to come,
if we repent not.

In the words there are three observable Points.

Obs.
1. Continuance in sin brings certain death. Or, For sin Gods judgments are on
particular Nations and persons.

Obs.
2. If particular Nations or persons turn away from their evil courses, no hurt
shall come near them.

God takes no delight in the death of a sinner, nor that he should despair of
his mercy: but would have us turn out of the broad way which leads to
destruction.

Obs.
3. It behooves every one speedily to set about the work of conversion.

Nor esteem this a vain word. I bring you those things whereon your life
depends. Obeying it you are made for ever, neglecting it you are undone for
ever. Unless you embrace this message, God will bend his bow, and make ready
his arrows against you. Know therefore 1. That continuance in sin brings
certain death. There will be no way of escaping but by repentance, by coming in
speedily unto God.

The words of this Text are taken from Psalm. 95. Harden not your hearts as in
the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness. If when God
calls us either to the doing of this, or leaving that undone, yet we are not
moved, but continue in our evil ways. What Is the reason of it? It Is because we
harden our hearts against him. The Word of God which is the power of God to
salvation, and a two-edged sword to sever between the joints and the marrow.
The strength of the Almighty encounters with our hard hearts, and yet they
remain like the stony and rocky ground: whereon though the Word be plentifully
sown, yet it fastens no root there, and though for a season it spring, yet
suddenly it fades and comes to nothing. We may have a little motion by the
Word, yet there is a rock in our souls, a stone in our hearts, and though we may
sometimes seem to receive it with some affection, and be made as it were
Sermon-sick, yet it holds but a while, it betters us not: why? because it is not
received as an ingrafted word. Therefore says St. James, Receive with
meekness the ingrafted word, Jam. 1.21. Let the word be ingrafted in thee; one
sprig of it is able to make thee grow up to everlasting life. Be not content
with the hearing of it, but pray God it may be firmly rooted in your hearts;
this will cause a softning. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts against Almighty God. If you do, expect him also to come against you in
indignation. Hearken what he says by his Prophet. I will search Jerusalem with
candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in their
heart the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil, Zeph. 1.12. Mark, I
will search Jerusalem, and punish those that are settled on their lees. When a
man is thus settled and resolved to go on in his sins, to put the matter to the
hazard come what will come, there is a kind of Atheism in the soul. For what
does he but in a manner reply, when God tells him by his Minister that he is
preparing the instruments of death against him, do you think us such fools to
believe it? What does this but provoke God to swear that we shall never enter
into his rest. What Is the reason of this? It Is because men are not shifted,
they have no change, they are settled on their lees. Moab has been at ease from
his youth, he has been settled, and has not been emptied from vessel to
vessel, neither has he gone into captivity, Jer. 48.11. Consider we whether
our security comes not from the same cause: We have not been emptied from
vessel to vessel, we have always been at rest. Why have we so little
conversion? There are two things hinder it: the hardening of a man's heart
against the Word, and our settling our selves on our lees. When we we have no
change in grace, we are secure, we never see an evil day. And this is that
which slays the foolish person. Woe to them that are at ease. It were better for
thee to be emptied from vessel to vessel, to go into captivity. For as long as
a man continues thus in an unregenerate condition, he can look for nothing but
troubles; certain judgments must necessarily follow, and as sure as God is in
heaven, so sure may they expect misery on earth: and they shall receive the
eternal weight of Gods wrath treasured up against the day of wrath: Therefore
there is a necessity of our conversion if we will keep off either temporal or
eternal wrath. Our Savior makes it the case of all impenitent sinners to be
liable to wrath: One judgment befell the Galileans, an other those on whom the
Tower of Siloe fell: But what says our Savior, Suppose you that these were
greater sinners above all the men of Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except you
repent you shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. All, every mothers son here
present, if you turn not from your sinful courses, God will meet with you one
time or other, if you harden your hearts against him be sure. Who ever hardened
his heart against God and prospered? As long as a man is in this condition, his
state is woeful. As many as are in the state of unregeneracie, are under the
power of Satan, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Mark the Apostles words, In meekness instruct
those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to
the acknowledging of the truth. And that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will. The state then of
the hardened and settled on their lees, is as a bird in a cage, taken alive at
the will of the Fowler. So is it here, as long as we continue obstinate and
hardened, we are taken alive at Satan's will, we are at his disposing. While we
are at liberty, we are way laid by his nets and traps, and taken we are at his
pleasure: As long as we are hardened in heart, we are in the Devils cage: true
repentance is that whereby alone we purchase our freedom, whereby we recover
our selves; and therefore in Romans 2.5. Hardness of heart and impenitency
signify the same thing. After thy hardened and impenitent heart thou treasurest
up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Mark then: what is a hard
heart? It Is an impenitent heart. Do thou harden thy heart? then know that for
the present thou art a dead man. If notwithstanding all Gods threats out of his
word thou art not a jot moved, thou art dead whilst alive, as the woman that
lived in pleasure. And if thou continuest so, thou treasurest up wrath against
the day of wrath, and the just revelation of Gods judgments. Gods Word is the
especial means to recover thee. A man that is in a swoun, they rub him to
recover him, because there is life in him; but if dead, strong water, or any
thing else cannot restore him. Examine thy self then, does the working of the
Word rub and gall thee? it is a sign there is life in thee; but if it make no
impression, it moves thee not, it is a sign of a dead heart. Consider then the
danger of this condition for a man to resolve on his evil courses, never
purposing to alter matters. It exceedingly hastens Gods judgments.

But leaving this, I proceed to the second point, which is to direct us how to
work our escape. Though God threaten us, yet if we have but the grace to look
about us, and remember our selves: If God do but cause us to consider we have
to deal with a merciful Father, and make us meet him by humiliation, then
though our sins were as scarlet, yet submitting our selves to our Judge, living
as obedient subjects, the storm shall pass from us: So that this is the 2d.
point.

2. Notwithstanding God threatens us, yet if he gives us but grace to repent,
and bethink our selves, let our sins be never so great, we may be sure of mercy.

O that we could see with what a gracious God we have to deal! Can thou but
humble thy self? all these things shall speak peace unto thee. As an impenitent
sinner is under the power of Satan, and liable to all misery: So contrariwise
whoever returns and seeks the Lord, is sure to be under his wings, and free
from all evil. Think thou that God makes use of threatenings for thy hurt? No,
he deals not with us as an angry Judge, but as a compassionate Father; men
will take an enemy always at an advantage, when they may do him most hurt.
Gods terrors overtake us, he threatens us that he will do this and this, that
we may prevent it. He knows that unless his terrors awake us, we will rest
secure. Before he smites us he tells us. I will whet my sword: He has bent his
bow, and made it ready: He has prepared his instruments of death, Psalm. 7.12,
13. He could shoot thee presently, and instantly run thee through, but he
threatens thee, that so he may not strike thee. See what the Prophet Amos
denounces from the Lord, Cap. 11, 12. I have given you cleanness of teeth, I
have with holden rain, v. 6, 7, 8. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew,
v. 9. I have sent amongst you the Pestilence, v. 10. yet have you not returned
unto me. Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and because I will do
thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel, v. 12. What judgments have
befallen us, have befallen us for our own use, if so be we will be warned by
them. The reason why God says he will overthrow us, is not because he means
to do it, but that we may prevent him by repentance. Look into Jer. 3.1. and
see what wonderful passages are to this purpose: There Is a Law-case. If a man
put away his Wife, and she go from him, shall he return unto her again? shall
not that land be greatly polluted? But thou have played the harlot with many
lovers. And in the 20 v. As a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so
have you dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel. And yet see Gods
unspeakable mercy. Return again unto me. And 23. v. Return ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your backsliding: turn to me, and I Will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you. Only acknowledge thine iniquity that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God, v. 13. See God makes us the worst and
vilest of all, and yet as it were entreats us to return. See then the
Conclusion of the second Point; how, if God give us but grace to repent, let
our former evils be what they will, the danger is past.

But I leave this and come to the Third, for which I chiefly chose this Text.
You have seen how dangerous a thing hardness of heart is, how it brings certain
death: and that if we have the heart to repent, we are safe. As to make it
appear in an instance. It Is not the falling into water, but the lying under it
that drowns a man. Art thou fallen into sin? only lift up thy head: if thou can
be but thus happy, the promise of salvation belongs to thee. The main thing
then is this.

3. It behooves us to set about the work of repentance presently.

God is angry with us, and we know not whether God will execute his judgments
on us this day or no, therefore go about it presently. God will remove all our
adulteries, and put away all our sins, if we will come to him within a day. Now
what madness is it to neglect it? After a certain time (says the Apostle)
according to that in the Psalmist, Psalm. 95. God has limited a certain day:
Thou have provoked the Holy Ghost, and now he limits thee a day, Heb. 3.7.
Wherefore (says the Holy Ghost) to day if you will hear his voice. Now is it
safe think you to pass this day? A hard heart is a provoking heart, and as long
as it continues hard, it continues provoking God, and despising the Holy Ghost.
To day therefore hear his voice, that is, this present day. But which is that
day? It Is this very time, wherein you stand before God, and in which you hear
me. If you embrace the opportunity, happy are you; if not, you shall give as
dear an account as for any thing you ever heard in your life. There is no
dallying with God, take his proffer, take him at his word in a matter of
salvation. He calls to thee to day, peradventure he will speak no more,
therefore Heb. 3.13, we shall find it is a limited day. Exhort one another to
day, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. While it is called to day, that is, stay not till to
morrow, but embrace the present opportunity: This day God holds out the golden
Scepter, and my life for yours if you accept it you will be saved. If you take
it not to day, your heart will be more hardened to morrow; and so it may be you
will never touch it; your hearts will be like stones, and you will be incapable of
yiedling. God is angry with us, Psalm. 7.11. Why? He is our adversary, because
we bear arms against him, and will try the mastery with him. We oppose him in
hostile manner as long as we continue sinful against him. What Is the best
counsel in this case? Agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the
way with him. It Is wisdom to do that soon, which must of necessity be done.
If it be not, we perish for ever. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and thou
perish from the right way, Psalm. 2. ult.

Obj. Obj.
But what needs such haste, I may do it hereafter, when I come to my journeys
end?

Sol. Sol.
There needs haste. The day is limited. A thousand to one, if God be angry, but
we perish from the way. I have heard thee in an accepted time, and in the day
of salvation have I succored thee, behold now is the accepted time, now is the
day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. It Is a day of salvation, and would not we be glad
to know this time? Behold this is the accepted time. Seek the Lord while he may
be found, call on him while he is near. This is the accepted time, this is the
day of salvation, Esa. 49. Embrace this time, for now he may be found; this
instant is the time, the (...), the present now. God at this time stirrs the
waters, if now thou will step in and close with God, casting down thy weapons,
then this will be the day of thy salvation; this is called, as Gods day, so our
day: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known in this thy day the things
that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hidden from thine eyes, Luke
19.42. Mark, If thou had known in this thy day: So that if we pass by in this
acceptable time those things which belong to our peace, they will be hidden
from our eyes. Therefore should the enemies of Jerusalem lay her even with the
ground, because she had neglected this opportunity, the day of Gods visitation.
Will thou be so hard-hearted as to put from thee Gods grace? If thou find
now that Satan hides this from thee, and persuades thee to do it to morrow, and
to take a day of thine own, neglecting Gods day, Know and remember that he is a
liar from the beginning.

Give me leave to press this to you, for nothing more brings destruction, then
this putting from us the proffers of Gods grace; unless we return to the
Almighty, humbling our selves, there will be bitterness in the end. There Is the
matter, whether God must wait on us, or we on him? This is the day of
salvation, says God, and we must take time to think of it, whether it be
seasonable or no. Alas

1. By this means we incur the highest presumption: and this is no light thing
inconsiderately to be passed over. Shall God offer you such a proffer, and you
be so presumptuous as to think such a one more seasonable? It Is high
presumption for thee to make thy self wiser then God, to neglect that he
prescribes, and that with a promise too; as if thou had God at command. If
thou resolve to take to morrow, it is requisite that thou have 1. Space to
repent, and

2. Grace to do it. Now neither of these are in thine own hands, if they were,
thou had ground for a farther delay. If thou had power to say, I will live
so long, or could by thine own might prolong thy life, it were something, but
it is otherwise. In refusing Gods proffer, thou refusest him that has thy life
in his hand. What high presumption is this? See it in Jezabel, Rev. 2. I gave
her space to repent, but she repented not. As if God should have said, it is I
gave it her, I gave her time to live, I might have cut her off in the midst of
her whoredoms. Observe here by the way the reason why God gives us this space;
it is to repent. What presumption must that be, when we will go quite contrary
to God? and because we have space, therefore we will not repent. Why does not
God smite thee from heaven, when thou thus audaciously set thy self against
him? Why does he not strike thee with a thunderbolt? Sure he gives thee this
space not to spend it idly, but to another end; not to follow our lusts,
neglecting Gods call, but that thou may remember thy self, and return with
all thy heart. Remember those words of the Prophet, My times are in thy hands,
Psalm. 35. He said not, my times are in mine own hands; for he knew it was grand
presumption. Why then should any challenge that to himself, that belongs to
God, as if he were the lord of his own life, supposing Gods call unseasonable,
and that he may think on it better hereafter? May not a young man die soon? now
an old man cannot live long. Many strong and lusty m^n are brought to the gr^ve
as well as the weak and feeble. And why should we suffer Satan to abuse us
thus? Thy space then is preserved in Gods hand, and therefore thou may not be
Lord and Master of it. But admit God grant thee space, yet thou may not have
the grace to do it. What was Jezabels case, Rev. 3. Though God gave her space,
yet she repented not. What can thou tell what may then become of thee?
perchance thou may live long, yet may thou never find as much as thy
thoughts on repentance, much less the grace to do it: thou may not have a
desire that way, much less perform it. Repentance is not a thing at our own
command. In meekness (says the Apostle) instruct them that oppose themselves,
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the
truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. If God will give it them. It Is a thing then it should seem
in Gods hand, it is his proper gift. Mark, the Apostle would have Gods Ministers
to be humble and meek; but how many are of other spirits? If another opinion
be contrary to theirs, they are in a heat presently, as if a man were master of
himself and of his own heart, to believe what he would. No, no, Repentance is a
grace out of our reach, it is not in a man's own power. Be meek therefore in
instructing. What needs passion? that helps not the matter. The opening of the
eyes of the blind is in Gods hands; thank him for what thou see, and know
that it is his gift, Acts 5.31. The Apostle speaking of our Savior Christ,
says, Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior,
for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. The grace of
repentance then is no herb growing in our own garden, it is a gift of Gods
bestowing. And to this purpose is Acts 11.18. When they heard these things,
they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, then has God also to the
Gentiles granted repentance unto life. As God grants life, so repentance unto
life. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, says the Lord, Thou have
chastised me, and I am chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. And to the same purpose, Lam. 5.21.
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. As if Zion should have
said, we are no more able to turn our selves then a dead man. After that (says
Ephraim) I was turned, I repented, and after I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh: I was ashamed, yea even confounded. See then what an high presumption it
is for a man to presume he has this grace of God at command: But as it is high
presumption, so

2. It Is the highest contempt and despising of the grace of God, Romans 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering?
Thus is it here. God gives thee space: thou have it, but imployest it not in
what God gave it thee for. Thou deferrest the main business; and the Apostle
accounts it no better then despising the proffers of Gods grace and goodness.
Do thou think God will take this at thy hands? will thou despise him, and
think he will not despise thee? With the froward he will show himself froward. God
will come on a sudden, if thou make not use of thine opportunity, and take
all away from thee. The threatening is plainly laid down, Rev. 3.3. If thou
shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what
hour, I will come on thee. It Is spoken to us all, and therefore concerns us
all: Whoever has an ear to hear let him hear. They are Gods words I have
spoken to you this day, and you shall be accountable for them: let not the
Devil steal this from you, hold it fast, this is your day: If thou shall not
watch, I Will come on thee suddenly as a thief. It Is the heaviest judgment can
come on unconverted persons, irregenerate souls, not to awake till God comes
on them, never to bestir themselves till hell rouse them up. Thus will it be
with us, unless we awake by repentance, God will come stealing on us as a
thief by sudden death, and speedily cut us off.

To pray against sudden death, and not to fit thy self for it, is to add
contempt to thy presumption and rebellion. The wise man tells us, That man
knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the
birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil
time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. Mark, when it falls
suddenly, at unawares, here is thy wisdom then to provide that thou may not be
taken suddenly. If the good man of the house knew at what time the thief would
come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to have been
broken up. And therefore Christ counsels us to watch, since we know not the day
nor hour when the Son of man comes. Here Is the difference then between wisdom
and folly. Hereby may we know whether we are wise men or fools, if we foresee
this day, and provide for it, it is an argument of wisdom, if we watch so as
that when it falls, it may not fall on a sudden on us. If we are negligent of
this day, and suffer our hearts to be dead as Nabals, like a stone, 1 Samuel 25.
He had a great time of repentance, ten days, yet repented not, for his heart
was dead, and like a stone; and this may be thy case, if thou despisest the day
of thy salvation, Gods day, and thine own day too, thou may be a Nabal, no
more moved then a pillar in the Church, as I have found by experience.

But you may reply, I suppose God will not take me at an advantage, I trust I
shall have life and space, and not Nabals condition; I hope I shall have my
wits about me to be able to cry, Lord have mercy upon me.

But suppose God give thee a tender heart, and thou are sensible of thy danger,
that so thou call and cry earnestly to God for mercy, yet this is a miserable
condition. Thou shall find it will not be enough to cry Lord be merciful to me.
If thou neglectest him here, he will cry quittance with thee on thy deathbed:
Nor do I speak this of my self; no. Look what Wisdom faith, Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched out mine hand and no man regarded, but
set at naught all my coun^el, and would none of my reproof, I also will laugh
at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, Pro. 1.24, 25, 26. As if
he had said, you refused me on my day I called and cried unto you, but you set
at naught my words, and rejected my counsel, and were wiser then I, therefore
will I laugh at your destruction: when you are in misery I will mock and
deride, in stead of succouring. A terrible thing will it be, when in stead of
hearing our cries to answer them, he shall deride us, and laugh at our folly
and madness: And in the 28. verse, Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. See what folly
then it is to let slip this time. This is the acceptable day, Esaias 55. Seek the
Lord while he may be found, call on him while he is near. When a man refuses
Gods day, God will not hear his prayer, all his sighs and sobs, his groans and
cries, shall not prevail, Esaias 66. I will choose their delusions, and will
bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I
spoke, they did not hear. When men will needs be choosers of what God would not
have, God will have his choice too, and it shall be that which will be
displeasing to them. I will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears
upon them.

Heb. 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day after so
long a time as it is said, to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.
THe last day I entered on the opening of the place, and showed.

How the Lord had proposed a limited time for our conversion unto him, in which
we should hear and obey his voice.

We showed farther how it was Satan's policy to make men seem wiser then God,
that when God proposes a certain time, and limits us a day wherein he will be
found, we will not have his, but our own. True, say we, God calls on us, and
it is fit and convenient to hearken unto him; but yet I Will stay for a more
seasonable opportunity. There is nothing provokes God so much against us, as
when we will thus scorn that acceptable time he has proposed: Nor can there be
a greater hinderance to repentance, then to stop our ears at his counsels, and
to suffer him to call and cry unto us so long, and yet to abuse his patience by
a foolish neglect. It accuses us of rebellion and high presumption, on such
infirm grounds to put from us the day of salvation. Folly it is in the highest
degree to trust on the future, when as in our own hands we have neither space
nor grace for such a business. God is the Lord and owner of them both, and
will not part with his Prerogative. Go to, you that say to day or to morrow we
will return unto the Lord. You add to presumption both folly and rebellion.
Jezabel had space to repent, yet she repented not, for she had not the grace;
that without this will not benefit.

Seeing then these are not in your power, harden not your hearts as in the
provocation: Nor offer despite unto the Holy Ghost, by whom you are sealed to
the day of redemption. If we embrace not Gods day, we despise the riches of his
goodness, long suffering and patience. Romans 2. Despisest thou the riches of
Gods grace, not knowing that the long-suffering of God leads to repentance?
There can be no higher presumption then this, to bid defiance to the Spirit of
God: Nor can there be greater contempt of mercy, then to set light of the time
of our repentance, and returning unto God, making that the greatest argument of
our delay, which God uses to draw us to him. God gives us space, that we may
repent, and we repent not, because he gives us space: He gives us life, that
with fear and trembling we may set about the business of salvation, and we
through strong delusions put from us the proffers of his grace, as if they were
unseasonably offered. What madness is it to frustrate the Almighty of his ends
and purposes? The Lord is not slack touching his promise. It Is a great stop and
hindrance to our progesse in goodness and the work of repentance, when we
distrust God, and take him not at his word. He sends abroad his Ambassadors,
who proclaim, This is the accepted time, this is the day of salvation, to day
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; yet we put this day from us,
and say hereafter is a more acceptable time. I have this delight, this pleasure
to take first in the world, I am not so weaned from it as I would be. As if God
would take it well from our hands that we should then return to him when there
is no remedy. I Will first use all the pleasure the world affords me, and then
Lord have mercy on me will serve the turn. This is the very stifling of the
beginnings and proceedings of Christianity. Let this be well and speedily
weighed, as we tender our good and comfort.

Obj. Obj.
But may some say, what needs this haste, may we not use leisure? soft and fair
goes far.

Sol. Sol.
True, soft and fair goes far, if a man goes fairly in the way. In this case,
though thou go but softly, thou may come to thy journeys end; but the doubt
remains still, there is a question whether thou art in the way or not. Happy are
we if we are, although we can but halt and limp on in this way: although this
should be no ground for us to content our selves therewith. We must not trifle
in the ways of holiness. It Is that concerns our life, and must be seriously
thought on, and that speedily too. Agree with thine adversary quickly while
thou art in the way with him. God is thine adversary, unless thou agree with
him speedily, his patience will break forth into fury. Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and thou perish from the right way. Thou have no assurance of thy life,
thou may be snapt off whilst thou think it time enough to repent and
return. As long as we go out of the way of repentance, we are in the way to
hell, and the farther a man goes in a wrong way, the nearer is he to hell, and
the greater ado to return back: and i^ this regard soft and fair may go far;
but it is far out of the way, far in the way to perdition and destruction. As
long as we are out of the right way to heaven and happiness, we are in the
path that leads directly to the chambers of death.

But let me in this particular unrip the heart of a natural man. What Is the
reason, that when God gives men a day, and cries out, This is the day of
salvation, this is the accepted time, what in the name of God, or the Devils
name rather, should cause them to put salvation from them? to defer and desire
a longer time? Thus a natural man reasons with himself, I cannot so soon be
taken off from the profits and pleasures of the world; I hope to have a time
when I shall with more ease and a greater composedness of mind bring my self
to it: or if it be not with so much ease, yet I trust in a sufficient manner I
shall do it: wherefore for the present I Will enjoy the profits and delights of
the state and condition wherein I am; I will solace my self with the pleasures
of sin for a season, I hope true repentance will never be too late.

This is well weighed; but consider whether these thoughts which poise down our
hearts, be not groundless; see whether they will hold water at the last; and
whether in making such excuses, to great presumption we add not the height of
folly. To pretend for our delay the profits and pleasures of sin, and yet hope
for heaven at the last, as well as the generation of the righteous; it is but a
mere fallacy and delusion of Satan, to fill our hearts with such vanities. Can
it be expected that we should have our good in this world, and in the world to
come too? This is well, if it might be.

But let us try the matter, and begin with your first branch.

You are loath to part with your profits and pleasures.

But consider what a grand iniquity this is. Can you offer God a greater wrong
and indignity? Do you thus requite the Lord you foolish and unwise? Do thou
think this the way to make thy peace with God whom thou have offended, as long
as thou may to be a rebel against him? What an high dishonor is it to him,
that thou should give him thy feeble and doting old age, and the Devil thy
lively and vigorous youth, thy strength and spirits? Do thou think he will
drink the dregs, and eat the orts? will he accept thee in the next world, when
thou thus scornest him here? If you offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not an
evil? If you offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy
governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of
hosts? Mal. 1.8. But mark how he goes on, v. 14. Cursed be the deceiver, which
has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt
thing. Mark, God accounts such service a corrupt thing. Never look for a
blessing from God in heaven, when thou sacrificest to him such corrupt things.
We are to offer and present our selves a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
unto God, Romans 12.1. Now judge whether they offer God the living, who say, when
my doting days come, my lame days, that I cannot go, my blind days, that I
cannot see, I Will offer my self a sacrifice to God, Will this be acceptable to
him? Is not this evil, says the Lord, to offer me such a corrupt thing? Nay
more, he is accursed that offers such an offering, such a polluted sacrifice.
God will not like with it, when we serve our selves first with the best and
choice? Do you thus requite the Lord? do you think he will accept it at your
hands? Go offer such a gift to thy Ruler, to thy Prince, will he accept it, or
be pleased with it? No, a Landlord will have the best and the choice; and it
must needs provoke God, when we give him the refuse. I am King of Kings, says
the Lord, my name is dreadful, and I will look to be served after another
manner. Let no man then thus delude himself with vain hopes, but let him
consider how dishonorable a thing it will be to God.

2. And how unprofitable to him, whoever thou art.

1. It Is the ready way to thy destruction. Heaven, and happiness, and eternal
life, are laid up for those that embrace the acceptable time; death, horror,
and eternal misery for those that refuse it; and will thou hazard soul and body
on this? Moses, on this ground, did rather choose to suffer affliction in this
world with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a moment.
When these things are past, what profit will you have of those things whereof
then you will be ashamed? When a man comes to see truly and thoroughly into
himself, he will find no profit of such things as these: death will certainly
follow us, both temporal and eternal, if we repent not the more speedily,
that is all the profit we shall find.

2: But suppose thou prevent everlasting death by repentance, yet what profit
is there of those things whereof we are now for the present ashamed? The best
can come is shame.

3. Thou art loath to part with the pleasures of sin for a season, and hereafter
thou think thou can amend all. But consider the particulars, and then
shall you see how you are befooled in your hearts and souls. Believe it for an
undoubted truth, there is nothing in the world by which Satan more deludes a
man, then by this persuading him to neglect his day, and repent well enough
hereafter. That you may expel this suggestion out of your soul, pray unto God
that he would go along with his Word, and cause you to lay this to heart, that
by his Spirit your understanding may be enlightened to see the truth. Though I
make this as clear as the Sun, that it is a false supposition and mere folly on
which we build, in deferring our return to God, yet God from heaven must teach
you, or you will be never the wiser. Know therefore that this very day God
reaches out the golden Scepter to thee, and what folly were it to neglect it,
since thou know not whether he will ever proffer it thee again: And assure
thy self that he is a liar that tells thee thou may as well repent hereafter
as now: and this will appear whether we consider, the order of outward things
in the world, or the nature of sin.

1. Order of outward things.
1. For external things, every Age after a man comes into the world (if he
embrace not the present opportunity for repentance) is worse then other, and
are each of them as so many clogs which come one after another to hinder it. As
for thy childish Age, that is mere vanity, and thy riper Age will bring many
impediments and hindrances that youth never thought of. Thou art then troubled
about many things, and perplexed how to provide for maintenance; in the midst
whereof know that thou have not a body of brass, but a corruptible and fading
body: and yet such is the folly of the heart of man, that the less ground he
has to go, the fewer days to spend, the more he often provides, and is the
more covetous. Consider that the wisest of men gave thee this counsel, Remember
thy Creator in the day of thy youth, before the evil days come, wherein thou
shall say thou have no pleasure in them. Here we find it is a youthful thing,
and should be a young man's practice: not according to that devilish saying, A
young Saint, and an old Devil: but Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth. The more sin thou committest, the more unapt thou art to repent. Custom
in sinning makes thee a Lot; the elder thou growest, the more loath to go out of
Sodom. Besides,

2. The nature of sin.
2. Consider what sin is in its nature. It is a weight, Heb. 12.1. Let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us. Sin is then a
weight, and so an heavy thing; but add sin to sin, a weight to a weight, and it
becomes heavier and heavier. A man that is in the state of impenitencie, has
this weight laid on him, and is subject to the Devil, in a state of rebellion
against God. A man now in this estate is weighed down, what will he be six,
seven, or ten years hence, going on in his impenitency? How will he then shake
that off, which now he cannot free himself of? He must hereafter buckle against
it with a great deal of disadvantage, and wrestle with more difficulty: One
says well, that if we consider of sin aright, it is like the rising of water,
over which a man being to pass, and finding it higher then it was wont to be,
he stays a while, and then tryes again, and finds it higher then before: he
stays yet longer, till it become unpassable, so that he may not adventure
without great disadvantage. Thus it is with sin: now peradventure the waters of
iniquity are passable, if thou will, thou may go over, but if thou delayest
the adventure, the streams of sin will run together into one channel, and be
more difficultly passed.

Take another Metaphor from the Scripture: The Scripture compares sin to cords,
Sin is compared to cords.
which are instruments of binding, and therefore the mystery of the Gospel is
expressed by binding and loosing; Whose soever sins you shall bind on earth,
they are bound in heaven, but whose sins ye remit, they are remitted. Every sin
thou committest is a bond, and binds thee hand and foot against the judgment of
the great day. Therefore it is said, His own iniquity shall take the wicked, and
he shall be bound and holden with the cords of his sins. Now consider what
folly it is, when a man shall say, though my sins are so many cords difficult
to be broken, yet I Will not trouble my self about it in my younger days, but I Will
stay till my old age, and then I hope I shall be the better able to break these
bonds, and cast all these cords from me; when as every iniquity I commit is as
a new cord, which binds me faster and faster. Is not this madness it self to
think so, that in our younger years being scarce able to break one of them, in
our dotage we shall be able to break ten thousand together? And certainly this
is the disposition and nature of sin.

3. But add hereto the Argument in the Text: To defer repentance hardens the
more
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart; but repent while it
is called to day. Showing that if we pass this day, we shall be harder and
harder. Wherefore, says the Apostle, Exhort every one another daily while it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb. 3.13. As if he had said, if thy heart be hard to day, it will be
harder to morrow. Custom in sin hardens the heart, and takes away the sense of
it. Wherefore, says the Apostle, I speak after the manner of men, because of
the infirmity of your flesh. For as ye have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now yield your members
servants to righteousness, unto holiness, Romans 6.19. So that we see if a man
once give himself up unto sin, he will not be satisfied therewith, but will
give himself up to iniquity unto iniquity. What Is the meaning of that? It Is
as if he had said if we give our selves up to iniquity, we will not rest there,
but we will add iniquity unto iniquity, sin unto sin: we will be brought to such a
custom in evil, as that it will be easier for a blackmoor to change his skin,
and a leopard his spots, then for those that have been accustomed to do evil,
to learn to do well, Jer. 13. It will be to as much purpose to wash an
Ethiopian, as to go to put off that ill custom, and shake off that second
nature. Sin is a hammer, and sin is a nail too. Every sin strikes the former
sin home to the head, that whereas before it might easily have been drawn out,
it roots it in so fast, as that it can very hardly be plucked out. Mark how the
Apostl^ describes this cursed nature of sin: Having eyes full of Adultery, and
that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, a heart they have
exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2.14. What makes a man prompt in any
thing but exercise? When a man is exercised in sin, see the event of it: it
brings him to that vicious habit, as that at length he cannot cease from sin.
If a man deal with a young twigg, it will bend and break at his pleasure; but
when it comes to full growth, it is past his strength. So fares it with sin: if
thou dealest with it whilst thou art young, and it in thee, before it has
taken ^oot, thou may easily wield it, at least with more facility then
otherwise thou could; but if thou let it run on to confirmed habits, it
becomes immovable. Wherefore, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside
the sin which does so easily beset us. The reason is evident, because else we
shall be so hardened, as that we shall not be able. A man that has a green
wound, if he will seek for his cure betimes, it may be quickly and easily
remedied; but through delay it begins to fester, and must be lanced to the
quick, not without great pain and anguish to the Patient. Sin is such a wound;
if it be let ^lone, it corrupts; and proud flesh the more grows up, the longer
the cure is delayed. This therefore should be a chief thing we should take heed
of, how we put from us Gods time, and the proffers of mercy till another day.

2. But there are another sort as greatly be^^ol'd as these, yea more, if more
may be: The folly of those that defer their repentance till death.
and ^^ose are they who put it off till the hour of (...) death, till the last
gasp, as if they desired t^ ^ive God as little of their service as possibly
they might, who think if they can but cry Peccavi, and Lord have mercy on me,
when their breath departs their bodies, they show a good disposition, and
perform such acceptable service, as that God cannot choose but grant them a
pardon: But think not all will be well if thou shall shake hands with God at
thy journeys end, when thou have not walked with him all the way.

Obj. Obj.
But did not the thief repent at the last on the Cross, and why may not I on
my death bed:

Sol. Sol.
This is no good warrant for thy delay, for Christ might work this miraculously
for the glory of his Passion. Trust not therefore on this, nor content thy self
with good intentions, but set about the business in good earnest and
presently. Our deathbeds will bring so many disadvantages, as will make that
time very unseasonable: whether we respect.

Impediments to repentance on our deathbed.
1. External hindrances, such as are pangs and pains in thy body, which must be
undergone: and thou shall find it will be as much as thou well can do to
support thy self under them. Every noise will then offend thee; yea thou will
not be able to endure the speech of thy best friends. When Moses came to the
children of Israel, and told them God had sent him to deliver them, what
acceptance found this comfortable message? The Text says, Exodus 9.6. They
hearkened not through anguish of their spirits. Trust not to deathbed
repentance.
See here the effects of anguish and grief: Moses spoke comfortably, but by
reason of their pains they hearkened not unto him; they were indisposed to give
attendance. So shall it be with us on our deathbeds, through the anguish of
our spirits we shall be unfit to meddl^ with ought else; especially when the
pains of death are upon us, the dread whereof is terrible: how will it make us
tremble, when death shall come with that errand, to cut off our souls from our
bodies, and put them into possession of hell, unless we repent the sooner. Now
thou art in thy best strength, consider what a terror it will be, what a sad
message it will bring, when it comes not to cut off an arm or leg, but soul
from body. Now then make thy peace with God: but that these men are fools,
they would through fear of death be all their lifetime in bondage. It Is the
Apostles expression, Heb. 2.15. The consideration hereof should never let us be
at rest till we had made our peace with God; it should make us break our
recreations and sports. The considerations of what will become of us, should
put us in an ecstasy. Nor are these all our troubles, besides these, outward
troubles, when a man is to dispose of his wife and children, house and lands,
so that he must needs be very unfit at this time for the work of rep^ntance.
These things will cast so great a damp on his heart, as that he shall be even
cold in his seeking after peace with God.

2. But suppose these outward hindrances are removed, that neither pain of
body, nor fear of death seize on thee, neither care of wife nor children,
houses nor lands distract thee, but that thou might then set about it with
all thy might, though thou were in the most penitent condition that might be to
man's seeming, yet where is the change or new nature should follow thy
contrition, unless we see this in truth, we can have but little comfort. Shall
I see a sinner run on in his ill courses till the day of his death, and then
set on this work, It will be hard to prove deathbed repentance to be ound.
I could not conclude therefore the safety of his soul, because it is the change
of the affections, not of the actions, that God looks after; for the fear of
death may extort this repentance, where the nature is not changed. Take an
example of a covetous man, which dotes on his wealth more then any thing else
in the world; suppose him in a ship with all his riches about him, a tempest
comes and puts him in danger of losing all, both life and goods, in this strait
he sticks not to cast out all his wealth, so he may preserve his life; and
shall we therefore say he is not covetous? No, we will account him
nevertheless covetous for all this, nor that he loved his goods the less, but
his life the more. It Is so in this c^se when an impenitent person is brought
upon his death bed (...) to cry out in the bitterness of his soul, If God will
but grant me life; and spare me now, I Will never be a drunkard, swearer, or
covetous person more. Whence comes this? Not from any change of his nature, and
loathing of what he formerly loved, but because he cannot keep these and life
together: fear alters his disposition, the terrors of the Almighty lying upon
him. I have my self seen many at such a time as this, that have been so
exceeding full of sorrow and penitent expressions, that the standers by have
even wished their souls to have been in the other souls cases, and yet when God
has restored them, they have fallen into their former courses again; And why
is this? but because when repentance comes this way, it alters only the outward
actions for the present, not the sinful dispositions, things that are extracted
from a man, alter the outward appearance not the nature. Therefore says the
Lord, I Will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offense, and
seek my face: In their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. last. Mark,
when Gods hand is on them, they will seek him: and as in the 6. Chap. 1. v. say
one to another, Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will
heal us, he has smitten and he will bind us up: How penitent were they when
Gods hand was on them: but let it once be removed, and hear how God presently
complains of them: O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I
do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it
goes away. Mark, thy goodness is as a morning cloud, such a goodness as is
extorted, that is as temporary as earthly dew! Another considerable place we
have in the Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
returned and enquired early after God. Was not this a great conversion? When
they were in this dismal condition, they were not troubled with cares, for Wife
or Children, Houses or Lands, how can we think but that these men died in
peace, that were in so good a humor; yet see what follows, verse 36.
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouths, and lied unto him with
their tongues.

Besides, consider the unworthiness of it; I Will forsake sin, when sin forsakes
me: We leave it, when we can keep it no longer: Thank you for nothing, may God
say, if you could you would sin longer, this is that folly which deferring our
repentance brings us to.

But to draw to a conclusion: God has set us a certain day, and if we pass the
time woe be to us. For though he is full of mercy and patience, yet patience
hurt oftentimes harms, and provokes the Almighty to fury. God will not always
strive with man, Genesis 6.3.
but his days shall be an hundred and twenty years, if he convert in that
space, and return, well, if not, he shall be swept away. And to this purpose is
that parable, Luke 13.6. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard,
and he came and sought fruit thereon and found none, Then said he unto the
dresser of his vineyard, behold these three years I came seeking fruit on this
fig tree, and find none: Cut it down, why combreth it the ground? There is an
appointed time then foreordained by God, wherein he offers us grace. Let it
alone, says the dresser one year more: it may be seven years, or ten, it may
be but two hours for ought thou know, that God may offer thee longer this
space. No man knows the time, and its continuance, but he that has appointed
it to this purpose: which is a point I thought not to speak of, but now I will.

You hear much talk of Gods eternal, and everlasting election, and we are too
apt to rest on this, that if we are elected to salvation we shall be saved, and
if not, we shall be damned; troubling our selves with Gods work of
Praedestination, What use to make of Election and Reprobation.
whereas this works no change in the party elected, until it come unto him in
his own person. What is Gods election to me, that he chooses the godly, and
refuses the wicked? Its nothing to my comfort, unless I my self am actually
elected. We are to look to this actual election. The other is but Gods love to
sever me. But what is my actual election? Its that, when God touches my heart,
and translates me from the death of sin, to the life of grace. Now there are
certain times which God appoints for this election, wherein he uses the means
to work on us, and of which he can say, what could I do more then I have done?
Now if it be thus in the point of election, what must we think of the point of
reprobation? May there not be actual rejection as well as actual election? And
may thou not fear since thou have lived thus long under the means of grace;
That God has waited these, not only three but many years, the dew of heaven
continually falling on thee, and that yet thou should remain unfruitful.
Do thou not fear, I say, that dismal sentence, cut it down, why combreth it
the ground? Gods grace is not to be dallied with, as Children do with their
meats, if we do thus slight him, he may justly deprive us of all. See a
terrible place to this purpose, Heb. 6.7, 8. The earth which drinks in the
rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it
is dressed, receives blessing from God; but that which bears thorns and
briers, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.
Consider these places, God calls us where the droppings of his grace are;
consider then, do we bring forth that fruit which is meet for the dresser,
answerable to those continual distillings and droppings on us? If our
consciences witness for us, happy are we, but when there have been these
showers of grace out of Gods Word flowing down upon us, and yet we have
received so much grace in vain; O what can we then expect, but a curse in this
life, and eternal death in the world to come? What can we look for, but the
fig trees curse which was barren? The tree was not cut down but withered: We
are near the same curse, if we answer not Gods grace. When we have had so long
a time, the Ministry of the Word, and yet suffer it to be lost, through our
barrenness, our condition is sad and woeful; we can look, for nothing but
withering. It Is our wisdom to arm against Satan's fallacy, and hearken to God in
his accepted time.
But beloved, I must hope better things of you, and such as accompany
salvation: Labor therefore to prevent, and arm your selves against this
suggestion and fallacy of Satan, and resolve to hear God in this acceptable
time, now to set to the work, which if we do, all will be well. God will be
gracious to us. If otherwise, we are undone for ever. Till you have learned
this lesson, you can go no further. Wherefore let not Satan possess you with
that madness, to cause you to pass and let slip this golden opportunity,
through a false conceit, that you may have a more seasonable day of your own
for repentance hereafter.

Gal. 6.3, 4. For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing,
he deceives himself. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he
have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.
HAving entered on the Doctrine of the conversion of a sinner, in that Text,
Heb. 4.7. upon which depends our everlasting salvation. I labored to persuade
you of the necessity of taking the accepted time, of embracing the proffers of
Gods grace, and of the necessity of doing it speedily.

I showed you that there is a certain time in which God will be found, and that
this time was the present time.

I declared unto you the great danger that would follow, if we took not God at
his word, but refused his day for a day of our own, as if we were wiser than
he; If when God calls, and holds out the golden Scepter, we refuse to draw near
and touch it: Also what danger there is of being deluded by Satan, and our own
hearts.

I showed you farther, that the work was half done if this were done, if we
could but learn this lesson.

And now all that I shall speak will be to little purpose, if this be not first
wrought. If it be already wrought in us blessed are we. Our condition were
thrice happy, would God now strike in, and cause us to return to himself. It Is
not good to dally with God, the time will come when it will be too late, when
we shall wish we had done otherwise, and taken the accepted time.

Now I will go on to a farther point, which is this, When Satan cannot prevail
with a sinner, to say to his soul, or to think with himself, I will do it
hereafter, or I will at the day of death, when he cannot prevail with him to
defer it and leave it quite undone for the present: then he will give way to
his doing a little to it, but it shall be so superficial, and on such false
grounds, that he had as good leave it undone; For Satan makes him thus conclude
with himself, well, since I see it is a duty so necessary, I will not defer, I
will not put it off to an hour, but yet I see no such matter required in
conversion, no such great need of being new molded. But now in the point of
conversion, there are two things to be thought on.

1. First what estate the sinner is in for the present, and then when he has
made search, and found it to be amiss, then the next thing is, he must turn
unto God, and resolve to amend.

I shall not now stand to speak of that common aspersion cast upon Religion,
and the ways of God (that men must sail to Heaven by the gates of Hell) of
which many are so much afraid: But yet we must not think that our Savior came
to heal those which are whole already; he is a God of wisdom, and the Physician
of the soul; he comes to find that which is lost: So that we must be lost in
our own apprehensions, if we will be found as David was, Ps. 119. ult. He first
says, I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, then seek thy servant. If
now we are once lost, we are lost for ever if he seek us not; therefore we
should first consider with our selves what estate we are in now, how the case
stands with us at present, that if God should come and strike thee with death,
if thou were now to come to Judgment, what would trouble thee most, what
could thou then answer him? Therefore since it is uncertain how soon God may
deal thus with thee, it is wisdom to be always ready. Lam. 3.40. Let us search
and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Let us first try how the
matter stands with us at the present, let us examine our selves and our ways,
and see if all be well, and then may we go on with comfort in the way wherein
we are.

But when we have searched, and find things not to go as well as they ought,
or that we are not in a right way, then after our searching we must

Psalm. 119.57. I thought upon my ways, and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies. First he thought on his ways, he considered whither he was going,
whether to Heaven or Hell; then when he had thus thought, he made haste and
turned his feet unto Gods testimonies: Here are both put together: first he
made haste and thought on his ways, and then he turned.

I took this Text to show that one of these is as dangerous as the other, and
how men are apt to deceive themselves in their search and examination. It Is as
dangerous not to prove our ways, as to put off and defer our turning to God.
This is a dangerous disease, that when men come to examine and try their
spiritual estates, they have false weights and unequal balances to prove
themselves by: they are very willing to save themselves the labor, though they
be deceived. A man is loath to be cozened by another, but here is his folly,
that he is willing enough to deceive and betray himself. Such fools the Devil
makes many men, because they take not right glasses to look on themselves in,
and so they deceive themselves. For if a man think himself to be something when
he is nothing, he deceives himself; but let every man prove, etc.

In the words here are, 1. The Disease. 2. A Remedy.


1. The Disease is in the 3d. v. If a man think himself to be something when he
is nothing, etc. this is a common and dangerous disease; and a disease which is
both common and dangerous is the more to be feared, the more care^ul must the
Physician be. This is the most common disease, for there is not a man but finds
a snatch of it in his own heart. And it is the more dangerous; for who is in
more danger then he that is blind and will be blind? that is willing to be
cheated by Satan and himself. This is the patient. Now what his disease is, and
the dangerousnesse of it, the Apostle tells us: He thinks himself to be
something, and is nothing. This is the patient to be cured, and that is his
disease, then which none more common: for there is not the worst of men but
will say, I thank God I am something, and I am not half so bad as the Preacher
would make me, I have some good thing in me.

Now this his disease stands in two things.

1. That he is nothing. 2. That he thinks himself to be something.
1. He is nothing. And for a man to be brought before Gods Judgment Seat, and
have nothing to answer, how will it fare with him then? but yet this man cannot
but think he is something: well then something he is, but nothing to the
purpose: As we say of an Idol, An Idol is nothing in the world: that is,
Nothing that can help or succor those that bow to them, and adore them,
nothing that they should have in them. An Idol is something indeed, for it is
silver, or gold, or brass, or stone, etc. but it is nothing, that is, is nothing
to the purpose, nothing that can plead for a man when he holds up his hand at
Gods bar.

2. He thinks himself to be something, though he be nothing: He thinks he shall
come to Heaven, though he be not in the way; as the foolish Virgins, that
thought they should be let in, feared not the contrary, till they came there:
So these men walk in their way all their life, and yet fear not entrance into
Heaven, till they receive sentence to the contrary. If these men knew
themselves to be nothing, they would seek something for themselves; but now
they are nothing, though they think themselves something. This is the Disease.

2. The Remedy is in the next verse, Let him pro^e his own work. Let him look
himself in a true glass, and that is the point we shall insist on. If then
Satan shall not delude us in deferring and putting off our repentance; so let
him not deceive us with a false conceit of our ways and estate; that we may
not make our selves something, when we are nothing. Therefore let us see what
false glasses they are that men get to themselves. If Satan bring us to have a
good opinion of our selves, and our condition, and persuade us that it is not
with us as precise Preachers tell us; that it is no such matter to go to Heaven,
but that it may be done with less pains and more ease: when, I say, Satan
lulls a man asleep with such plausible things as these, he has him where he
would have him. Why then no marvel if this man like his ways, when he looks
upon them with false glasses.

1 Glass. Self-love.
1. The first false glass is self-love, and the property of love is to make the
good things in the party it loves very great, and the vices very little.
Self-love represents nothing in it is true shape. The Apostle speaking of the
later days, 2 Timothy 3. says, There shall be perilous times: And wherein lies
the peril? Men shall be lovers of their own selves. As if he had said, that is
one of the worst perils, for a man to have a great conceit of himself. If one
be sick of this disease, it will so blind him, that he shall never see a thing
in its right place: we may see it by the contrary in the want of love. Suppose
to a neighbor, for example; he that is full of malice and envy toward his
neighbor, (consider what a false glass this is) the man that wants love, see
how the good and bad deeds of his neighbor show themselves to him: when he
looks on the good actions of his neighbor, they appear but very small, he is
always abridging and contracting his virtues and good things, making them seem
less then they are. On the other side, all things he sees amiss in him, this
want of love makes them far greater then they are. Love breeds the contrary;
when a man loves himself, his good things seem very great, and his evil things
very small, those he abridges and contracts; and hereupon is that instance
brought of the Jews, Romans 2.3. Think thou O man that judge them them that
do such things, that thou shall escape, etc. When such a man looks upon his own
sins, they appear small to him; but when on the infirmities of others, they
seem very great. With one eye he looks on himself, with another on his
neighbor. This man perchance is drunk as well as his neighbor, covetous as
well as him, yet he concludes them great evils in his neighbor, but extenuates
them within himself: self love causes this difference. As long as this sways
us, that we love things because they are our own, we shall never be able to
guess at our own condition. If another man should look on you both, would he
not account thee partial? If a man has a son or a daughter, though they be not
so wise or beautiful as another man's, yet he delights in them as much, he loves
them because they are his own. Let a man be born in a barren Country, he will
praise it most, not because there is none so good, but because he loves it
best, it is his own Country. Thou will never be a good Judge of thine own
estate if thou viewest thy self in this false glass, for it will easily
deceive a man.

True, I know self-love is a deceitful glass, and looking therein, a man will
be favorable to himself, and so deceive himself, for it renders things in a
bigger shape then they are. But

2 Glass. Others good opinion.
2. I thank God my neighbor also, and all others that know me speak well of me.
I have not only a good conceit of my self, but every man about me can speak
well of me, cannot say, black is mine eye. I have a good report of all men. But
if this were enough and sufficient to assure thee of the goodness of thy
estate, it were well, but it is not enough. True it is, a good report from men
for fair and honest dealing is not to be despised; yet it will do no good
unless thou have it from God. It was one of the happinesses of our Savior
that he was in favor with God and men; it was with God too as well as men.
When both meet together it is well indeed. Demetrius in John 3.12. we read, had
a good report of all men, and of the truth it self. To have a good report from
men, and also from the truth, is an happy thing: but having it not from the
truth, Woe to us when all men speak well of us. What folly is it to rest upon a
good report from men, when I have it not from the truth? The like madness it
is, as for a man to trust in the absolution of his fellow-prisoner, when the
Law of the Land condemns him. Shall a sick man be so mad as to say he is well,
because others say so? As if we should seek our selves out of our selves, and
not within our selves. No, Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he
have rejoicing in himself, and not in another. Romans 2. ult. He is a Jew which
is one inwardly, whose praise is not of men but of God. Not as if this did dis
common, or turn out the praise of men; but it is comparatively spoken, and it is
meant, whose praise is not so much of men as of God. So that this is the second
false glass, when a man concludes himself to be in a good estate because men
praise him, thinks it well with him because others think so, and say so. He
has a good opinion of himself, but that is not all, other men give him a good
report too. And this follows the former: a man needs never fear flattery from
others, that does not flatter himself.

But these are not my only grounds that I have so good opinion of my self, and
that others speak well of m^, but when I compare my self with my self, I find
wherein I may rejoice. So that this is the

3. 3 Glass. When a man compares himself with others.
3. Third glass, when a man compares himself with others and himself.

1. When he compares himself with others. I thank God, says he, I am better
then twenty of my neighbors; I know this man follows such courses, and another
lives in such a foul sin. Sure, says he, I am not such a sinner as these,
therefore I am happy, and I doubt not of room in Heaven. This is the cause that
the Pharisee went home unjustified, because looking on other men, he justified
himself. God I thank thee I am not as other men, no extortioner, etc. This
fellow is so far from begging any thing of God, that he fills up his time with
thanksgiving, he thinks he wants nothing, and that is his error; he looks on
other men, and compares himself with them, and thence concludes he is well
enough, because he is not so bad as this or that man. This is the common
deceit, when men take this for a rule, that because they are not so bad as the
offscouring of the world, but are better then the ordinary sort of men,
therefore they suppose they are very well, or as well as they need to be: As if
a sick man should say, I am not so sick as such a man who is at the point of
death, therefore I am very well. I would desire such men, that as they look on
those that are under them, so they would a little cast up their eyes on those
that are above them. When you look on the Publican, this and that man, and
bless your selves because you are not so bad as these, who perchance are
before you in points of morality: If you stand on comparisons, look on those
that are above you, that go beyond you in grace and zeal, and look not so much
on the sins of others as your own: Another man's sins may condemn him, they
cannot save thee. When a Thief and a Murderer are both arraigned at the Bar
for their lives, will the Thief say to the Murderer, thy sin is greater, thy
fault is of an higher nature, therefore I shall be saved, because mine is not
so heinous, when they both are punishable with death. The fault of another will
not make thy case the better. It Is no point of Justification thus to deceive
thy self, and to conclude because another is worse then thee, thy estate is
blessed. So we see the degrees of false glasses. Self-love: or self-conceit:
then a good opinion of men: and conferring a man's self with some others. He Is
better then they, therefore his estate is good. An absurd conclusion; the Devil
will mightily insult over such as he can so easily deceive.

But this man goes farther: I not only compare my self with others, but my
self too, and find good ground to conclude the safeness of my condition. I
remember a time, when I was vain and idle, when I ran in a way contrary to God.
But now I have sowed my wild oats; and whereas before I was loose and
dissolute, I have care to do my duty, to serve God, etc. I am not so profane as
formerly, my estate must needs be good. This is a very dangerous thing to say,
that because I am not as bad as I was, I am therefore good: It is as if a man
had a debtor, a slack paymaster, to whom the Creditor calls earnestly to pay
the debt, the best answer the debtor gives is this, I am sure there are many
worse paymasters in the world then I am, and I my self have been a worse, and
more flow paymaster heretofore then I am now. Well, because there are worse
paymasters, and he himself has been a worse, does this make him a better now?
And shall this serve to excuse thee, by comparing thy self with others that are
worse? and with thy self, that because thou have mended thy self in some
particulars, therefore thou art in the way to Heaven? It is a false and foolish
Conclusion.

4 Glass. Partial Obedience^
4. Now we come to the main thing, another false glass, which we call Partial
obedience, when a man goes further, looking upon the letter of the Commandment
only, saying, I thank God I forbear many sins, and do many duties, I am not a
thief, nor a murderer, swearer, drunkard, or covetous person: I do not take
Gods name in vain; I have not broken the Sabbath, though I doubt whether it be
moral or no. I have served God in coming to his house, given obedience to my
Parents, etc. and looking on this he concludes, doubtless all is well with
him: As when I have a thousand thorns in my feet, and have three or four taken
out, will this help me? because I have not the stone or the gout, shall I
conclude I am well, as if I could not be sick without this or that disease.
Because I do something that God requires, shall I think I do as much as I need?
No, we must take heed of that, God will not be contented with partial
obedience, He will have the whole heart or none.

Obj. Obj.
But mine is not partial obedience, I do my endeavor, as far as I am able to
do, what God requires: Here comes in natural reason, and says, I thank God I
do what I can, and I see no reason why more should be required. I conform my
self as I am able, and I see it needful, to the greatest duties of
Christianity; I lead such a blameless life, that no man can tax me in any
particular what God has enabled me to do; and according to moral Philosophy, I
know not how more can be required: I go as far as Seneca's rules, and somewhat
farther, and sure this is not partial obedience.

Sol. Sol.
I speak not against Morality. But yet let me tell thee, if thou have no more
then Morality, it will not bring thee to Heaven. Not but that a moral man is
an excellent stock, whereon to graft grace and virtue, it is a good help to
Heaven, yet it comes far short of bringing him thither. Natural reason was once
a full and fair glass, till it was broken by the fall: but now it is
insufficient. The Tables in Moses hands were excellent things, God made the
first Tables with his own hand, and perchance they may be therein typical; when
these were broken, Moses makes the second, these not so excellent as the
former, though I should esteem a piece of these more excell^^t, then all the
relics of the Papists, for there was something of the first in them, God
writes them with his own singer. This glass which then was so perfect, is now
broken, and is not so perfect as it was, though there be something yet
remaining in it; We may see something of its ancient luster in the Gentiles,
for these having not a Law, are a Law unto themselves. There are practical
principles yet remaining in the Tables of our hearts, so that they that care
not for the Law, shall be judged by that natural light which is in them. We
have a conscience to difference between good and evil. This is the truth. It Is
a part of the Image of God implanted in us, which we are not to despise lest we
be judged with those that hold the truth in unrighteousness: The truth is the
principals of difference betwixt good and bad: the soul was to have a seat as a
Queen to rule all our actions* But ^ow this Queen is taken captive, and all is
lost: Morality and in ward prncipals are to be much esteemed, as things which
God at first planted, yet do they comeshort of bringing a man to Heaven. The
young man in the Gospel had a good esteem of himself, and was doubtless
esteemed of others, and did many things: but yet our Savior tells him, how
hard a thing it was to come to Heaven: Although he thinks himself well enough,
though he were rich, our Savior tells him of the commandments: all these,
says he, have I kept from my youth, a good moral man indeed that had done so
much, but this was not enough, one thing lacked: go and sell all that thou
have, etc. Yet because there was so much in him, we read Mark 10.21. Jesus
loved him: he shows that his cause was heavy, that going so far he should not
attain his end: but this was not to be despised, for this Jesus loved him. So 1
Kings 13.13. He only of Jeroboams shall come to the grave, because in him are
found some good things. If there are but some good things in a man, they remain
of Gods work, and God loves his own work; Here Is the point then, Morality is
good, and natural reason is good: it remains in us since the state of our
first creation; This was a pure and a full glass, made by God himself, but
since the fall, is much darkened: If we consult with natural reason and Moral
Philosophy, it will discover many things: yet this comes short. There are
abundance of things that it cannot discover, manifold defects. The Apostle
says in the Romans, I had not known sin but by the Law. I had not known lust
to have been a sin, had not the Law said, I shall not lust. We have many sins
we cannot know but by the Law, yea such secret sins as must be repented of. Our
Savior overthrew the tables of the money changers, and would not suffer them
to carry burdens through the Temple, though for the use of those that
sacrificed, a thing which had some show of Religion in it. He whipped both out,
not only those that had residence there, but those that passed through: he
would suffer none but those that could justify what they did by the Law. Now,
as God would not have sin lodge and make its abode in the soul, so he would not
have it made a through fare for sin: he would not have vain thoughts come up and
down in the hearts. Now, By the Law comes the knowledge of these secret sins.
Reason is a glass much to be esteemed for what it can show, but it is not a
perfect glass; sometimes it shows a sin, but many times diminishes it, that
we cannot see it in full proportion. The Apostle makes this use of the Law,
that by it sin became exceeding sinful. Thou may see sin to be sin by natural
reason, but to see it exceeding sinful, this morality comes short of, thou must
have this from the Law of God.

Another false Glass.

The Devil transforms himself into an Angel of light.


5. There is another false glass, when the Devil transforms himself into an
Angel of light, when he preaches Go^pel to a man. Beware of ^he doctrine when
the deceiver preaches. This may be his doctrine, He that believes and is
Baptized shall be saved. From this, by Satan's cunning delusion, the natural man
thus concludes: A mere heathen shall be shut out of Heaven gates, but I believe
in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, therefore I am in a good condition.
Why then should I trouble my self any further? there is no man can accuse me,
and my own good works will testify unto me that I do enough. Str^ctnesse in
Religion is troublenesse, and it is an unreasonable thing to do more: but this
is but a mere delusion of Satan, for there is nothing more quiet, and satisfies
a man, then Religion; there is nothing in the world more reasonable then the
service of God. First then know thy disease, and then apply those sweet balms.
It is no easy matter for a man to believe: we block out the strait ways of
God, if we think it an easy matter to believe of our selves. It must be done
by the mighty power of God: It Is as great a work of God, as the Creation of the
world, to make a man believe: It Is the mighty power of God to salvation. Such a
one must not receive Christ as a Savior, but as a Lord too. He must renounce
all to have him must take him on his own terms. He must deny the world and all,
looking before hand what it will cost him. Now for a man to take Christ as his
Lord, denying himself, the world, and all, to resolve to pluck out his right
eye, cut off his right hand rather then to part with him, and account nothing
so dear to him as Christ, is no small matter. Thou can not be Christ's Spouse,
unless thou forsake all for him. Thou must account all things as dung and
dross in comparison of him: and is not this a difficult thing? is this an
easy task? Easily spoken indeed, not as easily done: it must be here as in the
case of marriage; a man must forsake all others, yea the whole world, else
Christ will not own him. Observe the speech of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.19. What is
the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward that believe, etc. Mark, is to
believe so easy a matter think you? why, unless the mighty power of God be
engaged for it, with that strength as it was engaged in raising Christ from the
dead, it cannot be. When thou art to believe, and be united unto Christ, the
agreement is not that thou shall take him as thy wife, and thou shall be his
husband: No, he must be thy husband, and thou must obey him. Now for a man to
be brought out of his natural condition, and to take Christ on any terms, so
he may be saved by him in the end, is not so easy. Can thou think there is
no more required but only the outward Baptism, or that there is no more in
Baptism but the outward washing of the flesh? No, He Is not a Jew that is one
outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is in the flesh; but he is a Jew
that is so inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart. Thou then entrest
into Gods livery. Mark this, for by it I strive only to bring thee back to thy
self. Thou entrest into covenant with him; thou bindest thy self to forsake the
world, the flesh, and the Devil; and we should make this use of Baptism, as now
to put it in practice. When we promised, there were two things in the
Indenture; one, that God will give Christ to us, the other, that we must
forsake all the sinful lusts of the flesh: this is that makes Baptism to be
Baptism indeed to us. The other thing required, is, that we forsake all, Romans
6.2. It is not confined to the very act, but it has a perpetual effect all the
days of thy life. I add, it never has its full effect till the day of our
death, till the abolition of the whole body of sin. That which we seal, is not
complete till then, till we have final grace. The water of Baptism quenches the
fire of Purgatory; for it is not accomplished till final grace is received. We
are now under the Physicians hands, then shall we be cured. Baptism is not done
only at the Font, which is a thing deceives many; for it runs through our
whole life: nor has it consummation till our dying day, till we receive final
grace: the force and efficacy of Baptism is for the washing away of sin to
morrow as well as the day past: the death of sin is not till the death of the
body, and therefore its said we must be buried with him by Baptism into his
death. Now after death we receive final grace; till when, this washing and the
virtue thereof has not its consummation.

Let no man therefore deceive you with vain words; take heed of looking on your
selves in these false glasses, think it not an easy thing to get Heaven, the
way is strait, and the passage narrow. There must be a striving to enter; there
must be an ascending into Heaven, a motion contrary to nature: And therefore
it is folly to think we shall drop into Heaven, there must be a going upward, if
ever we will come thither.

EPHESIANS. 2.1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins,
where in times past you walked according to the course of this world, according
to the Prince that rules in the Air, the Spirit that works in the children
of disobedience: Amongst whom also, etc.
THe last time I declared unto you the duty that was necessarily required of us
if we look to be saved, that we must not only take the matter speedily into
consideration, and not be deluded by our own hearts and the wiles of Satan; but
that we must not do it superficially or perfunctorily, but must bring our
selves to the true touchstone, and not look upon our selves with false glasses,
because there is naturally in every one self-love; and in these last and worst
times men are apt to think better of themselves then they deserve. If there be
any beginning of goodness in them, they think all is well, when there is no
danger in the world then being but half Christians. He thinks that if he has
escaped the outward pollutions of the world through lust, and be not so bad as
formerly he has been, and not so bad as many men in the world are, therefore
he is well enough: whereas his end proves worse then his beginning. Superficial
repentance will not change the nature of man. No morality, nor external change
of life will do, without quickening grace and a new life wrought.
This superficial repentance is but like the washing of a hog, the outside is
only washed, the swinish nature is not taken a way. There may be in this man
some outward abstaining from the common gross sins of the world, or those
which he himself was subject unto; but his disposition to sin is the same, his
nature is nothing changed: there is no renovation, no casting in a new mould,
which must be in us. For it is not a little reforming will serve the turn, no,
nor all the morality in the world, nor all the common graces of Gods Spirit,
nor the outward change of the life: they will not do, unless we are quickened,
and have a new life wrought in us; unless there be a supernatural working of
Gods Spirit we can never enter into Heaven. Therefore in this case it behooves
every man to prove his own work, Gal. 6. A thing men are hardly drawn unto, to
be exact examiners of themselves. Coelo descendit, (...), a Heathen himself
could say, to know a man's self is a heavenly saying; and it is an heavenly thing
indeed if we have an heavenly Master to teach us. The Devil taught Socrates a
lesson that brought him from the study of natural to moral Philosophy, whereby
he knew himself; yet the Devil knew morality could never teach him the lesson
indeed. All the morality in the world cannot teach a man to escape Hell: we
must have a better instructor herein then the Devil or our selves, the Lord of
Heaven must do it, if ever we will be brought to know our selves aright. St.
Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, one of the learned Doctors of
the Pharisees, and yet he could not teach him this. When he studied the law, he
thought himself unblameable, but coming to an higher and better Master, he
knows that in him, that is, in his flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7. By self
examination a man may find many faults in himself, but to find that which the
Apostle afterward found in himself, to see the flesh a rottenness, the sink of
iniquity that is within him, and to find himself so bad as indeed he is,
unless it please the Lord to open his eyes, and to teach him, he can never
attain it.

Now we come to this place of the Apostle, wherein we see the true glass of
our selves, the Spirit knows what we are better then our selves, and the Spirit
shows us that every man of us either was or is such as we are here set down to
be. We are first natural before we can be spiritual, there is not a man but
has been, or is yet a natural man, and t^^^efore see we the large description
of a natural man before he is quickened, before God which is rich in mercy
enlivens him being dead in sins, and saves him by grace in Christ. Thus is it
with us all, and thus must it be; and we shall never be fit for grace till we
know our selves thus far, till we know our selves as far out of frame, as the
Spirit of truth declares us to be. In this place of Scripture consider we

1. Who this carnal man is; what they are which the Apostle speaks of, to be
dead in sins: and that walk after the course of the world, led by the Devil,
and have their conversation after the flesh, children of wrath. These are big
words and heavy things: Consider therefore first the subject* of whom this is
spoken.

Then follows the P^aedicate, or

2. What the till news is which he delivers of them. We begin with the first.

1. Who they are of whom this is spoken: and that is (you) You has he quickened
who were dead: and ( ye) (in the words following) that in times past walked
after the course of the world: and in the third verse more particularly: Among
whom we had our conversation also in times past. He speaks now in the first
person, as before in the second, so that the subject is we, and ye all. Not a
man in this Congregation, but is or was as bad as the Holy Ghost here makes
him. But

2. To come to that which is delivered of him: he is one not quickened, dead in
sins: no better then nature made him, that corrupt nature which he has from
Adam, till he is thus spiritually enlivened.

Now he is described,

1. By the quality of his person.

2. By his company. Even as others. Thou may think thy self better then
another man, but thou art no better; never a barrel the better herring (as we
say:) Even as others, thou art not so alone, but as bad as the worst, not a man
more evil in his nature then thou art. When thou go to hell, perhaps some
difference there may be in your several punishments, according to your several
acts of rebellion: but yet you shall all come short of the glory of God, And
for matter of quickening you are all alike.

1. First then concerning their quality: And this is declared

1. By their general disposition, they are dead in trespasses and sins. Dead,
and therefore unable and indisposed to the works of a spiritual living man:
Besides, not only indisposed and unable thereto, but dead in trespasses and
sins. He lies rotting in his own filth, like a rotten carcass, and stinkking
carrion in the nostrils of the Almighty, so loathsome is he: all which is drawn
from original sin. Not only dis-enabled to any good, but prone to all sin and
iniquity.

2. By his particular conversation: And that appears in the verse following.
Where in times past ye walked. How? Not according to the word and will of God,
not according to his rule, but they walked after three other wicked rules. A
dead man then has his walk you see: a strange thing in the dead, but who
directs him in his course? these three, the world, the flesh, and the Devil,
the worst guides that may be; yet if we look to the conversation of a natural
man, we see these are his Pilots, which are here set down.

1. The World. Where in times past ye walked after the course of the world. He
swims along with the stream of the world. Nor will he be singular, not such a
precise one as some few are, but do as the world does, run amain whither that
carries him. See the state of a natural man. He Is apt to be brought into the
slavery of the world. This is his first guide. then follows

2. The Second, which is the Devil. The Devil leads him as well as the World:
According to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience. In stead of having the Spirit of God to be led
by, he is posted by the Spirit of Sa^an, and the works of his Father the Devil
he will do, He has not an heart to resist the vi^est lusts the Devil shall
persuade him to. When Satan once fills his heart, he has no heart to any thing
else, then to follow him.

3. There remains the Flesh, his guide too, and that is not left out, v. 3.
Amongst whom we had our conversation in times past in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. So that you see the three
guides of a natural man; and he is as bad as these three can make him: and till
the stronger man comes and pulls him out, in this condition he remains, and in
this natural estate, he is a son of disobedience. We see then the state of
disobedience described to be wretchedness.

3. This further appears by that which must follow, which is cursednesse.
Rebellion and wretchedness going before, cursednesse will follow. For God will
not be abused, nor suffer a Rebel to go unpunished: Therefore says the
Apostle, We are by nature the children of wrath. Being the natural sons of
disobedience, we may well conclude we are the children of wrath, If we can well
learn these two things of our selves, how deep we are in sin, and how the wrath
of God is due to us for our sins, then we may see what we are by Nature. Thus
much concerning the quality of a natural man. Next follows

2. His company. Even as others. By nature we are the children of wrath even as
others. That is to say, we go in that broad wide way that leads to damnation,
that way we all naturally rush into: though we may think it otherwise, and
think our selves better, yet we are deceived. For it is with us even as with
others. Naturally we are in the same state that the worst men in the world are;
so that we see the glass of a natural man, or of a man that has made some
beginnings, till Christ come and quicken him.

Q. Quest.
See we then who it is spoken of to be dead men, that are rotten and stinking,
as bad as the world, the flesh, and the Devil can make them: Who should these
be?

A. Ans.
I answer, it is you: you has he quickened. And ye, wherein ye walked, etc. But
who are they?

The Ephesians perhaps that were in times past heathens: I hope it belongs not
to us. They were Gentiles and Pagans that knew not Christ, v. 12. Aliens to the
Commonweal of Israel, strangers to the covenant of promise, having no hope,
without God in the world. (...), as the Text renders it, Atheists, and
therefore they might well be so. But I hope it is not thus with me, I was never
a Pagan or Heathen, I was born of Christian Parents, and am of the Church.

But put away these conceits. Look on the 3d. v. Amongst whom we also had our
conversation: and wherein ye your selves, etc. It Is not only spoken of you
Gentiles, but verified of us also: As if he had s^id here as Gal. 2. We who are
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. He paints out no^ only you
the Gentiles in such ugly colors, but we Jews also, we of the Commonwealth of
I^rael. We, before we were quickened, were in the same state that you are
described to be in.

Obj. Obj.
Oh but the Apostle may do this out of fellowship, and to avoid envy, as it
were making himself a pa^ty with them, as Ezra did cap. 9. that included
himself in the number of the offenders, though he had no hand in the offense: O
our God (says he) what shall we say? Our evil deeds, etc. and how shall we
stand before thee because of this? making a particular confession, whereas he
was not accessory to the fault, but to sweeten it to them.

Sol. Sol.
But here the Apostle does not so, he was not thus minded, but it is we all, he
puts universality to it: So that it is clear, that before conversion and
quickening by grace from Christ, we all, all of us are in as foul and filthy a
condition, as this which is here described and set down: So that this is the
point, that it is not spoken of some desperate sinners, but that it is the
common state and condition of all the sons of Adam.

Doct. Doct.
All men, every man and woman in this place, either is or has been in the
state that here the Apostle describes him to be.

Therefore we have all need to examine our selves, whether we yet remain in
that condition or not. The Apostle brings this description to testify the
truth of the point, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded^ all under sin. The
whole current and course of the Scripture shows the universality of it, that
it is true of all. See, the Apostle speaking of himself and the rest, Tit. 3.3.
says, We our selves also, not only you of the Gentiles, but we our selves
also were foolish, disobedient, etc. but after the kindness of God toward man
appeared, etc. that is, before the day star of grace did arise in our hearts,
there is not the best of us all but have been thus and thus.

Romans 3.3. There the Apostle insists on the point expressly, that every mouth
might be stopped; to show the state of all men naturally, having laid down a
large beadrole of the iniquities of the Heathen, comes afterward to convince
the Jews. What are we better then they; no, we have proved that all are under
sin: there is none good, no not one.

Obj. Obj.
But though you bring many places to prove that all are sinners, yet I hope the
Virgin Mary was not.

Sol. An inch breaks no squares, but All are sinners. There is none righteous,
no not one. The drift of the Apostle in this, is to show that these things are
not spoken of some heinous sinners only, but there is not one to be exempted;
and therefore in his Conclusion, v. 19. he says, That every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world become guilty before God: and that by the deeds of
the Law no flesh can be justified from sin.

So that now having proved this so clearly to you, consider with your selves
how needful it is to apply this to our own souls. Many men, when they read such
things as these in the Scripture, read them but as stories from strange
Countries. What, are we dead in sins, not able to stir one foot in Gods ways?
bad we are indeed: No natural man does judge himself so bad as he is:
but dead, rotten, and stinking in sins and trespasses? what, as bad as the
world, the devil, and flesh can make us? what, children of wrath? firebrands of
hell? few can persuade themselves that it is so bad with them. Therefore take
this home to your selves; think no better of your selves then you are: for thus
you are naturally. Therefore consider, if thou were now going out of the world,
what state thou art in, a child of wrath, a child of Belial, or the like. Set
about the work speedily, go to God, pray, and cry earnestly: give thy self no
rest, till thou know this to be thy condition: Let not thy corrupt nature
deceive thee, to make thee think better of thy self then God says thou art.

Now that we may the better know to whom these things belong, know it is thou
and I, we all have been or are in this estate, till we have supernatural grace;
and therefore we are declared to be children of wrath, and children of
disobedience, till regenerated. Why? It Is because it is thy nature, it belongs
to all. Now we know the common nature always appertains to the same kind:
There Is nothing natural but is common with the kind. If then by nature we are
children, then certainly it belongs to every Mothers son of us, for we are all
sons of Adam. In Adam we all die, Romans 5. That Is the fountain whence all misery
flows to us. As thou receivedst thy nature, so the corruption of thy nature
from him; for he begat a son in his own likeness. This therefore is the
condition of every one. The Apostle in 1 Cor. 15. speaks of two men, the first
was from the earth, earthy, the second was the Lord from heaven. What, were
there not many millions and generations more? True, but there were not more men
like these, men of men, two head men, two fathers of all other men. There were
but two by whom all must stand or fall, but two such men. By the fall of the
first man we all fell; and if we rise not by the second man, we are yet in our
sins. If he rise not, we cannot be risen. We must rise or fall by him. He is
the Mediator of the second Covenant. If he rise and we are in him, we shall
rise with him; but if not, we are dead still. So it is in the first Adam, we
all depend on him, he is the root of all mankind. It Is said in Esaias 53. Our
Savior should rejoice to see his seed. His seed, that is to say, he is the
common father of all mankind, I mean of all those that shall proceed from him
by spiritual generation. He shall present them to his father, as when one is
presented to the University: Behold here am I, and the children that thou have
given me. So in Adam, he being the head of the covenant of nature, that is, the
Law, if he had stood, none of us had fallen; if he fall, none of us all can
stand He is the peg on which all the keys hang: if that stand, they hang fast;
but if that fall, they fall with it. As we see in matter of bondage; if the
father forfeit his liberty, and become a bondsman, all his children are bondmen
to a hundred generations: here is our case. We were all once free, but our
father has forfeited his liberty; and if he become a slave, he cannot beget a
freeman. When our Savior tells the Jews of being freemen: We were never
bondmen, say they, though it be false; for even Cicero himself could tell a
Jew that he was a slave, genus hominum ad servitium natum, although they had a
good opinion of themselves: But our Savior says, you are bond-m^n unto sin
and Satan. For till the Son make you free, you are all bondmen: but when he
makes you free, then are you free indeed. So that we see our condition here set
down.

1. We are dead in trespasses and sins; that is, there is an indisposition in
us to all good works. A dead man cannot walk, or speak, or do any act of a
living man; so these cannot do the actions of men that are quickened and
enlivened, they cannot pray with the spirit, they cannot love God, etc. they
cannot do those things that shall be done hereafter in heaven. There Is not one
good duty which this natural man can do. If it should be said unto him, Think
but one good thought, and for it thou shall go to heaven, he could not think
it. Till God raise him from the sink of sin, as he did Lazarus from the grave,
he cannot do any thing that is well-pleasing unto God. He may do the works of
a moral man, but to do the works of a man quickened and enlightened, it is beyond
his power. For if he could do so, he must then have some reward from God; for
however we deny the merit of good works, yet we deny not the reward of good
works to a man that is in Christ. There Is no proportionable merit in a cup of
cold water and the Kingdom of heaven, yet he that gives a cup of cold water to
a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward. Here then is
the point. The best thing that a natural man does, The best works of a natural
man cannot please God.
cannot so relish with God, as that he should take delight in it, or reward it:
whereas the least good thing that comes from another root, from a quickened
spirit, is acceptable and well-pleasing to him. Consider for this end that
which is set down, Prove. 15.8. Take the best works of a natural man, his
prayers or sacrifice, and see there what is said. The sacrifice of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord. It is said again, Prove. 21.27. where there are
additions, The prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the lord: how much
more when he brings it with a wicked mind? Suppose there should come upon this
man a fit of devotion, where he has or should have some good motions, is it
then accepted? no, it is so far from being accepted, that it is an Abomination
to God, how much more then if he brings it with a wicked mind? That is, if he
bring it not with a wicked mind, it is an abomination, how much more with it?
See the case set down in Haggai 2.12, 13, 14. If one bear holy flesh, etc.
shall he be unclean? And the Priest answered, no. Then said Haggai, if an
unclean person touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And he said, it shall
be unclean. Then answered Haggai, so is this people, so is this nation before
me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, it is unclean. A man
may not say prayer is a sin, because it is so in them; no, it is a good duty,
but spoiled in the carriage. He marrs it in the carriage; and therefore in
stead of doing a good work, he spoils it; and so in stead of a reward, must
look for punishment, 1 Timothy 1 5. The end of the Commandment is love out of a
pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. Let the things thou do
be according to the Commandment: look what thou do be according to the
middle, end, and beginning of the Commandment. If wrong in all these, then
though the work be never so materially good, being faulty in the original,
middle, or end, it is so far from being a good work, that God will not accept of
it, and thou may rather expect a plague for spoiling it, then a cure.

See then the beginning of a good work, Look to the oginal of duties.
it must be from a pure heart. A man not ingrafted into Christ, is a defiled,
polluted person, his very mind and conscience are defiled. The conscience is
the purest thing a man has, it holds out last, and takes part with God, that
as Jobs messenger said, I only am escaped to tell thee: so conscience only
remains to declare a man's faults to God, and to witness against the man; and
yet this very light, the eye of the soul, is defiled: therefore if thou have a
corrupt fountain, if the heart be naught, the fountain muddy, whatever stream
comes from it, Look to the end of duty.
cannot be pure.

Again, the end of it is love. Consider when thou do any duty, what puts
thee on work. Is it love does constrain thee? If love do not constrain thee, it
is manifest that thou do not seek God but thy self, and art to every good
work a Reprobate; that is, thou art not then able to do any thing that God will
accept; the best thing thou do will not relish with God. A hard estate
indeed, that when a man shall come to appear before God, he shall not have one
good thing that he has done in all his life that God will own. Some there be
that take a great deal of pains in coming to the word, in prayer public and
private, in charity and giving to the poor: Alas, when thou shall come to an
account, and none of these things shall stead thee, not one of them shall speak
for thee, but all shall be lost, How heavy will thy ease be? 2 John 8. Look to
your selves, that you lose not the thing that you have wrought: By being
indisposed to do the works of a living man we lose all; that is to say, God
will never own nor accept them: we shall never have reward for them. So that
here is the case, thou being dead, unable to perform the works of a living man,
can have no reward from heaven at all, until a man is quickened, and has life
from Christ. Without me, says our Savior, you can do nothing. St. Austin on
this place observes that Christ says not, Without me ye can do no great
matter: no, but unless you be cut off from your own stock, taken from your own
root, and be ingrafted into me, and have life from me, and be quickened by me,
you can do nothing at all: Nothing, neither great nor small, all that you do is
lost. So that if there were nothing but this being dead, you could do no good
action. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh (says St. Paul) there dwells
no good thing: that is, nothing spiritually good, nothing for which I may look
for a reward in heaven. The Lord will say of such a man, thou have lived ten,
twenty, forty, or it may be fifty years under the Ministry, and yet have not
done a good work, or thought a good thought that I can own. Cut down this
fruitless tree, why cumbers it the ground? And this is the case of every man
of us while we continue in our natural condition: till we be ingrafted into
Christ, and live by his life, God will own nothing we do.

But now we are not only dead, and indisposed to the works of a living man,
though this be a very woeful case, and we need no more misery; for this will
bring us to be cut down and cast into the fire, if we continue so: But this is
not only the case of a natural man, but he is very active and fruitful in the
works of darkness, the others were sins of omission. Here he is wholly set
upon the commission of sins and trespasses, Heb. 6.7. He not only brings not
forth meet fruit, or good fruit, or no fruit, but he brings forth thorns and
briars; and is therefore rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burnt. Thou art not only found a barren tree, and so deservest to be cut down;
but thou bring forth thorns and briars, and deservest to be burnt; not only
no good fruit, but noxious, bad and poisoned fruit; and this does mightily
aggravate the matter. Now for us that have lived so long under the Ministry,
and the Lord has watered, and dressed, and hedged us, do we think the Lord
expects from us no good fruit? Had we lived among heathens, or where the word
is not taught, then so much would not be expected; but we have heard the word
often and powerfully taught, and therefore it is expected that we should not
only bring forth fruit, but meet fruit, answerable to the means. Where God
affords greatest means, there he expects most fruit. If a man live thirty or
forty years under powerful means, the Lord expects answerable fruit, which if
he bring forth, he shall have a blessing from the Lord. But when a man has
lived long under the means, and brings forth no fruit pleasing to God, but all
Gods cost is lost, when notwithstanding the dew and the rain which falls often
upon him, he brings forth nothing but thorns and briars, he is rejected, and
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burnt. The earth which drinks in the
former and the latter rain, etc. if it bring not forth fruit answerable to the
labor of the dresser, it is nigh unto the curse.

Now if we consider but the particulars, and search into Gods testimonies, we
shall see how bad this man is.

But who should this man be?

We have Gods own word for it. It Is men, generally all men, Genesis 6.5. God saw
the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every thought and
imagination of his heart was only evil continually. Every word is as it were a
thunderbolt: and was it not time, when it was thus with them for God to bring
a flood? The thoughts are the original, from which the words and actions do
usually proceed. Now all their thoughts were evil: What, was there no kind of
goodness in their thoughts? no, they were only evil continually: and that was
the reason the flood came. Well, but though it were so before the flood, yet I
hope they were better after the flood. No, God said again after the flood, cap.
8. The thoughts of the hearts of men are evil, etc. Like will to like. Men are
all of one kind, till they receive grace from Christ. We are all of one
nature, and naturally all the thoughts and imaginations of our hearts are only
evil continually.

See it in the understanding, 1 Cor. 3.14. The natural man perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, for they are foolishness
unto him etc.

Look upon his will, Romans 8. It is not subject to the will of God, neither
indeed can it be. Our Savior, Mat. 15.8. does anatomize the heart of such a
man. Those things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and they
defile the man, for out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, etc. these are they which defile the man, because they come from
his heart from within. If a man go by a house, and see great flakes of fire
come out of the ^himney, though he see not the fire within, yet he cannot but
know there is fire within, because he sees the flakes without. I am not able
to see the heart of any man, and to declare to you what I have seen with mine
eyes; but yet if I see such flakes to come forth, as murder, thefts,
blasphemies, lying, and the like. I may say there is hel-fire in the heart; thy
heart is a little hell within thee, these manifestations from without make it
appear to be so. The words of this man are rotten words and stinking words, and
his heart is much more. So, this is the point, we are utterly indisposed,
aliens to all good, and bent to all evil. I am carnal (says the Apostle) we
are sold under sin, slaves unto it; sin is our Lord, and we its slaves. We have
generally forfeited our happy estate, and are servants to Satan, whom we obey.
Therefore this is a thing not easily to be passed over; this is our condition,
of which if we were once truly persuaded, we would never give our selves any
rest till we were got out of it.

If the party that goes to the Physician, could but know his disease, and cause
the Physician to know it, and the causes of it, whether it came from a hot
cause or a cold, it were easily cured, it were as good as half done: That is
the chief reason why so many miscarry, because their disease is not perfectly
known. That is the reason we are no better, because our disease is not
perfectly known: That is the reason that we are no better, because we know not
how bad we are. If we did once know our disease, and knew our selves to be
heart sick, and not like the Laodiceans, which thought themselves rich and
wanted nothing, when they were poor, blind, and naked, then we would seek out,
and were in the way to be cured. So much for this time, but we will have
another Lecture on this point.

GAL. 3.22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
YOu see in this excellent portion of Scripture the two Covenants of Almighty
God: to wit, the Covenant of Nature, and the Covenant of grace. The first of
Nature, which was written by God in man's heart, and this is the holy Law of
God, by virtue whereof a man was to continue in that integrity, holiness, and
uprightness, in which God had first created him, and to serve God according to
that strength he first enabled him with, that so he might live thereby.

But now when man had broken this Covenant, and entered into a state of
Rebellion against God, he is shut up in misery, but not in misery for ever, as
the Angels that fell were, being reserved in chains till the judgment of the
great day: No, the Lord has shut him up in prison, only for a while, that so
he may the better make a way for their escape and deliverance, and for their
entrance into the second Covenant of grace: that so making him see his own
misery, wherein by nature he is, and cutting him off from his own stock, he may
be ingrafted into Christ, draw sap and sweetness from him, and bring forth
fruits to everlasting life. And this is the method the Scripture uses: It
concludes all under sin, that so the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be
given to them that believe. It Is no new Doctrine devised by us, but it is the
course and method of the Scripture: for it begins in this great work with
imprisoning and shutting up. The Law is as a Justice of Peace, that by his
Mittimus commands us to prison: It Is a Sergeant that arrests a man, and carries
him to the Jail: But why does the Scripture do thus? It Is not to destroy you
with famine; the Law sends you not hither to starve you, or to kill you with
the stench of the prison, but thereby to save and preserve you alive, and that
you may hunger and thirst after deliverance. So that we find the reason added
in the Text, The Scripture concludes all under sin, why? It Is that the promise
by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. You are shut up
as prisoners and rebels, that having found the smart of it, seen your misery,
and learned what it is to be at enmity with God, and the folly to make your
selves wiser and stronger then God, you may submit your selves casting down
your plumes, and desire after Christ with an hungry and thirsty appetite, for
not only a Priest to sacrifice himself for you, and a Prophet to teach and
instruct you, but a King to be swayd by him, earnestly craving from thy soul
to be his subject, and to be admitted into the privilege of his subjects in
the Commonwealth of Israel, and esteem it our greatest shame that we have been
aliens so long, so long excluded. The Scripture then concludes you under sin,
and shut up by it, not to bring you to despair, but to bring you to salvation:
As a Physician, which gives his Patient bitter pills, not to make him sick, but
that so he may restore him to health: or as a Surgeon, that lays sharp
drawing plasters, and cuts the flesh, not with an intent to hurt, but to cure
the wound.

This is the Scriptutes method, it concludes all under sin, (...), has shut up
all. The Text says not (...), but (...), not all men in the masculine gender,
but all things in the neuter. And it is all one as if the Apostle had said, The
Scripture arrests not only thy person but thine actions: The Scripture lays
hold not only of the man, but of every thing in him. This word ( all) is a
forcible word, and empties us clean of every thing, that we may truiy confess
with the Apostle, In me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.
It Is impossible a man should by nature think thus of himself, that there is no
good in him; or that he should by asking others find himself half so bad as
the Law makes him to be, by shutting up a man under sin, and all things in a
man, yea all good whatsoever is in thee.

And this it does that thou may come to Christ: as it is enlarged in the 2.
verses following. Before faith came (says the Apostle) we were kept up under
the Law, shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be revealed: wherefore
the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified
by faith. Before the time then thou have faith, (which is the day salvation
comes to thine house) thou art kept under the Law. Thou art not assured of
salvation, nor can thou expect till then that God should show thee mercy. We
may have a conceit, that though we are never transplanted, nor cut off from our
own stock, yet God will show us mercy: But we shall beguile our selves to hell
therein; for we are kept under the Law till faith comes, that so we may know
our selves. We are kept, etc. ( Kept) It Is a Metaphor drawn from Military
affairs, when men are kept by a Garrison, and kept in order. Now the Law is
Gods Garrison, which keeps men in good awe and order. The Law does this not to
terrify you too much, or to break your minds with despair, but to fit you for
the faith: It Is a shutting up till that faith which should afterward be
revealed. He Is a miserable Preacher which ends with preaching of the Law; the
Law is for another end, it is to fit us for faith. It Is our Schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ. We thunder not the Law to make men run away from God, but
to bring them home unto him. The Schoolmaster by the smart of his rod makes the
child weary of his bondage, and desire earnestly to be past his nonage; and
this is his end, not that he delights to hear him cry. Thus are we beaten by
the law, not that God delights or loves to hear us sigh or sob, but that we may
grow weary of our misery and cruel bondage, may desire to be justified by
faith. The Law then is so a Schoolmaster, as that by making us smart, it might
bring us home. We see then the course and method of the Scripture, it has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ may be made
to them that believe.

Now because men like not this kind of Doctrine, to begin with Preaching of
the Law, and therefore think there may be a shorter and nearer way, to preach
Christ first, I will therefore make known unto you this method of the
Scripture, and I will justify it unto you.

There must be this Preparative, else the Gospel will come unseasonably. If
before we are sowred by the leaven of the Law Christ be preached, he will be
but unsavory and unpleasant to us.

It Is necessary to preach the Law before the Gospel.
2. Does God at the first Preaching of the Gospel begin with Adam by Preaching
Christ, before he saw his sin and wickedness? No, he said not to him
presently, as soon as he had sinned, Well, Adam, thou have sinned, and broken my
covenant, yet there is another covenant, thou shall be saved by one that comes
out of thy loins: But God first summons him to appear, he brings him out of
his shelters and hiding places, tells him of his sin, and says, Have thou
eaten of the tree which I forbad thee to eat of? But the man shifts it off, and
the woman also to the serpent: The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat: Yet all
this will not excuse him, Gods judgments are declared, his sin is made
apparent, he sees it: Then being thus humbled, comes in the promise of the
Gospel, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. This is the 1
Instance.
Be ye open then ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.

2 Instance.
2. John the Baptist, who was the Harbinger to prepare the way for Christ,
Preaching to the Scribes and Pharisees, warned them, O generation of vipers. He
came to throw down every high hill, and to beat down every mountain: calls them
serpents. This was his office, to lay the Axe at the root of the Tree.

3 Instance.
3. And Christ himself coming into the world, and Preaching to Nicodemus,
begins: Unless a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
John 3. A man in his natural condition can never enter into Heaven, for he is
wholly carnal. That that is born of the flesh is flesh, and that that is born
of the Spirit is Spirit It Is carnal, and must be born again. A little patching
will not serve the turn. Thou must be new born, new molded, a little mending
is not sufficient: A man must be a new creature, and new made. So that this is
the substance of this doctrine of Christ, that if thou be no better then moral
virtue, or civil education can make thee; if thou have any thing less then
Regeneration, believe me thou can never see heaven. There Is no hope of heaven
till then, till thou art born again: till then our Savior excludes all false
fancies that way.

5. The Apostles began to gather the first Church after Christ's resurrection,
Act. 2.23. They do not begin to preach Christ first, his virtue and efficacy;
but first they tell them of their great sin, in crucifying the Lord of life,
viz. Whom with wicked hands you have taken and crucified. But what was the end
of their doing thus? It Is set down v, 37. They were pricked to the heart, and
then they cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? See, this
was the end of all, the humbling of them, that by declaring what they had done,
they might be pricked at the heart; so that now they see if it be no better
with them then for the present, it is like to go ill with them. This makes them
cry out, What shall we do? Then (says Peter) repent and be Baptized, and you
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. After he had told them their own, and
had brought them to their search, which is their first work, then comes the
promise of Christ. Observe the Apostles method in the Epistle to the Romans:
which book is a perfect Catechism of the Church, which contains these three
parts of Divinity, Humiliation, Just^fication, and Sanctification. See how the
Apostle orders his method. From the first Cap to part of the third, he treats
all of the Law, and convinces both Jew and Gentile, and all of sin. Then 3
Cap. 19. mark his Conclusion: that every mouth may be stopped. When he had
stopped every mouth, cast down every strong hold which listed it self up
against God: when he had laid all at Gods feet, and left them bleeding, as it
were, under the knife of God, then comes he to Christ, Romans 3.21. The
righteousness of God without the Law is manifested. He had done his first
business in humbling them, in showing them their sins by the Law: and as soon
as that was done, when every mouth was stopped, then comes he to the promise by
faith in Jesus Christ to all them that believe.

You see then the method of the Scripture is first to conclude all under sin,
and so to fit men for the promise of Jesus Christ. Know therefore that the law
is the highway to the Gospel, the path that leads to it, that way which must
be trodden in: we are still out of our way, till we have begun our walks in
this path: And if thou art not terrified by the Law, and the sight of thy sins,
been at thy wits end as it were, weary of thy condition and bondage, thou art
not in the way yet. Our sowing must be in tears. And it is said, that in the
Church Triumphant all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes. That Is a
promise: But is it possible that tears should be wiped from our eyes before we
shed them? Shall we look to go to heaven in a way that was never yet found
out? Shall it be accounted a point of preciseness to walk in this way, or a
soul-torturing doctrine to preach it? This is the way that all our Forefathers
have both preached and gone. This is that time of sowing spoken of in Psalm.
126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. It brings us joy in the
end, to begin our sowing in tears. It waters that precious seed, and makes it
bring forth joy unto us in abundance, yea such as no man can take from us.

So then having laid this point for a foundation, we now will come to the next.

That until we come to Christ, the Law lays hold of us. Till Christ come, we
are shut up under the Law, kept under it. And if there were nothing else in the
world to make a man weary of his condition, this were enough. Until a man has
given over himself to Christ, and renounced his own righteousness, he is
subject to the Law, kept under it, not under grace. It brings a man only to the
place where grace is. Put this therefore close to your consciences, and jumble
not these two together. First Nature comes, and whilst you are under that, you
are under the Law. Never think you are under the Covenant of Grace, till you
believe (of which belief we shall speak more hereaftet.) Whilst you are under
the Law, you are held under it: Whoever is under the Law, is under the curse.

Now that I may unfold it, and show what a fearful thing it is to be under the
Law, to be held under it (although many think it no great matter) hearken what
the Apostle says of it: Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. Well then, art
thou under the Law? then never think of being under grace at the same time: not
but that we may hope to be under grace afterward: By this Law we must be
judged, and the judgment of the Law is very severe: It requires not only that
thou do this or that good thing; but if thou continuest not in every thing
that is written therein, it condemns thee.

Strange conceits men have now adays, and strange Divinity is brought forth
into the world: That if a man does as much as lies in him, and what he is of
himself able to do? nay farther, though he be a Heathen, that knows not
Christ, yet if he does the best he can; if he live honestly toward men,
according to the conduct of his reason, and has a good mind toward God, it is
enough, he need not question his eternal welfare. A cursed and desperate
Doctrine they conclude hence: Why (say they) may not this man be saved as well
as the best? But if it be so, I ask such, What is the benefit and advantage of
the Jew more then the Gentile? What is the benefit of Christ? of the Church? of
Faith? of Baptism? of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? This ground of
Pelagianism, is that for which the Church abhors us: when we shall undertake to
bring a man to salvation without Christ: whereas if he be not under grace,
under Christ, he is accursed. If thou will be saved by the Law, it is not thy
endeavor or doing; what lies in thee that will serve the turn; every jot and
tittle that the Law requires, must be fulfilled. What would be thine estate, if
thou should be examined according to the strict rigor of the Law? Not the
least word or thought that is contrary to it, but thou must give an account
for. If thou stand upon thine own bottom, or look to be saved by thine
own deeds; not one vain word which thou speak, but thou shall be questioned
for, cast, and condemned. Consider then the great difference of being under
Christ and grace, and of being under the law. When we are under Christ, we are
freed from a great deal of inconvenience: we are not liable to answer for those
evil things which we have committed; as in that comfortable place of Ezekiel,
All his iniquities that he has done shall not be mentioned unto him. When a
man is come to forsake his old way, his evils are cast out of mind; a
mavelous comfort to a Christian: whereas if a man be not in Christ, every
idle word he must be accountable for; if in Christ, the greatest sin he ever
committed he shall not hear of. All they that stand on Gods right hand, hear
only of the good things they have done, you have fed, clothed, and visited
me: But they on the left hand hear not a word mentioned concerning the good
they have done, only their evil deeds are reckoned up.

Now that I may declare to you the difference between the Law and the Gospel: I
will difference it in three particulars.

1. The law rejects any kind of obedience besides that which is thorough,
sound, full, and perfect, without any touch of the flesh. It rejects all cracked
payment: it will take no clipped coin. That obedience which has any
imperfection joined with it, will not be accepted: But here I must not speak
without book. See Romans 7.14. We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am
carnal. And then concludes, O wretched man, etc. The Law is spiritual. What Is
that? We may know the meaning of it by the particle ( but) but I am carnal. The
Law is spiritual. That is, it requires that all our works be spiritual, without
any carnality, or touch of the flesh. If in any point of our obedience there be
a smell of the cask, it is rejected. If the beer be never so good, yet if it
have an evil smatch, it will not relish. Let our services have this savor of
the flesh, and they will not relish in Gods nostrils. And thus the law is
spiritual, but we are carnal. Now it is otherwise here in the state of the
Gospel: Alas! we are carnal, it is true. The Apostle himself complains, That
there is a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind, and
leading him captive, etc. Yet notwithstanding the Gospel accepts our obedience,
though the Law will not. What Is the reason of this? why, it is plain. When the
Law comes, it looks for justice, it puts a strict rule to us; it requires we
should be complete: But now the Gospel does not so; it requires not
justification of our own, but looks that being justified by Gods free grace, we
should show forth our thankfulness, and express that we are so in heart, by
our obedience to our utmost power. Here Is all the strictness of the Gospel. If
there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to what a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. God takes well the desires of
our mind. This is then our blessed condition under the Gospel: it requires not
perfect obedience, but thankfulness for mercies received, and a willing mind.
Suppose we cannot do what we would, that is no matter. God looks to our
affections, and the willingness of our minds; if it be according to the
strength that thou have, it is received with acceptance. Here then arises the
second point of difference, and that is,

2. The Law considers not what thou now have, but what thou once had. If thou
say, I have done my best; and what, would you have a man do more then he can
do? The Law heeds not that: it considers not what thou do, but what thou
oughtst to do. It requires that thou should perform obedience according to
thy first strength, and that perfection once God gave thee, that all thou do
should have love for it is ground: that thou should love the Lord thy God with
all thy soul, mind, heart, and strength. Here the Law is very imperious, like
those Taskmasters in Egypt, that laid burdens on the Israelites too heavy for
them to bear. They had at first materials, and then they delivered in the full
tale of bricks: But when the straw was taken from them, they complain of the
heaviness of their burden. But what is the answer? You are idle, you are idle,
you shall deliver the same tale of bricks as before. So stands the case here.
It Is not enough to plead, Alas! if I had strength, I would do it; but I have
not strength, I cannot do it. But the Law is peremptory, you must do it: you
are compelled by force, you shall do it. The impossibility of our fulfilling
it, does not exempt us, as appears by comparing Romans 8.3. with Romans 7.6.
although it be impossible, as the case stands, for the Law to be by us
fulfilled, yet we are held under it, as appears plainly thus. If I deliver a
man a stock of money whereby he may gain his own living, and be advantageous to
me; and he spend it, and when I require mine own with increase, he tells me,
True Sir, I received such a sum of money of you for this purpose, but I have
spent it, and am disinabled to pay. Will this serve the turn? will it satisfy
the Creditor, or discharge the debt? No, no, the Law will have its own of him.
If thou payest not thy due, thou must be shut up under it. It Is otherwise under
the Gospel: that accepts a man according to what he has, not* according to
what he has not. And here comes in the third point.

3. Under the Gospel, although I am fallen, yet if I repent, the greatest sin
that is cannot condemn me. By repentance I am safe. Let our sins be never so
great, yet if we return by repentance, God accepts us. Faith and Repentance
remove all. The Law knows no such thing. Look into the laws of the Realm. If a
man be indicted and convinced of Treason, Murder, or Felony; though this man
plead, True, I have committed such an offense. but I beseech you Sir, pardon
it, for I am heartily sorry for it: I never did the like before, nor never will
again. Though he thus repent, shall he escape? No, the rigor of the law will
execute justice on him: there is no benefit had by repentance, the law will
seize on him, he should have looked to it before. If thou committest Murder,
or Burglary, it is not enough to put one good deed for another; to say, I have
done thus and thus for the King; I kept such a Fort, or I won such a Town: this
will not serve thy turn, it will not save thy neck: the law takes no knowledge
of any good thing done, or of any repentance. This is thy estate. Consider then
what a case they are in that are shut up under the Law: until a man has faith,
it admits no excuse, requires things far above thy power to perform; it will
accept no repentance: And therefore we may well make this Conclusion in the
Galathians, As many as are under the law, are under the curse, as it is
written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the law to do them.

But now, where are we thus shut up? It Is under sin, as the Apostle tells us.
For the Law discovers sin to be sin indeed: that sin by the commandment may
become exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13. The Law makes us see more of it then we
did, or possible could come to have seen, Romans 3.20. By the Law comes the
knowledge of sin: I had not known sin but by the law. Yes, peradventure I might
have known Murder, Adultery, etc. to have been sins; but to have known them to
have been exceeding sinful, I could not but by the law. To know what a kind of
plague sin is in it self, so as not to make a game of it, or a small matter, as
many usually make it; to see the ugliness of it, I cannot without the law. But
that we may know what sin is, and that we may see it to be exceeding sinful, I
here bring you a few Considerations, which I would have you ponder on, and
enlarge them to your selves when you come home.

1. Consider the baseness of him that offends, and the excellency of him that
is offended: You shall never know what sin is without this twofold
Consideration: lay them together, and it will make sin out of measure sinful.
See in David, The drunkards made songs and ballads of him He aggravates the
indignity offered him, in that he was their King, yet that those wretched and
filthy beasts the drunkards made songs of him. See it likewise in Job, Cap. 29.
when he had declared unto them in what glory he once was, that he was a King
and Prince in the Country. Then see Cap. 20. They that are younger then me
have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the
dogs of my flock. He aggravates the offense. First, from the dignity of the
person wronged, a King, and a Prince. Then from the baseness and vileness of
those who derided him, They were such as were younger then he, such as whose
fathers he would have disdained to have set with the dogs of his flocks. A
great indignity, and mightily aggravated by these circumstances, that a King
should be abased by such vile persons. Now some proportion there might be
between David and the drunkards, Job and these men; but between thee and God
what proportion can there be? Who art thou therefore that dare set thy self
in opposition and rebellion against God? What, a base worm that crawleth on the
earth, dust and ashes, and yet dare thou thy Maker? Do thou (says God)
lift thy self up against him before whom all the powers of Heaven do tremble?
whom the Angels do adore? Exaltest thou thy self against him who inhabiteth
Eternity? What, oppose thy self, a base creature, to Almighty God thy Creator?
Consider this, and let the baseness of the delinquent, and the Majesty and
Glory of that God against whom he offends, be the first aggravation of sin, and
thou shall find sin out of measure sinful.

2. Consider the smalnesse of the Motives, and the littleness of the
inducements that persuade thee so vile a creature, to set thy self against so
glorious a God. If it were great matters set thee a work, as the saving of thy
life, it were somewhat: But see how small and little a thing does usually draw
thee to sin. A little profit it may be, or pleasure: It may be neither of
these, or not so much. When thou breathest out oaths, and belchest out fearful
blasphemies against God; when thou rendest and tearest his dreadful and
terrible name: what makes such a base and vile villain as thou thus to fly in
Gods face? Is there any profit or delight in breathing forth blasphemies?
Profit thou can take none, and if thou take pleasure in it, then the Devil is
in thee: yea then thou art worse then the Devil himself. This is the second
Consideration which may make us to see the vileness of sin, and abhor our
selves for it: to wit, the slenderness of the temptations, and smalnesse of the
motives to it.

3. Add what strong helps and means God has given thee to keep thee from
sin. As, I say, thou should consider the baseness of the delinquent, the
glory of the offended, the mean motives which cause so base a creature to do so
vile an act; so also consider the great means God has given thee to keep thee
from sin.

He has given thee his Word, and this will greatly aggravate thy sins, to sin
against his word, Genesis 3.11. When God convinces Adam, he proceeds thus with
him: Have thou (says he) eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
should not eat? What, have thou done it, as if thou would do it on purpose
to cross God? God has given thee an express command to the contrary, and yet
have thou done this? Have thou so often heard the Law, and prayed, Lord have
mercy on me, and incline my heart to keep this law, and yet will thou lie,
swear, commit adultery, and deal falsely, and that contrary to the command of
God, obstinately disobey him?

Now God has not only given this great means of his Word and Commandment,
but great grace too. Where understand that there is not only final grace, but
degrees of grace: else the Apostle would not have said, received not the grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ in vain. Consider then how much grace thou have
received in vain. How many motions to good have thou rejected? Perhaps thy
heart is touched at this Sermon, though it is not my tongue, nor the tongue of
the most elegant in the world that can touch the heart, but the Spirit that
comes along with his word. Now when thou find wirh the Word a Spirit to go
with it* it is a grace. If thy conscience be enlightened, and thy duty revealed
to thee, so that it tells thee what thou art, what thou oughtst to do, and not
to do, it is a grace. Now if for all this thou blindly runnest through, and
art never the better, but obstinately set thy self against God, and do
many things which others that have not received the same grace would not have
done, know then that thou receivest this grace in vain, and thy case is
lamentable.

4. Consider Gods great goodness toward thee.

1. First, his goodness in himself. There Is nothing but goodness, infinite
goodness in him, and can thou find in thy heart to sin against so good a
God? To offend and wrong a good disposition'd person, one of a sweet nature and
affection, it aggravates the fault, it is pity to wrong or hurt such a one as
injures no body. Now such a one is God, a good good, infinite in goodness, rich
in mercy, very goodness it self; and therefore it must needs aggravate the
foulness of sin to sin against him: But now he is not only thus in himself,
but

2. Secondly, He Is good to thee, Romans 2. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance? etc. What have thou that thou have not received from
his bountiful hand? Consider of this, and let this be a means to draw thee off
from thy sinfulness. When David had greatly sinned against God, and when God
bring^ his murder home to him, he pleads thus with him: When thou were nothing
in thine own eyes, I brought thee (says God) to the Kingdom, I took thee from
the sheepfold, and exalted thee, and brought thee to a plentiful house. And may
not God say the like to us? and do you thus requite the Lord O you foolish
people and unwise, that the more his mercy and goodness is to you, the higher
your sins should be against him?

5. Besides, Consider more then all this, we have the examples of good men
before our eyes. God commands us not what we cannot do: If God had not set
some before our eyes that walk in his ways, and do his will, then we might
say that these are precepts that none can perform: But we have patterns, of
whom we may say, such a man I never knew to lie, such a one never to swear, and
this should be a means to preserve us from sinning, Heb. 11. Noah was a good
man, and being moved with fear, set not at naught the threatening of God, but
built the Ark, and thereby condemned the world. His example condemned the
world, in that they followed it not, although it were so good, but continued in
their great sins. So, art thou a wicked deboist person? there is no good man
but shall condemn thee by his example. It Is a great crime in the land of
uprightness to do wickedly: to be profane, when the righteous by their
blameless lives may teach thee otherwise.

6. And lastly, Add to all the consideration of the multitude and weight of
thy sins. Had thou sinned but once or twice, or in this or that, it were
somewhat tolerable. But thy sins are great and many: they are heavy, and thou
continually encreasest their weight, and addest to their number. Jer. 5.6. A
lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of the evening shall spoil
them, a leopard shall watch over their Cities, and every one that goes out
thence shall be torn in pieces. Why? Because their transgressions are many, and
their backslidings are increased. If thou had committed but two, or three,
or four sins, thou might have hope of pardon; but when thou shall never have
done with thy God, but wilt be still increasing, still multiplying thy sins,
How can I pardon thee? (Thus David sets out his own sins in their weight and
number, Psalm. 38.4.) Mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden
they are too heavy for me. The continual multiplying of them adds to their heap
both in number and weight.

Thus I have showed you what the Law does in respect of sin, the benefit of
being under the Law, that it makes sin appear in its own colors, and sets it
forth to be, as indeed it is, exceeding sinful. But the Law does not yet leave
sin, nor let it escape thus: But as the Law discovers our sinfulness and
accursednesse by sin, its wretchedness and man's misery by it, till his
blessedness comes from the hands of his Jesus, so it lays down the miserable
estate befalls him for it. If he will not spare God with his sins, God will not
spare him with his plagues. Let us consider of this accursednesse sin brings on
us: God will not let us go so, but as long as we are under the Law, we are
under the curse; and till we are in Christ, we can expect nothing but that
which should come from the hand of a provoked God. Assure thy self, thou that
please thy self in thy abominations, that God will not take this at thine
hands that by so base a creature as thou art, so vile a thing as sin is should
be committed against him. But of the woeful eff^cts of sin, which is Gods wrath,
we will speak the next time.

LAM. 5.16. Woe unto us that we have sinned.
I Declared unto you heretofore what we are to consider in the state of a
natural man, a man that is not new fashioned, new molded, a man that is not
cut off from his own stock, a man that is not ingrafted into Christ, he is the
son of sin, he is the son of death. First I showed you his sinfulness, and now
Secondly I shall show you his accursednesse, that which follows necessarily
upon sin unrepented of. I declared before what the nature of sin is: And now I
come to show what the dreadful effects of sin are, the cause, the consequence
that follows upon sin, and that is woe and misery, Woe unto us that we have
sinned. A woe is a short word, but there lies much in it.

Doct. Woe and anguish must follow him that continues sinning against God.

And when we hear this from the Ministers of God, it is as if we heard that
Angel, Rev. 8.13. flying through the midst of heaven, denouncing, Woe, woe, woe
to the inhabitants of the earth. The Ministers of God are his Angels; and the
same that I now deliver to you, if an Angel should now come from Heaven, he
would deliver no other thing. Therefore consider that it is a voice from
Heaven, that this woe, woe, woe, shall rest upon the heads, upon the bodies and
souls of all them that will not yield unto God, that will not stoop to him,
that will be their own masters, and stand it out against him: woe, woe, woe
unto them all. Woe unto us. It Is the voice of the Church in general, not of one
man; but woe unto us that we have sinned.

That I may now declare unto you what these woes are, note by the way that I
speak not to any particular man, but to every man in general. It is not for me
to make particular application, do you do that your selves: We are all
children of wrath by nature: In our natural condition we are all alike, we are
all of one kind, and every kind generates its own kind: It Is an hereditary
condition, and till the Son make us free, we are all subject to this woe. By
nature we are all children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Now that I may
not speak of these woes in general, I have showed how two woes are past, and a
third woe is coming. God proceeds punctually with us. And are not our
proceedings in Judiciary Courts after this manner? The Judge when he
pronounces sentence, does particularize the matter: Thou shall return to the
place from whence thou came, thou shall have thy bolts knocked off, thou shall
be drawn to the place of execution, thou shall be hanged, thou shall be cut
down, and quartered; and so he goes on. And this is that which is the witness
of Justice. Thus is it here, the Spirit of God thinks it not enough to say
barely, the state of a sinner is a woeful estate; but the woes are punctually
numbered, and this shall be my practice. Now

1. The first thing that follows after sin is this: After the committing of
sin, there comes such a condition into the soul that it is defiled, polluted,
and becomes abominable. And this is the first woe.

2. The soul being thus defiled and abominable, God loathes it; for God cannot
endure to dwell in a filthy and stinking carrion-soul, he startles as it were,
and seems afraid to come near it, he forsakes it, and cannot endure it. And
that is the second woe: First sin defiles it, then God departs from it, there
must be a divorce.

3. When God is departed from the soul, then the Devil enters in, he presently
comes in and takes up the room, there will be no emptiness or vacuum. And this
is a fearful woe indeed: for as soon as God is departed from a man, he is left
to the guidance of the Devil, his own flesh, and the world. There will be no
emptiness in the heart: no sooner God departs, but these step in and take Gods
place.

4. Then in the fourth place, after all this is done, comes sin and cries for
its w^ges, which is death. That terrible death which comprehends in it all that
beadroll of curses which are written in the Book of God; and not only those*
but the curses also which are not written, Deuteronomy. 28. which are so many that
they cannot be written. Though the Book of God be a complete Book, and the Law
of God a perfect Law, yet here they come short, and are imperfect: For the
curses not written shall light upon him, which are so many as pen and ink
cannot set down, nay, the very pen of God cannot express them, so many are the
calamities and sorrows that shall light upon the soul of every sinful man.

Now let us take these woes in pieces one after another.

1. The first woe is the polluting and defiling of the soul by sin. A thing it
may be that we little think of; but if God once open our eyes, and show us what
a black soul we have within us, and that every sin, every lustful thought,
every covetous act, every sin sets a new spot and stain upon the soul, and
tumbles it into a new puddle of filth, then we shall see it, and not till then;
for our eyes are carnal, and we cannot see this. If once we did but see our
hateful and abominable spots, that every sin tumbles us afresh into the mire:
did we see what a black Devil we have within us, we would hate and abhor our
selves as Job did. It would be so foul a sight, that it would make us out of
our wits as it were, to behold it. A man that is but natural, cannot imagine
what a black Devil there is within him: But though he sees it not, yet he that
has eyes like a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14 sees our stains and spots.

Our Savior shows the filthiness of the heart by that which proceeds out of
the mouth, Mat. 15.18. Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from
the heart. And v. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, etc. Observe. Of
all evils we account evil thoughts the least. This we think strange, what,
thoughts defile a man? what, so light a matter as a thought? Can they make any
impression? Yes, and defile a man too, leaving such a spot behind them, which
nothing but the hot blood of Christ can wash away. So many evil thoughts, so
many blasphemies, so many filthy things come from the heart, every one being a
new defilement and pollution, that a man is made so nasty by it and filthy,
that he cannot believe that it is so bad with him as indeed it is. The Apostle
having shown the Corinthians their former life, and exhorted them against it, 1
Cor. 6. goes on cap. 7. v. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit. Mark then, there is a double filthiness, a filthiness
of the flesh, and a filthiness of the spirit. The filthiness of the flesh,
that every one acknowledges to be filthy carnality, Fornication, and Adultery,
etc. These bestial lusts every one knows to be unclean. But then there is a
filth of the Spirit too, and such are evil thoughts. They are the filth of the
Spirit. Corruption optimi est pessima. The corruption which cleaves to the best
thing is worst. The soul is the Best thing, the most noble thing; the
filthiness which cleaves to it therefore must needs be the greatest. Fleshly
filthiness, as Adultery, is filthy; but contemplative Adultery, to dwell
thereon, is worse: however such a man may be pure from the filth of the flesh,
yet if he delight himself in filthy thoughts, his spirit is abominable in the
sight of God: there is a stain by every one of thy impure thoughts left behind.
However an actual sin be far greater then the sin of a thought, yet if that be
but once committed, and these are frequently in thee; if thou always lie
tumbling in the suds of thy filthy thoughts, thy continuing therein makes thy
sin more abominable then David's outward act which he but once committed. So
that we see there is a filthiness of the spirit as well as the flesh. In James
1.21. we have a word sets out the filthiness of it, which is ( Superfluity.)
Lay apart (says he) all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness.

First, it is expressed by the name of filthiness, ^hewing there is nothing so
defiles a man as sin.

Then it is called superfluity of naughtiness: But what, is there any
naughtiness to be born with? and what exceeds that, is it superfluity? No,
that is not the meaning of the place. By superfluity, is meant the excrements of
sin: Excrements are the refuse of meat when the good nourishment is taken away
from it. And it is as if the Apostle had said, Lay aside filthy, nasty, or
excrementitious sin. The word was used in the Ceremonies of the Jews, and
thereby we may see what was taught concerning sin, Deuteronomy. 23.12, 13. Thou shall
have a place without the camp whither thou shall go, etc. Though the
comparison be homely, yet it shows the filthiness of the sin, that it is as a
very excrement. Thou shall have a paddle, and it shall be that when thou will
ease thy self, thou shall dig therewith, etc. and thou shall cover that which
comes from thee. But what, did God care for these things? No, it was to teach
them a higher matter: As the reason following implies. For the Lord thy God
walks in the midst of the Camp. God would thereby show them, that those
things at which every man stops his nose, are not so filthy to man, as sin
is unto God. So that you see how the case stands with a sinful man: sin defiles
him, it pollutes him.

2. And then in the next place, It makes Gods soul to hate and abhor him. It Is
true, some sins there are that every man imagines to be shameful and filthy;
but we see all sin is so to God, it is fil^hinesse of flesh and spirit. A man
may hate carnality, fleshly filthiness; peradventure also he may hate
covetousness, but pride and prodigality that he may get (as he thinks) credit
by, that he cannot maintain the reputation of a Gentleman without them. A
miserable thing, that a man should account that a garnish of the soul, which
does defile and pollute it. If a man should take the excrements of a beast to
adorn himself, would not we think him an ass? Well, when we thus defile our
selves by sin, God cannot endure us, he is forced to turn from us, he abhors
us: And that is the next woe.

2. When thou have made thy self such a black soul, such a dunghill, such a
sty, then God must be gone, he cannot endure to dwell there: It stands not with
his honor, and with the purity of his nature to dwell in such a polluted
heart, there must now be a divorce: Holiness becomes his house for ever. His
delight is in the Saints. He is King of the Saints, he will not be in a sty:
When thou have thus polluted and defiled thy soul, God and thee must presently
part: God puts thee off, and thou put God off too. We read in that place
before alleged, Ephesians. 2 12^ that before they knew Christ, they were without God
in the world, etc. Atheists, (...). And in cap. 4. v. 18. Having your
understanding darkened, and being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them. The presence of God is the life of our souls; and
we having through sin and ignorance banished God, we become strangers until the
time of our ingrafting into Christ; we are aliens to the life of God: whereupon
comes a mutual kind of abhorring one another. God abhors us, and we vile and
filthy wretches abhor God again. There is enmity betwixt God and us, and
between all that belongs to God, and all that belongs to us. There Is an enmity
betwixt God and us, and observe the expression of it, Levit. 26.15. If you
shall despise my statutes, or if your souls shall abhor my judgments, so that
you will not do my commandments, etc. See here how we begin to abhor God, and
then for judgment on such persons, v. 30. My soul shall abhor you. We are not
behind hand with God in this abhorring, Zach. 11.8. My soul loathed them, and
their soul abhorred me. When we begin to abhor God, Gods soul also abhors us.
When a man has such a polluted soul, he becomes (...), a hater of God, and
hated of him. When thou have such a stinking soul, God must needs loath it, as
a most loathsome thing; and so thou art not behind God neither. Thy filthiness
makes God abhor thee, and thou abhorrest him. And this is thy case, by hating,
thou art hated of God.

Nor is this all the enmity. There is enmity also betwixt all that belongs to
God, and all that belongs to us. Gods children and the wicked have ever an
enmity betwixt them, such an enmity as will never be reconciled. It Is set down
in Prove. 29.27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is
upright in his way, is an abomination to the wicked. Just as it is between God
and the seed of the serpent, so it is between both the seeds. A wicked man is
an abomination to the just, and an upright man is an abomination to the wicked.
There is a pale of abomination set between them: so that this is the second
woe. We come now to the third.

3. And the third woe is that which immediately follows Gods leaving of us. When
we have polluted our selves with sin, and God by reason thereof abhors us, and
turns from us, then are there others ready presently to take up the room; so
soon as God departs, the Devil steps in and becomes thy God. He was thy God by
Creation, this by usurpation: He was thy Father that would have given thee
every good thing; but now thou art fatherless, or rather worse, thou have the
Devil for thy Father, and better is it to to be without one. When the Devil is
thy Father his works thou must do. When the Spirit of God departed from Saul,
presently the evil Spirit entered into him, 1 Samuel 16.14. If the good Spirit be
gone out, the evil Spirit soon comes in: he comes and takes possession, and is
therefore called The God of this world: And while we are in that state, we walk
after the course of him that works in the children of disobedience. We would
account it a terrible thing, for our selves, or any of our children, to be
possessed of a Devil: But what it is to be possessed of this Devil thou know
not. It Is not half so bad to have a Legion possess thy body, as to have but
one to possess thy soul. He becomes thy God, and thou must do his work; he
will tyrannize over thee. What a fearful thing therefore is this, that as soon
as God departs from us, and forsakes us, and we him, that the Devil should
presently come in his room, and take up the heart? Mark that place in Ephesians. 2.2.
Where in times past ye walked according to the course of the world, according
etc. As Soon as God leaves a man, what a fearful company assail him? They all
concur together, the world, the flesh, and the Devil: These take Gods place.

The world is like the tide; when a man has the tide with him, he has great
advantage of him that rows against the tide.

But here is the Devil too. The world is as a swift current, and besides this
comes the Devil and fills the heart, the Prince of the power of the air. While
thou were carried with the world, thou went with the stream, and had the
tide with thee; but now the Devil being come, thou have both wind and tide; and
how can he choose but run whom the Devil drives?

But this is not all: There must be something in thine own disposition too,
that it may be completely filled: Though there be wind and tide, yet if the
ship be a slug, it will not make that haste that another light ship will:
Therefore here is the flesh too, and the fulfilling the desires thereof, which
is a quick and nimble vessel, and this makes up the matter. So that if we
consider the wind and tide, and lightness of the ship, it will appear how the
room is filled: And how woeful must the state of that man be? It is a fearful
thing to be delivered up unto Satan, but not so fearful as to be delivered up
to ones own lusts. But by the way observe this for a ground: God never gives us
up, God never forsakes us till we first forsake him. He is still before hand
with us in doing us good; but in point of hurt we our selves are first. In the
point of forsaking we are always before hand with God. If it should be proposed
to thee, whether thou will forsake God or the Devil, and thou do forsake God,
and choosest the Devil, thou deservest that he should take possession in thee.
When a man shall obstinately renew his gross sins, does he not deserve to be
given up? Observe the case in our first Parents. God told the woman one thing,
the Devil persuades her another; she hearkens to the Devil, and believes him
rather then God; and when we shall desire to serve the Devil rather then God,
the God that made us, and that made heaven for us, do we not deserve to be
given up to him? For his servants we are whom we obey. And thus we see how
fearful a thing it is to be delivered up to our selves, and to the Devil, Psalm.
81.11. First they forsake God: God comes and offers himself unto them, I will
be thy God, thy Father, thou shall want nothing: yet notwithstanding Israel
would not hear, they would have none of me. And then, if thou will have none of
me, I will have none of thee, says God. Then see what follows, v. 12. God
commits the prisoner to himself: I gave them up to their own hearts lusis, etc.
And there is no case so desperate as this, when God shall say, If thou will be
thine own Maste^, be thine own Master. Thus to be given up to a man's self, is
worse then to be given up unto Satan: To be given up unto Satan may be for thy
safety; but there is not a mountain of Gods wrath greater, then to give a man up
unto himself. We would fain go over the hedges; but when God loves us, he
hedges up our ways, Hos. 2.6. If God love us, he will not leave us to our
selves, though we desire it. But when God shall say, go thy ways if thou will
not be kept in, be thy own Master, this is a most fearful thing: And this is
the third woe. First the soul is polluted with sin; it forsakes God, and God
forsakes it: then the world, the flesh, and the Devil, these fill up the room;
and then what follows when these three rule within? but all kinds of sin: And
so all kinds of punishment, which is the next woe.

4. And this woe brings in all the curses of Almighty God, an Iliad of evils.
Sin calls for its wages, viz. Death, Death. That Is the payment of all: The
wages of sin is death. And this is the next thing which I shall open and
explain.

Now in handling hereof, I will first show how death in general must of
necessity follow sin, that thou who have forsaken the fountain of life, art
liable to everlasting death. And for this see some places of Scripture, Romans
6.2, 3. The wages of sin is death. Consider then first what this wages is.
Wages is a thing which must be paid: If you have an hireling, and your hireling
receive not his wages, you are sure to hear of it, and God will hear of it too,
James 5.4. He which keeps back the wages of the labourer, or of the hireling,
their cry will come into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. As long as hirelings
wages are unpaid, Gods ears are filled with their cries, Pay me my wages, pay
me my wages. So sin cries, and it is a dead voice, Pay me my wages, pay me my
wages, the wages of sin is death. And sin never leaves crying, never lets God
alone, never gives him rest till this wages be paid. When Cain had slain Abel,
he thought he should never have heard any more on it; but sin has a voice, The
voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. So Genesis 18.20. the
Lord says concerning Sodom, Because the cry of Sodom is great, and their sin
very grievous, therefore I will go down and see whether they have done
according to the cry that is come up into mine ears. As if the Lord had said,
It Is a loud cry, I can have no rest for it, therefore I will go down and see,
etc. If a man had his ears open, he would continually hear sin crying unto
God, Pay me my wages, pay me my ^ages, kill this sinful soul: And though we do
not hear it, yet so it is. The dead and doleful sound thereof fill^ Heaven: it
makes God say, I will go down and see, etc. Till sin receive its wages, God
has no rest. Again, see Romans 7.11. Sin taking occasion by the commandment,
deceived me, and by it slew me. I thought sin not to have been so great a
matter as it is. We think on a matter of profit or pleasure, and thereupon are
enticed to sin; but here is the mischie^, sin d^ceives us. I^ is a weight, it
presses down, it dece^^es men, it is more then they deemed it to be. The
committing of sin is as it were running thy self upon the point of Gods blade.
Sin at first may fl^^ter thee, but it will deceive thee: It Is like Joabs kiss
to Amasa. Amasa was not aware of the spear that was behind, till he smote it
into his ribs that he died. When sin entices th^e on by profits and pleasures,
thou art not aware that it will slay thee: But thou shall find it will be
bitterness in the end. A sinner that acts a tragedy in sin, shall have a
bloody Catastrophe. Romans 6. What fruit had you then in those things whereof you
are now ashamed? Blood and death is the end of the Tragedy. The end of those
things is death. The sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. What is sin? It Is the
sting of death: Death would not be death unless sin were in it. Sin is more
deadly then death it self: It Is sin enableth death to sting, enableth it to
hurt and wound us: So that we may look on sin, as the Barbarians looked on the
viper on Paul's hand, they expected continually when he would have swollen and
burst. Sin bites like a snake which is called a fiery serpent, not that the
serpent is fiery, but because it puts a man into such a flaming heat by their
poison: And such is the sting of sin, which carries poison in it, that had we
but eyes to see our ugliness by it, and how it inflames us, we should
continually, every day look when we should burst with it. The Apostle, James
1.15. uses another metaphor: Sin when it is accomplished brings forth death.
(...), says the Original, sin goes as it were with child with death. The word
is proper to women in labor, who are in torment till they are delivered. Now
as if sin were this woman, he uses it in the faeminine gender. (...). So is it
with sin, sin is in pain, cries out, has no rest till it be delivered of this
dead birth, till it have brought forth death: That is, sin grows great with
child with death, and then it not only deserves death, but it produces and
actually brings forth: This is generally so.

Now consider with your selves, death is a fearful thing. When we come to talk
of death, how does it amaze us? The Priests of Nob are brought before Saul for
relieving David, and he says, Thou shall surely die Ahimelech. And this is
your case, you shall surely die: death is terrible even to a good man. As
appears in Hezekiah, who though he were a good man, yet with how sad a heart
does he entertain the message of death? the news of it affrighted him, it went
to his heart, it made him turn to the wall and weep. How comes it to pass that
we are so careless of death? that we are so full of infidelity, that when the
word of God says, Thou shall die Ahimelech, we are not at all moved by it?
What, can we think these are fables? Do we think God is not in earnest with us?
And by this means we fall into the temptation of Eve, a questioning whether
Gods threats are true or not? That which was the deceit of our first Parents,
is ours. Satan disputes not whether sin be lawful or not: whether eating the
fruit were unlawful: whether drunkenness, etc. be lawful; he will not deny but it
is unlawful. But when God says, If thou do eat, etc. thou shall die: he
denies it, and says, ye shall not die. He would hide our eyes from the
punishment of sin. Thus we lost our selves at the first, and the floods of sin
came on in this manner: when we believed not God when he said, If thou do eat
thou shall surely die: And shall we renew that capital sin of our Parents, and
think if we do sin we shall not die? If any thing in the world will move God to
show us no mercy, it is this, when we slight his judgments, or not believe them.
This adds to the height of all our sins, that when God says, if thou do live
in sin, thou shall die, and yet we will not believe him: that when he shall
come and threaten us, as he does, Deuteronomy. 29. when he shall curse, and we shall
bless our selves in our hearts, and say, we shall have peace though we go on,
etc. The Lord will not spare that man, but the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against him. It is no small sin when we will not believe
God: This is as being thirsty before, we now add drunkenness to our thirst:
That is, when God shall thus pronounce curses, he shall yet bless himself, and
say, I hope I shall do well enough for all that. There are two words to that
bargain. Then see what follows, The anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, etc. We are but now entered into the point; but it would
make your hearts ache and throb within you, if you should hear the particulars
of it. All that I have done, is to persuade you to make a right choice, to take
heed of Satan's delusions. Why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33. Therefore cast away your
sins, and make you a new heart and a new spirit, for why will you die? Where
the golden candlestick stands, there Christ walks, there he says, I am with
you. Where the word and Sacraments are, there Christ is; and when the wo^d
shakes thy heart, take that time, now choose life. Why will you die? Consider
of the matter: Moses put before the people life and death, blessing and
cursing: We put life and death before you in a better manner: He was a Minister
of the letter, we of the spirit. Now choose life. But if you will not hearken,
but will needs try conclusions with God, therefore because you will choose your
own confusions, and will not hearken unto God, because you will needs try
conclusions with him, will not obey him when he calls, therefore he will turn
his deaf ear unto you, and when you call and cry, he will not answer, Prove. 1.
I press this the more, to move you to make a right choice.

But now to turn to the other side, as there is nothing but death the wages of
sin, and as I have showed you where death is so give me leave to direct you to
the fountain of life: There is life in our blessed Savior; if we have but an
hand of faith to ^ouch him, we shall draw virtue from him to raise us up from
the death of sin to the li^e of righteousness, 1 John 5.12. He that has the
Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life. You have heard of a
death that comes by the first Adam and sin and to that stock of original sin we
had from him, we have added a great heap of our own actual sins, and so have
treasured up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath. Now here is a
great treasure of happiness on the other side in Christ, have the Son, and have
life. The question is now, whether you will choose Christ and life, or sin and
death? Consider now the Minister stands in Gods stead, and beseeches you in his
name, he speaks not of himself, but from Christ. When he draws near to thee
with Christ's broken body, and his blood shed, and thou receive Christ, then as
thy life and strength is preserved and increased by these Elements, so have
thou also life by Christ. If a man be kept from nourishment a while, we know
what death he must die: If we receive not Christ, we cannot have life, we know
that there is life to be had from Christ, and he that shall by a true and
lively faith receive Christ, shall have life by him. There is as it were a pair
of Indentures drawn up between God and a man's soul: there is blood shed, and by
it pardon of sin, and life conveyed unto thee on Christ's part. Now if there be
faith and repentance on thy part, and thou accept of Christ as he is offered,
then thou may say, I have the Son, and as certainly as I have the bread in my
hand, I shall have life by him. This I speak but by the way, that the Sun might
not set in a cloud, that I might not end only in death, but that I might show
that there is a way to recover out of that death to which we have all naturally
praecipitated our selves.

ROMANS 6.23. The wages of sin is death
THe last day I entered on the Declaration of the cursed effects and consequents
of sin, and in general showed that it is the wrath of God; that where sin is,
there wrath must follow. As the Apostle in the Epistle to the Galathians, As
many as are under the works of the Law, are under the curse. Now all that may
be expected from a God highly offended, is comprehended in Scripture by this
term Death. Wheresoever sin enters, death must follow, Romans 5.2. Death passed
over all men, forasmuch as all had sinned: If we are children of sin, we must
be children of wrath, Ephesians. 1.3. We are then children of wrath even as others.
Now concerning death in general, I showed you the last time, that the state of
an unconverted man is a dead and desperate estate: He is a slave. It would
affright him if he did but know his own slavery, and what it is that hangs over
his head: that there is but a span betwixt him and death, he could never breath
any free air, he could never be at any rest, he could never be free from fear.
Heb. 2.15. the Apostle says that Christ came to deliver them that through fear
of death were all their life time subject to bondage. This bondage is a deadly
bondage, that when we have done all that we can do, what is the payment of the
service? Death: And the fear of this deadly bondage, if we were once sensible,
if God did open our eyes and show us, as he did Belshazzar, our doom written,
did we but see it, it would make our joints loose, and our knees knock one
against another. Every day thou live, thou approachest nearer to this death,
to the accomplishment and consummation of it: death without, and death within;
death in this world, and in the world to come.

Not only death thus in gross and in general, but in particular also.

Now to unfold the particulars of death, and to show you the ingredients of
this bitter cup, that we may be weary of our estates, that we may be drawn out
of this death, and be made to fly to the Son, that we may be free indeed.
Observe, that Death is not here to be understood of a separation of the soul
from the body only, but a greater death then that, the death of the soul and
body, We have mention made of a first resurrection, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and
happy is he that has his part in the first resurrection, for on such the
second death has no power. What is the first resurrection? It is a rising from
sin. And what is the second death? It is everlasting damnation. The first death
is a death unto sin, and the first resurrection is a rising from sin.

And so again for all things the judgments or troubles that appertain to this
death, all a man suffers before. It is not as fools think, the last blow that
fells the tree, but every blow helps forward. It Is not the last blow that kills
the man, but every blow that goes before, makes way unto it. Every trouble of
mind, every anguish, every sickness; all these are as so many strokes, that
shorten our life, and hasten our end; and are as it were so many deaths:
Therefore however it is said by the Apostle, It is appointed for all men once
to die, yet we see the Apostle to the Corinthians of the great conflicts that
he had, in 2 Cor. 11.23. says, that he was in labors abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons frequent, in deaths often. In deaths often? what is
that? That is, however he could die but once; yet these harbingers of death,
these stripes, bonds, imprisonments, sicknesses, etc. all of them were as so
many deaths, all these were comprehended under this curse, and are parts of
death; in as much as he underwent that which was a furtherance to death, he is
said to die. So we read Exo. 10.17. Pharaoh could say, Pray unto your God that
he would forgive my sins this once, and entreat the Lord that he will take away
from me but this death only. Not that the locusts were death; but are said to
be so, because they prepared and made way for a natural death. Therefore the
great judgments of God are usually in Scripture comprised under this name
Death. All things that may be expressions of a wrath of an highly provoked God,
are comprehended under this name: All the judgments of God that come upon us in
this life, or that to come; whether they be spiritual and ghostly, or temporal,
are under the name of death.

Now to come to particulars, look particularly on death, and you shall see
death begun in this world, and seconded by a death following, the separation of
body and soul from God in the world to come.

1. First, in this life he is always a dying man: Man that is born of a woman,
what is he? He is ever spending upon the stock, he is ever wasting like a
candle, burning still, and spending it self as soon as lighted, till it come to
its utter consumption: So he is born to be a dying man, death seizes upon him
as soon as ever it finds sin in him, Genesis 2.1. In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall die, says God to Adam, though he lived many years after.
How then could this threatening hold true? Yes, it did, in regard that presently
he fell into a languishing estate, subject and obnoxious to miseries and
calamities the hasteners of it. If a man be condemned to die, suppose he be
reprieved and kept prisoner three or four years after, yet we account him but a
dead man: And if this man's mind shall be taken up with worldly matters, earthly
contentments, purchases, or the like, would we not account him a fool or a
stupid man, seeing he lightly esteems his condemnation, because the same hour
he is not executed? Such is our case, we are while in our natural condition in
this life dead men, ever tending toward the grave, toward corruption, as the
gourd of Jonah, so soon as ever it begins to sprout forth, there is a worm
within, that bites it, and causes i^ to wither. The day that we are born there
is within us the seed of corruption, and that wastes us away with a secret and
incurable consumption, that certainly brings death in the end: So that in our
very birth begins our progress unto death: A time, a way we have, but it leads
unto death. There is a way from the Tower to Tyburn, but it is a way to death.
Until thou come to be reconciled unto Christ, every hour tends unto thy
death; there is not a day that thou can truly say thou live in, thou art
ever posting on to death: death in this world, and eternal death in the world
to come.

And as it is thus with us at our coming into the world, so we are to
understand it of that little time we have above ground, our days are full of
sorrow. But mark, when I speak of sorrows here, we must not take them for such
afflictions and sorrows as befall Gods children, for theirs are blessings unto
them: chastisments are tokens of Gods love: For as many as I love I chasten
(says God.) Affliction to them is like the dove with an Olive Branch in her
mouth, to show that all is well. But take a man that is under the Law, and then
every cross, whether it be loss of friends, loss of goods, diseases on his
body, all things, every thing to him is a token of Gods wrath, not a token of
Gods love, as it is to Gods children; but it is as his impress-money, as part
of payment of a greater sum, an earnest of the wrath of God, the first part
of the payment thereof.

It Is the Apostles direction, that among the other armor, we should get our
feet shod, that so we might be able to go through the afflictions we shall
meet withal in this life, Ephesians. 6.15. Let your feet be shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace. What, is the shooing of the feet a part of
the armor? Yes. For in the Roman discipline there were things they called
Caltrops, which were cast in the way before the Army, before the horse and men;
they had three points, so that which way soever they threw them, there was a
point upwards. Now to meet with and prevent this mischief, they had brazen
shoes, that they might tread upon these caltrops and not be hurt: As we read
of Goliath, amongst other armor he had boots of brass. To this it seems the
Apostle had reference in this metaphorical speech: The meaning is, that as we
should get the shield of faith, and sword of the Spirit, so we should have our
feet shod, that we might be prepared against all those outward troubles that we
should meet with in the world, which are all of them as so many stings and
pricks: all outward crosses I say, are so: And what is it that makes all these
hurt us? what is it that makes all these as so many deaths unto us but sin? If
sin reign in thee and bear rule, that puts a sting into them. It is sin that
arms death against us, and it is sin that arms all that goes before death
against us. Have thou been crossed in the loss of thy wife, children, good
friends, etc. why the sting of all is from sin, sin it is which makes us feel
sorrow. What shall we then do? Why, get thy feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace. Prepare thy self, get God at peace with thee; and if God
be at peace with thee, thou art prepared, and then whatsoever affliction
comes, howsoever it may be a warning-piece to another that Gods wrath is
coming, yet to thee it is a messenger of peace. Now these outward troubles are
the least part of a wicked man's payment, though all these are a part of his
death so long as he remains unreconciled, whatsoever comes upon him whereby he
suffers either in himself, or in any thing that belongs unto him, they are all
tokens of Gods wrath, and are the beginnings of his death. In the 26th. of
Levit. and the 28th. of Deuteronomy. the particulars of it are set down. But this is
that I told you the last time, how that the law of God is a perfect law, and
nothing is to be added to it, yet the variety of the curses belonging unto a
man unreconciled are so many, that the ample book of God cannot contain them,
Deuteronomy. 28.61. All the curses which are not written, etc. We read v. 27. The Lord
shall smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with Emralds, and with a scab,
and with itch. See the diversities of plagues: All these are made parts of the
curse. The very itch and scab is a part of the payment of Gods wrath in hell,
Lev. 26.26. I will send a sword amongst you, which shall avenge the quarrel of
my Covenant, the sword which shall destroy you, that when you shall hear of
war, of the coming of the sword, (which the children of God need not fear, all
is alike unto them) it shall be to avenge the quarrel of Gods Covenant. The
Book of God comprehends not all the curses that are to light on the wicked. And
therefore we find in Zachary, a Book, a great Folio-book, every side whereof
was full of curses, Cap. 5.2. He said unto me, what see thou? And I said, I
see a flying roll, the length whereof is 20 cubits, and the breadth thereof is
10 cubits. Here Is a big Book indeed; but mark what is in it. Sure it is not for
naught that the Holy Ghost sets down the dimensions of it: there is something
questionless in it, the length thereof is 20 cubits, and the breadth 10
cubits: a huge volume. Nor is it a Book, but a Roll, so that the crassitude
goes into the compass, and this is written thick within and without, and is
full of curses against sin. Now for the dimensions of it, compare this place
with 1 Kings 6.3. and you shall find them the very dimensions of Solomon's
Porch: A great place, where the people were wont to come for the hearing of the
Word: and not only in that time, but it was continued to the time of Christ
and the Apostles: For we read how our Savior walked in Solomon's Porch, and the
Apostles were in Solomon's Porch, Acts 5. So large then was this Roll, that it
agreed in length and breadth with Solomon's Porch, and so many curses were
written in it as were able to come in at the Church door. It is as if we should
see a huge book now, coming in at the Churchdoor, that should fill it up. Such
a thing was presented unto him, and it was a Roll full of curses, and all these
curses shall come on those that obey not all the Commandments, all shall come
upon them and overtake them. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall
thou be in the field, cursed in thy basket and in thy store, cursed when thou
come in and when thou go forth, Deuteronomy. 28. Till a man come to receive the
Promises, till he come to be a son of blessing, till he be in Christ, he is
beset so with curses, that if he lie down to sleep there is a curse on his
pillow; if he put his money in his cofer, he lays up a curse with it, which as
rust eats it out and cankers it; if he beget a child, he is accursed; there is a
curse against his person, and his goods, and all that belongs unto him, there is
still a curse over his head.

The creditor in this world by the Laws of the Realm may choose whether he will
have his debtors person se^zed on, or his goods and chattels: But not so here,
this writ is executed against his person, and goods, and all that belongs unto
him. So that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God If
this be the condition of a wicked man, that his very blessings be curses, what
a woeful case is it! There Is nothing till he be reconciled to Christ but has a
curse at the end of it.

Consider that one place in the Prophecy of Malachy, where the very blessings
are accursed: not only when God sends on him the itch, or botch, or scab, or
sword, but in blessings, cap. 2.2. he is accursed. If you will not hear, and if
you will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name, says the Lord, I will
even send a curse upon you. But how? See how this curse is threatened: I will
curse your very blessings, yea I have cursed them already, because you do not
lay it to heart. Mark, is it not a great blessing that God yet affords the
Word, that we yet enjoy it; but if we come to hear but formally, to hear it
only, and lay it not to heart, God curses this blessing, yea I have cursed it
already, says the Lord. When thou prayest in hypocrisy, thy prayer is a curse
to thee. If thou receive the Sacrament unworthily, the cup of blessing is a cup
of poison, a cup of cursing to thee. Stay not therefore one hour longer quietly
in this cursed condition, but fly unto Christ for life and blessing: run to
this City of refuge, for otherwise there is a curse at the end of every outward
thing that thou enjoyest. I have cursed these blessings already. It is as sure
as if already passed on thee. What a woeful thing then is it (think you) to be
liable to the curse of God!

2. But what is become of the soul now? why, if thou did but see the cursed
soul that thou carriest in thy body, it would amaze thee. These outward curses
are but flea bitings to the blow that is given to the soul of an unregenerate
man, that deadness of spirit that is within: did thou but see the curse of
God that rests upon the soul of this man, even while he is above ground, it
would even astonish thee.

1. Consider there are two kinds of blows that God gives unto the soul of an
unregenerate man. The one is a terrible blow. The other, which is the worst of
the two, is an insensible blow. The sensible blow is when God lets the
conscience out, and makes it fly into the face of a man, when the conscience
shall come and terribly accuse a man for wh^t he has done. This blow is not so
usual as the insensible blow; but this insensible is f^r more heavy. But as it
falls out, that as in this world, sometimes before the glory in heaven, the
Saints of God have here a glimpse of heaven, and certain communion with God and
Christ, certain love tokens, a white stone, a new name in graven, which no man
knows but he that receives it: And this is the t^stimony of a good
conscience, which is hidden joys: Privy intercourse is between Christ and
them, secret kisses: And as Gods children do as it were meet with a heaven
upon earth sometimes, and are, as we read of Paul, caught up into the third
heaven, which to them is more then all the things in the world besides: So the
wicked have sometimes flashes of hell in their consciences. If you had but seen
men in the case that I have seen them in, you would say they had an hell within
them; they would desire rather, and they have expressed it, to be torn in
pieces by wild horses, so they might be freed from the horrors in their
consciences. When the conscience recoyles and beats back upon it self, as a
musket over charged, it turns a man over and over: And this is a terrible
thing. This sometimes God gives men in this world: And mark, where the word is
most powerfully preached, there is this froth most raised, which is the cause
many men desire not to come where the word is taught, because it galls their
consciences, and desire the Mass rather, because they say the Mass bites not:
They desire a dead Minister, that would not rub up their consciences, they
would not be tormented before the time: They would so, but it shall not be at
their choice, God will make them feel here the fire of hell, which they must
endure for ever hereafter. This is the sensible blow, when God lets loose the
conscience of a wicked man; and he needs no other fire, no other worm to
torment, nothing else to plague him: he has a weapon within him, his own
conscience, which if God lets loose, it will be hell enough.

2. But now besides this blow which is not so frequent, there is another more
common and more insensible blow. God says he is a dead man, and a slave to sin
and Satan, and he thinks himself the freest man in the world. God curses and
strikes, and he feels it not. This is an insensible blow, and like unto a dead
palsy: Thou art dead, and yet walk about, and art merry, though every one
that has his eyes open sees death in thy face. O this deadness, this
senselessness of heart is the heaviest thing as can befall a sinner in this
life. It is the cause the Apostle speaks of in the Romans when God delivers up a
man (...), to a reprobate mind: And so in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 4.19.
declares such a man to be past feeling: Who being past feeling, have given
themselves over to lasciviousness to work uncleanness even with greediness.
Although every sin, (as I told you before) is as it were the running a man's
self on the point of Gods sword, yet these men being past feeling, run on, on,
on to c^mmit sin with greediness, till they come to the very pit of
destruction, they run a main to their confusion. When this insensibleness is
come upon them, it is not Gods goodness that can work upon them. Who art thou
that despisest the riches of Gods goodness, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads unto repentance. It is not Gods judgments that will move them, they
leave no impression, as Rev. 9.20. And the rest of the men which were not
killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that
they should not worship Devils, etc. brass, nor stone and wood, which neither
can see, nor hear, nor walk. They repented not, though they were spared, but
worshipped Gods which cannot see, not hear no^ speak, so brutish were they to
be led away by stocks and stones: I think the Papist Gods cannot do it unless
it be by couzenage; yet such is their senselessness, that though Gods fury be
revealed from heaven against Papists, such as worship false Gods; yet are they
so brutish, that they will worship things which can neither hear, nor see, nor
walk: They that made them are like unto them, and so are all they that worship
them, as brutish as the stocks themselves: They have no heart to God, but will
follow after their Puppets and their Idols, and such are they also that follow
after their drunkenness, covetousness, etc. Who live in lasciviousness,
lusts, excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.2. that run into all kind of excess, and marvel
that you do not so too. They marvel (that ye that fear God) can live as ye do;
and speak evil of you that be good; call such hypocrites, dissemblers, and I
know not what nicknames. This, I say, is a most woeful condition; it is that
dead blow. When men are not sensible of mercies, of judgments, but run into all
excess of sin with greediness: and this is a death begun in this life, even
while they are above ground.

But then comes another death, God does not intend sin shall grow to an
infinite weight, His Spirit shall not always strive with man, but at length God
comes and crops him off, and now comes the consummation of the death begun in
this life: Now comes an accursed death.

3. After thou have lived an accursed life, then comes an accomplishment of
curses.

First, a cursed separation between body and soul, and then of both from God
for ever, and that is the last payment. This is that great death which the
Apostle speaks of, Who has delivered us from that great death. So terrible is
that death. This death is but the severing of the body from the soul: This is
but the Lords Harbinger, the Lords Sergeant to lay his Mace on thee, to bring
thee out of this world into a place of everlasting misery, from whence thou
shall never come till all be satisfied, and that is never.

First, Consider the nature of this death, which though every man knows, yet
few lay to heart. This death, what does it?

First, It takes from thee all the things which thou spentst thy whole life in
getting. It robs thee of all the things thou ever had: Thou have taken pains
to heap and treasure up goods for many years, presently when this blow is
given, all is gone: For honor and preferment, it takes thee from that;
pleasure in idle company keeping, it bars thee of that. Mark, this is the
first thing that death does, it takes not only away a part of that thou have,
but all: it leaves thee quite naked, as naked as when thou came into the
world: Thou thoughtst it was thy happiness to get this and that. Death now
begins to unbewitch thee, thou wast bewitched before, when thou did run after
all worldly things: thou wast deceived before, and now it undeceives thee; it
makes thee see what a notorious fool thou wast, it unbefools thee. Thou had
many plots, and many projects, but when thy breath is gone, then all thy
thoughts perish, all thy plottings and projectings go away with thy breath: A
strange thing, to see a man with Job, the richest man in the East, and yet in
the evening (we say) as poor as Job: He has nothing left him now. Now though
death takes not all things from thee, yet it takes thee from them all; all thy
goods, all thy books, all thy wealth, all thy friends thou may now bid
farewell: now adieu for ever, never to see them again. And that is the first
thing.

2. Now death rests not there, but comes to seize upon thy body. It has
bereaved thee of all that thou possessedst of all thy outward things, that is
taken away: Now it comes to touch his person, and see what then. It touches
him, it rents his soul from his body: those two loving companions that have so
long dwelt together, are now separated. It takes thy soul from thy body: This
man does not deliver up his spirit, as we read of our Savior, Father, into thy
hands I commit my spirit, or deliver their spirits as Stephen did: But here
it is taken from them; it is much against his mind, it is a pulling of himself
from himself. This it does.

3. But then again, when thou art thus pulled asunder, what becomes of the
parts separated?

1. First, The body as soon as the soul is taken from it, hastens to
corruption; that must see corruption: yea, it becomes so full of corruption,
that thy dearest friend cannot then endure to come near unto thee. When the
soul is taken from the body, it is observed, that of all carcasses that are,
man's is most loathsome, none so odious as that. Abraham loved Sarah well; but
when he comes to buy a monument for her, see his expression, Genesis 23 8. He
communes with the men, and says, if it be your mind to sell me the field, that
I might bury my dead out of my sight. Though he loved her very well before, yet
now she must be buried out of his sight. It is sown in dishonor, and it is the
basest thing that can be: Therefore when our Savior was going near to the
place where Lazarus lay, his sister says, Lord, come not near him, for he
smells. Job 17.14. I have said to corruption, thou art my father (says Job)
and to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister: As in the verse before, The
grave is my house, I have made my bed in the darkness. Here then he has a new
kindred; and though before he had affinity with the greatest, yet here he gets
new affini^y: He says to corruption; thou art my father, and to the worm, thou
art my mother and my sister. The worm is our best kindred here; the worm then
is our best bed; yea worms thy best covering, as Esaias 14.11. Thus is it thy
Father, thy mother, and thy bed: nay, it is thy consumption and destroyer also,
Job 26. Thus is it with thy body, it passes to corruption, that thy best or
dearest friend cannot behold it, or endure it.

2. But alas! what becomes of thy soul then? Thy soul appears naked, there is no
garment to defend it, no Proctor appears to plead for it: It is brought singly
to the bar, and there it must answer. It is appointed for all men once to die.
But what then? And after that to come to judgment, Heb. 9.27. Eccles. 12.7. The
body returns unto the earth from whence it was taken, but the Spirit to God who
gave it. All men's spirits, as soon as their bodies and souls are parted, go to
God to be disposed of by him, where they shall keep their everlasting
residence. Consider when thou hear the bell rung out for a dead man, if thou
had but the wings of a dove to fly, and could fly after him, and appear
with him before Gods Tribunal, to see the account that he must give unto God
for all things done in the flesh: and when no account can be given, what a
state of misery and horror would thou see him in! and this is a silent kind
of judging: The last day of judging shall be with great pomp and solemnity.
This is a matter closely carried between God and thy self; but then thou must
give an account of all that thou have received: And then when thou can not
give a good account, then is thy talent taken from thee. Why, says God, I gave
thee learning, how did thou use it? I gave thee other gifts of mind, how
did thou employ them? God has given thee wisdom, and wealth; Moral
virtues, meekness, and patience, etc. these are good things: But mark,
whatsoever good things thou had in this world, is now taken from thee. If a
man could but see the degrading of the soul, he should see that those moral
virtues in which his hope of comfort lay, even these, though they could never
bring him to heaven, yet they shall be taken from him. As when a Knight is
degraded: First his sword is taken from him, then comes one with a hatchet and
chops off his golden spurs, and then go Sr. Knave: This is the degrading of the
soul before the judgment is received: the moral virtues are taken from him, and
then see what an ugly soul he has: he had hope before, now he is without hope:
he had some patience in this world, but he made no good use of it, and now his
patience is taken from him: And when thou shall come to a place of torment, and
thy hope and patience be taken from thee, what case will thou be in then?
Patience may stay a man up in trouble, and hope may comfort a man up in
torment; but both these are taken away. This is a thing we very seldom think;
but did we seriously consider of this first act of the Judgment before the
sentence, we would not be idle in this world.

3. Then lastly, he is put into an unchangeable estate: So soon as ever death
lays Gods Mace upon him, he is put into an estate of unchangeblenesse. Such is
the terriblenesse of it, that now though he yell, and groan, and pour out
rivers of tears, there is no hope of change.

Consider now what a woeful case this is. If some friend of this man's should now
come to him, would he not tell him, we have often been very merry together, but
did thou but know the misery that I am in, thou would be troubled for me:
Half those tears that I now pour forth, would have put me into another place,
had I taken the season, but now it is too late. Oh therefore do thou make use
of tears, a little may do it now, hereafter it will be too late.

That Is the thing we should now come to speak of, the second death: But think
not that I am able to speak of it now, no, that which is everlasting deserves
an hour in speaking, and an Age in thinking of it. Therefore that everlasting
torment, horror, and anguish which God has reserved for those that make not
their peace with him (which is easily done God knows) I shall speak of the next
time.

REV. 21.8. Bu^ ^he fearful, and unbel^^^^ng, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.
THe last day I entered, you know, upon the miserable estate of an unreconciled
sin^er, at the time of his dissolution, when his soul shall be taken from him,
and be presented naked before Christ's Tribunal, there to receive according to
the works which he has done in the flesh: And I showed that the woefulness of
that estate consisted in two acts done upon him: The one before he comes to his
place, before he is thrust away from Gods presence into hell fire; which I
showed you the last day, and did then promise to show you the other, to wit,
the woefulness of his estate, being once come into his place. The act done to
the sinners soul before he is sent to hell, is the deprivation of his light,
the taking away of his talent. For whilst a man is in this world, he has many
good things in him, too good to accompany him to hell. Now all these excellent
gifts and natural endowments which did adorn a wicked man's soul, before the
soul is hurled into hell, must be taken away from him. There is a kind of
degradation of the soul, it is depriested (...) were, and becomes lik^ a
degraded Knight that has his honor taken from him. All the rich talents, and
all the rich prizes that were put into the fools hand, shall be taken from him.
Is there any moral virtue? Are there any common graces and natural endowments
in the miserable soul? it shall be stripped of all, and packt to hell. You that
have abused your learning and gifts that God has given you, do you think that
they shall go with you to hell? No such matter, you shall be very sots and
dunces there. All your learning shall be taken from you, and you shall go to
hell arrant blockheads. He that had fortitude in this world, shall not carry
one dram of it to hell: all his courage shall then be abased, and his
cowardly heart shall faint for fear. Fortitude is a great advantage to a man in
distress, but let not the damned soul expe^t the least advantage: his
fortitude which he had whilst he was in the way, shall be taken from him. It
may be he had patience in this world: Now patience is ^ virtue unfit for hell,
therefore shall that be taken from him. A man if he were in most exquisite
torments, yet if he had patience, it would bear it up with head and shoulders
(as we say) but this shall add to his torments, that he shall not have any
patience left him to allay it. A man has perhaps hope in this world, and, as
the Proverb is, were it not for hope the heart would burst; yet even this too
shall be taken away from him, he shall have no hope left him of ever seeing
Gods face again, or of ever having any more tastes of his favor: And so what
has been said of some, may be said of all his graces and endowments: he shall
clean be stripped of all ere he be sent to hell.

I come now to speak of the place of torment it self, wherein the sinner is to
be cast eternally, which is the second act. But think not that I am able to
discover the thousandth part of it, no nor any man else: God grant that no soul
here present ever come to find by experience what it is. What a woeful thing is
it, that many men should take more pains to come to this place of torment,
then would cost them to go to heaven, that men should wilfully run themselves
upon the pikes, not considering how painful it is, nor how sharp those pikes
are: And this I shall endeavor to my power to set forth unto you. This Text
declares unto us two things.

1. Who they are for whom this place is provided.

2. The place it self, and the nature of it.

1. For whom the place is provided. The Text contains a Catalogue of that
black Roll (though there are many more then are here expressed) but here are
the grand crimes, the ringleaders to destruction, the mo^^er sins. And here we
have in the first place the Fearful: whereby is not meant those that are of a
timorous nature (for fear simply is not a sin) those that are simply fearful;
but such as place their fear on a wrong object, not where it should be: that
fear not God, but other things more then God. Such as if affliction and
iniquity were put to their choice, will rather choose iniquity then affliction:
Rather then they will have any cross betide them, rather then they will incur
the indignation of a man, rather then they will part with their life and goods
for Gods cause, will adventure on any thing, choosing iniquity rather then
affliction; being afraid of what they should not fear, never fearing the great
and mighty God: This is the fearful here meant. See how Job expresses it, Job
36.31. This have thou chosen. This (that is) iniquity rather then affliction:
to sin rather then to suffer. Christ bids us not to fear poor vain man, but
the omnipotent God, that is able both to kill and to cast into hell. The man
that fears his Landlord, who is able to turn him out of his house, and does
not fear God, who is able to turn him into hell, this dastardly spirit is one
of the Captains of those that go to hell, those timorous and cowardly persons,
that tremble at the wrath or frowns of men, more then of God. But what is the
reason men should thus stand more in fear of men then of God? Why it is because
they are sensible of what men can do unto their bodies, but they cannot with
Moses by faith see what that is that is invisible. They are full of unbelief;
for had they (...), they would banish all false fears. See what the Lord says,
Esa. 41 14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, I will help thee, says the Lord. He
says not, Fear not ye men, or thou man, for then perhaps thou might be
thought to have some power to resist, but fear not thou worm. A worm (you know)
is a poor weak thing, apt to be crushed by every foot; yet be this thy case, be
thou a worm, unable to resist the least opposition, yet fear not thou worm.
Fear not, why? for I will help thee, says the Lord. Could thou but believe
in God, this would make thee bold; and had thou faith, thou would not fear.
When word was brought to the house of Jacob, that two Kings were come up into
the Land to invade it, Esaias 7.2. it is said his heart was moved, as the trees
of the wood are moved with the wind. But what is the remedy of this fear? See
Esaias 8.12. Fear not their fear, nor be afraid (that was a false and a base
fear) sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and let him be your fear, and let him
be your dread. Esaias 51.12. there is an object of our faith and comfort, and a
remedy against fear proposed: I, even I, am he that comfort thee: who art
thou that should be afraid of a man that shall die, and the son of man that
is as grass? What, art thou one that have God on thy side? how unworthy art
thou of that high favor, if thou fear man? The greatest man that lives cannot
shield himself from death, and from a covering of worms, and will thou be
afraid of a man, and forget the Lord thy Maker? The more thou art taken up with
the fear of man, the less thou fear God; and the more thou remembrest man,
the more thou forgettest thy Maker.

You have seen the main, the ring ^^aders, which are these fearful, faithless,
dastardly, unbelieving men.

Now see what the filthy rabble is that follows after, and they are
Abominable, Murderers, etc. Abominable, that is, unnatural, such as pollute
themselves with things not fit to be named, but to be abhorred, whether it be
by themselves, or with others. They are the abominable here meant, such as
Sodom and Gomorrah, who were set forth to such as an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, Jude v. 7. (...), such are abominable, being given
up to unnatural lust. Let them carry it never so secretly, yet are they her^
ranked amongst the rest, and shall have their portion in the burning lake.

After these come Sorcerers, Idolaters, Liars: Though these may be spoken
fairly of by men, yet cannot that shelter them from the wrath of God, they
shall likewise have their part in this lake when they come to a reckoning. If
there be, I say, a generation of people that worship these, say what you will
of them, when they come to receive their wages, they shall receive their
portion in that burning lake with hypocrites: Those that make so fair a show
before men, and yet nourish hypocrisy in their hearts, these men, though in
regard of the outward man they so behave themselves that none can say to them,
black is their eye, though they cannot be charged with those notorious things
before mentioned; yet if there be nothing but hypocrisy in their hearts, let
it be spun with never so fair a web, never so fine a thread, yet they shall have
their portion in the lake, they shall have their part, their portion, etc. Then
it seems these of this black guard have a peculiar interest unto this place.
And as it is said of Judas Acts 1.25. that he was gone (...), to his proper
place. So long as a man that is an enemy to Christ, and yields him not
obedience, is out of hell, so long is he out of his place. Hell is the place
assigned to him, and prepared for him; he has a share there, and his part and
portion he must have: till he come thither he is but a wanderer. The Evangelist
tells us that the Scribes and Pharisees went about to gain Profelytes, and when
they had all done, they made them seven times more the children of hell then
themselves, filios Gehennae: So that a Father has not more right in his son,
then Hell has in them: He is a vessel of wrath filled top full of iniquity,
and a child of the Devils: So that as we say, the gallows will claim its right,
so hell will claim its due. But mistake me not, all this that I speak
concerning Hell, is not to terrify and affright men, but by forewarning them
to keep them thence. For after I have shown you the danger, I shall show you a
way to escape it, and how the Lord Jesus was given to us to deliver us from
this danger: But if you will not hear, but will try conclusions with God, then
you must to your proper place, to the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

A Lake it is, a River, a flaming River, as Tophet is described to be a lake
burning with fire and brimstone, a Metaphor taken from the judgment of God on
Sodom and Gomorrah, as in that place of St. Jude before mentioned, as also in
2 Pet. 2.6. where it is said God turned the Cities of Sodom into ashes, making
them an example to all them that should after live ungodly. Mark the judgment
of God upon these abominable men, the place where they dwelt is destroyed with
fire, and the situation is turned into a lake full of filthy bituminous stuff
called L^cus Asphaltites, which was made by their burnings. And this is made an
instance of the vengeance of God, and an Emblem of eternal fire; therefore
said he, you shall have your portion with Sodom. Nay, shall I speak a greater
word (with Christ) and tell you, that though they were so abominable, that the
Lake was denominated from them, yet it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah
then for you, if you repent not while you may, but go on to despise Gods
grace. But can there be a greater sin then the sin of Sodom? I answer, yes.
For make the worst of the sin of Sodom, it is but a sin against nature: But
thy impenitency is a sin against grace, and against the Gospel, and therefore
deserves a hotter hell, and an higher measure of judgment in this burning pit.

But what is this second death?

2. Sure it has reference to some first death or other going before. A man
would (as it is commonly thought) think that this second death, is opposed to
that first death, which is the harbinger to the second, and separates the soul
from the body; but it is far otherwise. That, alas, is but a petty thing, and
deserves not to be put in the number of deaths. The second death in the Text
has relation to the first Resurrection, Rev. 20:6. Blessed and holy is he that
has his portion in the first resurrection, on such the second death shall have
no power. The first death is that from whence we are acquitted by the first
resurrection, and that is the death; for that is a kind of death (as S. Paul
speaking of a wicked and voluptuous widow, says, she is dead while she lives)
and the time shall come and now is, when they that are dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of man, and they that hear shall live. And again, Let the dead
bury their dead. So that the first resurrection is, when a man hearing the
voice of the Minister, is rouzed up from the sleep of sin and carnal security,
and the first death is the opposite thereunto. So that the death of the body is
no death at all; for if it were, then this were the third death. For there
would be a death of sin, a death of the body, and a death of body and soul:
This death of the body is but a flea-biting in comparison of the other two.
This second death is the separation of the body and soul from God, and this
death is the wages of sin, and God must not, will not lie in arrear to sin, but
will pay its wages to the full. All the afflictions a wicked man meets withal
here, are but as Gods press money, and part of payment of that greater sum:
But when he dies, the whole sum comes then to be paid: Before he did but sip
of the cup of Gods wrath, but he must then drink up the dregs of it down to the
bottom, and this is the second death: It Is called death. Now death is a
destruction of the parts compounded: a man being compounded of body and soul,
both are by this death eternally destroyed. That death (like Sampson pulling
down the pillars whereby it was sustained, pulled down the house) draws down
the tabernacles of our bodies, pulls body and soul in sunder. A thing which
has little hurt in it self, were it not for the sting of it, which makes it
fearful: To die, is esteemed far worse then to be dead, in regard of the pangs
that are in dying, to which death puts an end. This temporal death is in an
instant, but this other eternal, whereby we are ever dying, and never dead, for
by it we are punished with an everlasting (...), 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. and that from
the presence of the Lord by the glory of his power. Then which place I have no
need to add more; for, as much as can be s^id of men and Angels is fully
comprehended in it. The Apostle terms this a fearful thing indeed, Heb. 2.15.
whereon if a man but think (if he has his wits about him) he would for fear of
it be all his life long subject to bondage. He would scarce draw any free
breath, but would still be studying how to avoid it, and would still be in
bondage and drudgery till he were delivered. Thus I have declared the nature of
the place, and of this second death.

That I may now go farther, know that this Lake and this place is the place
that the Lord has provided for his enemies: It is the Lords slaughterhouse;
its called a place of torments, Luke 16. a place wherein God will show the
accomplishment of his wrath, and revenge upon his enemies, Those mine enemies
that would not have me to reign over them, bring them forth, and slay them
before my face. Those vessels of wrath, those rebels; the King is in raged, and
his wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, which makes all the beasts of the
forest to tremble, Prove. 19.12. And where there is the wrath of such a King,
the issue thereof must needs be death, Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as a
messenger of death. How much more fearful is the wrath of the King of Kings.
God has sharp arrows, and he sets a wicked man as his Butt to shoot at, to
show his strength, and the fierceness of his wrath. See the expression of Job
in this case, The arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me, and the venom
thereof has drunk up my spirits: In so few words there could not be an higher
expression of the wrath of God. First, that God should make thee a Butt, and
then that thou should be shot at, and that by Gods arrows: And then they are
not shot by a child, but ( as the man is, so is his strength) by the Almighty,
by his bow, wherein he draws the arrow to the head. And then again these arrows
are poisoned arrows, and such poison as shall drink up all thy soul and spirit:
Oh, what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of such a God! It Is a
saying of Moses, Psalm. 90.11. (for it is Moses Psalm.) Who knows the power of
thine anger? the power of Gods anger is unknown. And so in his Song, Deuteronomy.
32.22. he sets it out in some measure. A fire is kindled in mine anger, which
shall burn unto the lowest hell, etc. So that the King being thus provoked, is
provoked to curse thee, Mat. 25. It Is put into the form of thy sentence: this
cursing shall be thy lot in hell, it shall be thy very sentence, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire. There is nothing but cursing: As Job cursed himself and
the day of his birth, so then shall cursing be all thy song: thou will curse
thy self that thou did not hearken to the Preacher, that thou would not
accept of Christ, and the means of mercy and grace when it was offered thee:
and thou will curse the time thou were acquainted with this man, and that man,
and others will curse thee for drawing them to sin: God curses thee, and man
curses thee; and God curses not in vain when he curses: others will curse thee,
and thou thy self and others; and think then how cursed will be thy condition?
All the curses that can be thought on, and all the curses that cannot be
thought on, shall rest on the head of an impenitent sinner, to show Gods
terrible and just indignation against him. Oh beloved, to deliver us from this
curse, Christ the Son of God was made a curse for us: the curse is so great,
naught else can free us from it. But now that I may rank these punishments of
the damned, and bring them for memories sake into some order (although there be
no order there, for it is a place of confusion) you may consider that the
penalties of Gods enemies are penalties partly of loss, and partly of sense.

1. Of loss. And that consists in the deprivation of every thing that might
administer the least comfort to him; and for this cause hell is termed utter
darkness. Now darkness is a privation of all light, so is Hell of all
comfort, to show that there is not the least thing that may give thee content,
nor is the poorest thing thou can desire to be had there. Darkness was one
of the plagues of Egypt, though there were no kind of sense in it, yet we may
think what a plague and vexation it was to them to sit so long in darkness. The
darkness of Hell is darker then darkness it self. They shall not see light,
says the Scripture, they shall not have so much as a glimpse of it: To be cast
into this utter darkness, where shall be nothing to administer the least
comfort, what an infinite misery will that be? Were it only the loss of the
things we now possess and enjoy, of all which death robs us, as pomp, honor,
riches, and preferment, this were grievous to a wicked man: These are things
death dispossesses a man of, these cannot follow him, naught but thy works
accompany thee: thy friends may follow thee to the grave, but there they shall
leave thee. To have been happy, and to be miserable, is the greatest woe: to
have lived in good fashion, and to be wretched, is the greatest grief. How will
this add to the sinners misery, when he shall say to himself, I had once all
good things about me, but have now for my portion nothing but woe: I had a bed
of down, but it is now exchanged for a bed of fire: I was once honorable, but
now I am full of shame and contempt; this will greatly add to his misery. But
all this is nothing, these are but the beginnings of his sorrow in regard of
loss: for a man to be rich and wealthy to day, and to morrow to be stripped of
all, and left not worth a groat, to have all swept away, this is a woeful case.

2. But if this be so grievous, what is it to lose Heaven? Certainly, to lose
the highest and greatest good, is the greatest evil and punishment that can be
inflicted upon a creature. Which makes many Divines think, that the penalties
of loss are far greater then those of sense, though they seem not to make that
impression. It Is another thing to judge of things by sense then by loss: As
for example, a man is greatly troubled with the toothache, and he thinks his
case more miserable then any, and thinks no man ever endured so much misery as
himself, he judges of his misery by sense: Another man is in the consumption,
and he has little or no pain at all; yet if a man come with a right judgment,
he will judge his condition far worse then the others. So take all the pains in
Hell, though sense may say they are the greatest that can be, yet discreet
judgment can say, that the loss of God the greatest good, is the worst of
evils. Now (if thou be a firebrand of Hell) thou must be for ever banished from
Gods presence. Thou base wretch, do thou thin^ Heaven a place for thee? not
so. It Is without are dogs and sorcerers, etc. Thou art a damned dog, therefore
thou must out from God, and from the company of the blessed Saints and Angels.
When Peter saw Moses and Elias with Christ in his Transfiguration, though he
had but a glimpse of glory, yet he says, It is good for us to be here: But oh
how infinite good will it be to be in Heaven? how shall we be then wrapped up
with glory when we shall be for ever with the Lord, in whose presence is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. On
the contrary, how exceeding terrible will it be to be shut out from the
presence of God? when God shall say, avaunt hence, whip out this dog, what does
he here? let him not defile this room, this is no place for such a filthy dog.
Oh the unspeakable horror and dread! oh the infinite shame of that man who is
in such a case! But this is not all.

There is yet one thing more, the wicked shall not only be banished from Gods
gracious presence, and cast into Hell, but this shall be done in the sight of
Heaven. The glorious Saints of God have continually a sight of Gods justice
upon sinners, that they may glorify his mercy the more. The Scripture runs
much to this purpose, Rev. 14.10. If any man worship the beast and his image,
the same shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of God and
of his holy Angels. This in the 9th verse is the portion of them that worship
the beast, that is the Pope, and receive the mark of his name. That is, if any
will be an express public or private Papist, if any one will be a slave to
the Pope, see his portion, he shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and
be banished from the society of holy Angels, and be tormented with hellfire in
their presence. Oh what a vexation will this be to the damned when they shall
see others in heaven, and themselves shut out of door? This will cause weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth. It will go to their very heart, when they
shall see Moses and Aaron and the Prophets and holy Saints in joy and glory,
and shall consider and remember, that if they had made use of these means and
opportunities of grace, they might have lived in Heaven too, whereas now they
must be everlastingly tormented in that lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, and that without any hope of recovery. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. You know that by the Law of Moses, whenever an offender was to
receive his strokes, Deuteronomy. 25 2, 3. The Judge was to cause him to lie down, and
to be beaten before his face, and he himself was to see it done. So when God
comes to give the damned their strokes in hell (for hell is the place of
execution, wherein he that knows his masters will and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes,) he himself will see them beaten in the presence of
all his holy Angels; and if so, how shameful will their punishment be? when
there shall be so many thousand witnesses of it, when they shall be made (as we
say) the worlds wonder. These are they that shall rise to everlasting contempt,
Dan. 12. So in Esaias, ult. Cap. v. ult. it is said of the damned, their worm
shall not die, nor their fire be quenched, but they shall be an abhorring to
all flesh, and the holy Angels and Saints shall go forth and look upon them:
those proud ones that scorned Gods people here, shall then be abhorred and
scorned of them.

4. Add to all this, that he is not only banished from the presence of God for
a while, but from all hope of ever seeing God again with comfort. Thy estate is
endless and remediless. Whilst thou art here in this life, of a Saul thou may
become a Paul; and though thou art not yet a beloved son, yet thou may come
in favor: Whilst thou live under the means of grace, there is yet hope of
recovery left thee, it may be this Sermon may be the means of thy conversion:
But then amongst all thy punishments, this will be one of the greatest, that
thou shall be deprived of all means of recovery, and this shall be another hell
to thee in the midst of hell, to think with thy self, I have heard so many
Sermons, and yet have neglected them: I had so many opportunities of grace, and
yet have slighted them, this will make the sinner rage, and bite his tongue,
and tear himself, to think how that now all means are past. And this is the
first penalty, the penalty of loss.

That of the sense succeeds. By the former we are deprived of all the joys and
comforts of heaven and earth, of Mount Sion, shut out of the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, deprived of an innumerable company of Saints, of
the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, of God himself the Judge of
all, and the souls of the Saints made perfect. This shall make a sinner curse
himself.

Now follows the penalty of torments and sense. When Adam was banished out of
Paradise, he had the wide world to walk in still; but it is not so here: Thou
art not only cast out of heaven, but cast into hell, and art deprived of thy
liberty for ever, 1 Pet. 3.19. It Is said Christ preached to the spirits in
prison, them that in the days of Noah were disobedient, and for this cause are
now in prison. Hell is compared to a prison, and a prison indeed it is, and
that an odious one. For,

1. Look on thy companions. If a man were to be kept close prisoner, it were a
great punishment, but go ye cursed, says God, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. To be among such companions is most infinitely
miserable, there is nothing but Devils and damned howling ghosts, woeful
companions! If there be an house possessed with an evil spirit, a man will
scarce be hired to live in it; but here the damned spirits, the filthy and
cursed host must be thy yoke-fellows: Suppose there were no torment to suffer,
yet to be banished from heaven, and to be tied and yoked to wicked spirits,
were a torment sufficient to make the stoutest that ever was tremble, and
quake, and be soon weary of it.

2. But it is a place of torment too, a prison where there is a rack, to which
thou must be put, and on which thou must be tormented: I am tormented in this
flame, says Dives. To speak of the torments there, will be matter enough for
another hour, but I delight not to dwell on so sad a subject: only this is that
which prepares the way to the glad tidings of salvation, therefore I shall a
little longer insist upon it. The body and soul, the whole man, shall be there
tormented; not the soul only, but even the body too after judgment. Do you
think the members of the body, which have been the instruments, shall escape?
be raised, and cast into hell to no purpose? Why should God quicken it at the
last day, but to break it on the anvil of his wrath, and to make it accompany
the soul, as well in torments as in sinning. It Is true, the soul is the
fountain of all sense, and the body without it has no sense at all: take away
the soul, and you may burn the body, and it will not feel it. Now the soul
being the fountain of sense, and the body being united to it, when God shall
lay his axe at this root, at this fountain, how dreadful shall it be? how shall
the body choose but suffer too? Should any of us be cast into a fire, what a
terrible torment would we account it? Fire and water, we say, have no mercy;
but alas, this fire is nothing to the fire of hell, it is but as painted fire to
that which burns for ever and ever. The furnace wherein Nebuchadnezzar
commanded those to be thrown that fell not down to the graven Image which he
had set up, was doubtless at every time a terrible place. Hell is compared to
such a furnace; but what shall we think of it, when the King in his wrath shall
command the furnace to be heated seven times hotter then usual? Nay, what shall
we think of hell, when the King of Heaven shall command it to be heated seventy
times seven times hotter then before? when there shall be a fire, and a fire
prepared: for so is this fire of Tophet, it is a pile of much wood. When the
King of Heaven shall as it were set to work his wisdom, to fit it in the
sharpest manner, in procuring such ingredients as may make it rage most, and be
most violent: It is a fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, the strongest
of creatures, for the punishment of principalities and powers: and if it can
master Angels, think not but that God has a fire to roast thy soul. It is the
soul that is in hell only till the day of judgment, though the body be not
there. A man would think that the soul did not suffer, but Philosophy tells us
that the soul suffers mediante corpore, in and by the body: Therefore it is a
rule in Divinity, that whatsoever God does by means, he can do without means.
Though the body be not there, but the soul only, yet God is able, nay does make
the soul as well feel grief without the body, as he does by means of the body.

3. But now besides thy fellow prisoners in that cursed Gaol, consider who are
thy tormentors, thou that do continue in impenitency. Now thy tormentors are
these three.

1. The Devil. 2. Thy self. 3. God Almighty.
1. The Devil, who is thy deadly enemy, a bloody-minded adversary, a murdering
and merciless-minded Spirit, a murderer from the beginning a merciless
tormentor, who being in plagues and torments, and thereby even at his wits end,
would fain ease himself in tormenting thee. When the Devil, as we read, was
dispossessed of a child wherein he was, he rends and tears, leaves him foaming,
that there was little hope of life in him: But now when a man shall be
delivered into the hands of this merciless spirit, when God shall say to the
Devil, take him, do what thou will with him, do thy worst to him: when thou
shall be thus put into the hands of one that hates thee, and delights in thy
ruin, how will he tear thee into pieces? how will he torment thee? in how
desperate and wretched a case will thy soul and body be?

2. But the tormentor within thee is far more heavy, painful, and grievous,
that never dying worm within, the sting of a guilty and wounded conscience,
this, like a sharp dagger, is still stabbing thee at the very heart. This by a
reflecting act upon it self, will cause thee to revenge Gods quarrel on thy
self; and as a musket overcharged beats back on the shooter, so will it most
furiously return upon thee. This is that that smote David, when it is said
David's heart smote him. A man needs no other fire, nor other worm to torment
him, then that within him: which as the worms on the carcass, gnaws on a
wretched soul. But there is a greater tormentor then both these behind, and
that is

3ly. God himself, he is highly offended and enraged at thee, and therefore
comes and takes the matter into his own hand, and will himself be executioner
of his fury. There i^ a passage in the These. to this purpose, which me thinks
is more then can be spoken by men or Angels, Epist. 2. cap. 1. v. 9. Who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power. Mark that, God whom thou have so highly provoked
to wrath, has a strong hand and glorious power. He showed the glory of his
power in the making the world, and all things in it, and all that infinite
power which he has manifested in the creation of heaven and earth, shall be
engaged in the tormenting of a sinner. Were there a man that should lay a
target of brass, or a target of steel on a block, and should then cleve all in
sunder at a blow, this would sufficiently manifest his strength: So does God
make manifest his power in crushing thee to pieces. There are still new charges
and discharges against sinners, to make his power therein manifest. What if
God, willing to make his power known (says the Apostle Romans 9.) suffered a
while the vessels prepared to destruction? God will manifest his power by the
strength of his stroke on those that rebel against him. Hence proceeds
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, which is a Metaphor taken from one
either that has a great coldness on him, or from the symptoms of a Fever.

Add to all that has been said these two things.

1. The torment shall be everlasting, you shall desire to die, that your
torments may have end: And here you may expect that I should say something of
the eternity of the torments of the damned; but I am not able, nor any one else
sufficiently to express it: It shall continue ten thousand thousand years, and
after that an hundred thousand times ten thousand, and yet be no nearer end
then at the first beginning. Thou must think of it seriously thy self, and pray
to God to reveal it to thy soul, for none else sufficiently can.

2. But besides, as it is everlasting, so is it unabateable. If a man were cast
into a fire, the fire coming about him, would in short time blunt his senses,
and take away his feeling, and besides, the materials of the fire would soon
spend and waste: But it is not so here, here is not the least abatement of the
horror, nor the least inch of torment taken away throughout all eternity. It
was a poor request of Dives (one would think) that Lazarus would dip the tip of
his finger in water and cool his tongue: A cold comfort, but one drop of water
for the present, which would soon be dried, and yet that is denied him, he must
have no abatement of his torment. Nor is there any abatement of thy feeling,
but thou art kept in full strength, and as long as God is God shall Tophet
burn, and thou feel it.

Obj. But (may some say) this is preaching indeed, this would affright a man,
and make him out of his wits: this is the way to make him go hang him self,
sooner then be converted.

Sol. True, should God let loose the cord of our conscience, it were the way
(such would be the terrors of it) to make a man find another cord, did not God
restrain him. I desire not by this to hurt you, but to save you. I am a
messenger not sent from Abraham (as Dives entreated) but from the God of
Abraham, to forewarn you that you come not to that place of torment.

But now (Beloved) there is a way to escape this misery, and that is by Jesus
Christ, Mat. 1.21. He was for this end called Jesus, because he saves his
people from their sins, and consequently from wrath: which how it is done I
shall show in a word, and that is 1. By Christ Jesus offered for us. And 2. By
Christ Jesus offered to us.


By Christ offered for us, he must die for us, and if there be any death more
cursed then other, that death must he die; if any more painful, that must he
suffer. Thus he undertakes thy cause, and suffers what for sin was due to thee.

And then being offered for us, he is offered to us, as we may see in the
Sacrament, where there are two acts of the Minister, the one the breaking the
bread, the other, the offering it to the people. Thou have as good warrant to
take Christ offered, as thou have to take the bread and wine, which thou art
commanded to receive. Thus I thought good to add something to sweeten the
rest, that I might show that there is a way to be freed from the bitter pains
of eternal death.

PHIL. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Let this mind be in you, which also was in Jesus Christ,
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion of a man, he humbled
himself unto the death, even the death of the Cross.
YOU have heretofore heard that point of Christian Doctrine which concerns the
knowledge of our misery, and wretched estate by nature. The substance of all
is, That we are the Children of wrath and disobedience as well as others. You
see then in what state every man stands, before he has made his peace with
God: as long as he stands on terms of Rebellion. You see what the Holy Ghost
says, They are the sons of disobedience, and Children of wrath as well as
others. This I tell you (as has often been declared) not to discourage a
sinner, or to drive him to desperation, but because it is fit he should know his
estate in which he is. If they will try conclusions with God, if they oppose
him, the Lord comes with a Bar of Iron, and will break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel. Those mine enemies that will not have me to reign over them,
bring them, and slay them before me. It is fit every man should know this; This
part is only for this end, that it may awaken us, otherwise to what purpose do
we preach unto you? Till the Law awaken us, we sleep securely in our sins, till
the dreadful Trumpet of mount Sinai comes with thundering and lightning; as
Ephesians. 4. Awake thou that sleep, etc. Unless this awaken us, in what case are
we? Men as sleepers, that are a dreaming, as the Apostle speaks, Jude 8. A
sleeping sinner will be a dreaming sinner: he never sees things as they are in
their proper shape: but he thinks with the Church of Laodicea, That he is rich,
and wants nothing, when as he is poor, miserable, blind and naked. He thinks he
shall be admitted into heaven as soon as the proudest: but this is a dream:
Isa. 29.8. As the hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but when he
awakes, behold he is empty; or as a thirsty man that dreams he drinks, but
awake, and behold he is faint. Thus it is with us, we think we are entering upon
the suburbs of heaven, and yet we are but in a dream, and in a sleep.

Now being thus awaken, consider with thy self what thou have to do, when the
dreadful trumpet of the Law has aw^kened thee: consider thy state; if thou
sleep this night, Hellfire will be thy portion. It were better for thee
therefore to awake before the flames of hellfire awake thee. Consider likewise
that thou must not be led by thy self: thou must renounce thine own will. Our
Estates may be pleasing unto us, to enjoy in a dream our hearts lusts here on
earth; but consider, unless thou cross thy Will here, it shall be crossed
hereafter: yea it shall be the main cross a man shall have in hell, (besides
the eternal weight of Gods wrath) that he can will or desire nothing, but he
shall be crossed in it: not the least thing he desires, but he shall have the
contrary world without end: Learn then what a woeful thing it is to be our own
lords, to follow our own lusts and pleasures, see what we shall gain by it:
No^e Well.
never shall thou enjoy the least portion of thy will in the world to come; if
thou would have but a drop of cold water, thou shall be crossed in it.
Nothing thou desire, but thou shall have the opposite to it.

Thus having truly and plainly showed our Sinfulness, Wretchedness, and
Cursedness by nature, I come unto the second part which I proposed; to wit, Our
Remedy, or our Redemption by Christ. Our Remedy, or, our Redemp^ion by Christ.
And God forbid that he should create man the best of his Creature for
destruction. What gain and profit is there in our blood? Psalm 30.9. God is
full of Grace and Compassion, and he considers that we are but dust. And happy
are we that we are but dust. Had we been more glorious Creatures, as Angels, we
had not had the benefit of a Savior. When they rebelled, God considered their
metal: And as with an high hand they rebelled, So the Lord reserved them in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the Judgment of the great day, Jude 3.
1 These. 1.10. They fell without a Redeemer; It is well for us that God
considers that we are but dust; For by Jesus Christ he saves us from the
wrath to come. It had been better for us never to have been born, then to be
born firebrarnds of hell. But now the point is, that we are Brands plucked out
of the fire, Zach. 3.2. It is fit therefore we should know who is our Redeemer.

Now as I have showed you the last day it is Jesus Christ: And here consider,

1. Christ Jesus offered for us for the satisfaction of Gods Justice, and this
is his priestly office.

2. As there was no Remission without shedding of blood, therefore after the
blood is shed, and the Priest offered himself, there comes a second thing, else
we are never the better: and that is Christ offered to us: This makes up our
comfort. Many talk of the extent of Christ's Death and Passion, saying, he dyed
sufficiently for us, which is an improper speech: For what comfort were this,
that Christ was offered for us, if there were no more? A bare sufficiency in
Christ serves not the turn: this were a cold comfort: As if a man that were in
debt, and afraid of every Sergeant, and every Sheriff should be told: Sir,
there is money enough in the Kings Exchequer to discharge all your debts. This
is very true, but what is that to him? what comfort has he by it, unless the
King make him an offer to come, and take freely for his discharge? And a cold
comfort were it to us to know Christ to be sufficient for us, unless he invite
us to take freely of the waters of life. Ho, every one of you that thirsts,
come you to the waters, etc. Isa. 55.1. Thus unless Christ be offered to us, as
well as for us, we are never the near.

Now to make this appear: Observe that in every Sacrament there are two acts of
the Minister. The one has Relation to God, a Commemoration of the Sacrifice,
in which respects the ancient Fathers called it a Sacrifice: the other, the
breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine: wherein there is a
Commemoration of the body broken, and the blood shed, not as they are
concomitants, the Wine in the bread, as the foolish Papists dream, for that
were rather a commemoration of his life then of his death, when the blood runs
in the veins. The commemoration of Christ's death is made by separation of the
blood from the body, and as there is one Act of the Minister in cons^crating by
breaking the body, and pouring out the blood, so there is a second Act which is
ministerial. When the Minister says, Take, eat, This is my body; as if Christ
were present, and said, Come, Take my body, thou have as free an interest to
it, as when thou art invited to thy friends table thou have right to the meat
before thee. So that as Christ is offered for thee, so he is offered to thee:
And what now should hinder thee, unless thou art one that will obstinately
oppose thy own salvation, and say, I will not have this man to rule over me,
thou can not miscarry. But if thou will be thine own lord, perish in thine
infidelity. Here be the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven given unto Gods
Ministers, unless thou wilfully oppose thine own salvation, and shut that door
of salvation which Christ has opened so wide for thee. See the ways of God are
plain. Christ has paid a great price for thee, and then, as great as it is, he
offers it to thee.

Now for the former of these, which is Christ's satisfaction made unto the
Father for us, I made choice of this place of Scripture, which sets it out
particularly. Herein two things are to be observed.

1. The person who it is that will thus humble himself: the Apostle grounds his
Exhortation on the fourth verse, where he tells us, We ought not to look every
man on his own things, but every man on the things of others. Let this mind be
in you which also was in Christ Jesus. If Christ had looked only on his own
things, he might have saved himself a great deal of labor and pains. He being
the Son of God, might as soon as he was born have challenged a seat with God in
Glory: He need not go per viam, He might be Comprehensor in meta: but he would
pass on to his journeyes end in a thorny and troublesome way: Let then the same
mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who minded not his own things, but
the good of others.

2. What it was wherein he humbled himself, he took upon him the form of a
servant, and was obedient unto the death of the Cross. The highest humiliation
that can be, that he who is above all praise, whom Angels adored, that he
should be brought from heaven to earth; and not only be a pilgrim there, but
have a sorrowful and pitiful pilgrimage; and at last to be cut off by a
shameful death from the land of the living: this humiliation has no parallel.

The depth of the humiliation consists in the height of the person thus
humbled; and were not he so high, it could have done us no good. It Is no small
satisfaction that can appease Gods wrath, therefore the Apostle to the Hebrews
speaking of Melchisedeck, the type of Christ, concludes, how great this man was.

Consider the invaluable price, how great he was, who being in the form of God,
he who was fellow, and fellow-like with God, as good as himself, as great as
himself, was thus humbled: It was the second person in the Trinity, he, and no
other that was thus humbled for thee; He was weary for thee, and reviled for
thee, sweated and fainted for thee; hungered for thee, and was buffeted for
thee. It was he, the second person of the Trinity, in proper speech, without
either Trope or Figure, shed his blood for thee, died for thee, and suffered
all these things in his assumed nature, taking on him the form of a servant,
though not in his divine. He remaining God alone, could not die, but yet die
fain he would for thee, therefore he took thy nature on him, that he might die
for thee in the assumed nature. He took not on him the nature of Angels, but
the seed of Abraham. He being the fountain of life, and the Prince of our life,
(and without sheding of blood no Redemption could be wrought) having not blood
to shed as God, therefore took our nature on him, as it is; Heb. 10.5.
Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body thou have prepared me, then
said I, Io, I come, in the volumn of thy book it is written of me, to do thy
Will O God. As if he should have said, Lord, I am not able to accomplish thy
Will, or to be subject to thee in thy nature, therefore thou have made me a
man, that in the form of a servant, I might show obedience, which I could not
while I was in nature equal unto thee. Now consider how great this person is
that has suffered all for thee. Rev. 1.5. Jesus Christ who is the faithful
witness, the first begotten of the Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the
earth: to have a great Prince bound like a thief, araigned, and executed, the
consideration of this state of the person, would move a stony heart. Rev.
17.14. He is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.

Amongst men the Father is more honorable then the Son, and the Son is but a
servant, until he be emancipated, but it is not so in the Divinity; but the
Father and the Son are both alike honorable.

Among men the Son has the same specifical nature with the Father, but not the
same individual: but it is not so in the Divinity: the Father and the Son there
have the self same individual nature. I and my Father are one, therefore there
must be an equality. The Pharisees themselves could draw this conclusion, that
if he were the Son of God, he was equal with God. John 5.18. Therefore the Jews
sought the more to kill him, because he said, God was his Father, making
himself equal with God: A man would think how could that follow? He was but
Gods Son: but Gods Son must be equal to the Father. In making himself Gods Son,
he made himself equal with God: and therefore know upon this, and by this
stands the point of our Redemption. If a pure and holy Angel had suffered never
so much, it would not have availed for our Redemption. It is a price no man,
nor Angel must meddle with all: It will require a greater Price. It was God
himself that suffered in his assumed nature: He, and no other person: (for we
must understand, though Christ took on him the nature of a man, yet not the
person of a man) here stands the point, the second person in the Trinity is the
Suppositum of all this humiliation: and therefore observe when the point of
suffering comes, there is a remarkable speech. Zach. 13.7. Says the Son to the
Father, it was against his heart to smite him: the expression is a lively one,
it went to his heart to smite one that was his equal, that did him no wrong,
Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, and against the man who is my fellow. You
know of whom it is spoken by M^thew, Mat. 26.31. I will smite the Shepherd, and
the sheep of the flock shall be scattered. The Lord is ready to break him, Isa.
53. The sword was as it were unwilling to smite. The man that is my fellow? A
blow lighting on Gods fellow, equal with God, of what value is it? Consider the
difference betwixt a man and a man; The State of a Prince makes great odds
between that is done to him, and that is done to another man. When David would
adventure himself into the battle: Thou shall, say they, go no more with us,
least they quench the light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17. and more fully, 2 Samuel
18.3. Thou art worth ten thousand of us: they would not hazard the person of
the King in the battle, Why? because thou art worth ten thousand of us. The
dignity of a Prince is so great, that ten thousand will not countervail the
loss of him. If this be the esteem and worth of David, what is the worth of
David's Prince? If thus with a King* what with the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords? This is a great ground of the sufficiency of Christ's suffering. Heb.
9.13. If the blood of Bulls and Goats sanctify to the purifying of the flesh;
how much more, verse 14. shall the blood of Christ, who through his eternal
Spirit, offered himself to purge your Consciences from dead works to serve the
living God? It is not the offering of the body only, but he did it through his
eternal Spirit. When the Martyrs and Saints offered themselves a sacrifice,
they offered it through the flames of their love, and therefore embraced the
stake; and love is described as strong as death: but Christ did not offer his
sacrifice with the flames of his love, though love was in him the greatest that
ever was, but with the everlasting flames of his Godhead and Deity, with that
fire from heaven which is a consuming fire? He did the deed that will purge our
Consciences from dead works. Act. 20.28. Take heed unto your selves, and to the
flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you oversee^s, to feed the Church of
G^d which he has purchased with his precious blood: God has purchased the
Church with his own blood: Who Is blood? Gods blood. The blood of God must be
shed. He who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, must shed his own
blood: As Zippora says to Moses, A bloody husband have thou been to me, Exodus
4.25. So may Christ say to his Church, a bloody Spouse have thou been to me,
that my blood must be shed for thee: 1 Cor. 2.8. Had they known, they would not
have crucified the Lord of Glory, that is, they would not have crucified God.
He that was crucified, was the glorious Lord God. Acts 3.15. You denied the
holy one, and killed the Prince of life. Here Is the matter, unless the Prince
of life had been killed, thou could not have life. This the Apostle sets down
as the ground of all before; he comes to the particularities of his
humiliation: and sets down, who it was who was thus humbled: He whom the Heaven
of Heavens could not contain, he must descend unto the lower-most parts of the
earth: that is a descent indeed: His Humiliation appears in this, that he who
was thus high, became a man, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. In this
humiliation consider, I say, these two Points.

1. The person who was humbled.

2. The point of his humiliation. Christ's humiliation in life and death.
Some things has regard to the whole course of his life, others to the
conclusion or period of his life. All his life from his incarnation to his
passion, was a continual thread of humiliation from his Cradle to his Cross,
from his womb to his Tomb: so here is set down the humbled life of our blessed
Savior. For I would not have you think his humiliation consisted only in
coming to the Cross, when they so mercilesly handled him: it cost him more then
so: as sinners have the curse of God on them in their life, as well as in their
death, so Christ must have a miserable life as well as an accursed death.
Though the heat came at the end of the Tragedy, yet his whole life was a
continual suffering. Consider the degrees of it.

1. He made himself of no Reputation, (...), he emptied himself: It was the
second person in the Trinity that thus humbled and emptied himself, (not in his
divine nature, but his assumed,) of all his transcendent endowments.

Consider the particulars of it, he took on him the form of a servant; Was not
this a great humiliation? That the second person in the Trinity should stoop so
low as to take on him the nature of one who is not worth the looking on? that
he should take dust and ashes upon him. Psalm 113.5, 6. Gods greatness is thus
expressed, Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who
humbles himself to behold the things in heaven, and in the earth: What
Humiliation is that? compare these two humiliations together. It is but an
humiliation to cast but his eye upon the heavens, to look upon the most
glorious of all his works, to look upon the Angels but what is man that thou so
regardest him? that thou should not only look upon him, but take him up, and
make him an inmate under thine own roof? this is a greater abasement, but
here is a further degree, Christ during the time of his pilgrimage was content
to deprive himself of his Glory, that he now enjoyes, by reason of his
Hypostatical Union with the Godhead, he deserves all honor and glory, When he
brought his first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels
worship him. Heb. 1.6. Every knee bows to him that is thus highly exalted. We
see Christ crowned with glory and honor, all Dominion and Power being made
subject unto him, yet he for thirty three years and an half was content to be
exiled from his Fathers court. John 17.5. Glorify thou me with the glory I had
with thee before the world was; which is expounded in the Proverbs, where the
Wisdom of God was shown before the world was framed. Prove. 8.30. Then I was by
him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always
before him; this was the work before the foundation of the world which God was
doing, the Father was glorifying the Son, and the Son was glorifying the
Father. The Father took infinite delight in the Son, and the Son took infinite
delight in the Father, and the Holy Ghost in them both. To be deprived of such
a sight, and such a glory as this, and for thy sake to be banished from that
high Court; where not to enjoy that fullness of joy, was an emptying of himself:
yet all this he did for thee.

2. He minded not his own things, if he had, The second degree of his
humiliation, that he might become a servant.
he might have presently sat at Gods right hand, where is fullness of joy for
evermore: but his bowels yearned on us, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was found in shape of a man, that is, as an ordinary man: We know
what the nature of servitude is. Every man naturally desires liberty, but
Christ that he might make thee free, was content to be bound as an Apprentice,
and endure a servile estate. Christ both in respect of God and man took on him
the form of a servant.

1. For him to be Gods servant was an Humiliation, though for us it be the
greatest honor to be Gods servants. Saint Paul makes it his prime Epithet,
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ. And David calls himself the servant of the
Lord, O Lord I am thy servant, truly I am thy servant. But it was an
Humiliation for Christ to become Gods servant. For him who thought it no
robbery to be equal with God to become Gods servant, and to take a nature on
him, that he might say, My Father is greater then I; behold my Father and I
were one, but now taking on me a humane nature, I am made inferior to my
Father, I am become his servant: Behold my servant in whom I am well pleased;
Isa. 53. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: there is
much difference in servants. A free servant and a bond servant. A very bondman
does Christ make himself, being man, and accounts it as great honor as may be,
not only to be his Fathers servant, but his bondman. Can I show that there is
any such humiliation as this? Look on Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and burnt offerings
thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me, these words have relation
to that of the Psalmist, Psalm 40.6. Sacrifice and burnt offerings thou did
not desire, but mine ears have thou opened; it is in the margent, mine-ears
have thou dug, or have thou bored. The boring of the ear was an expression
of everlasting servitude. Another servant that had not yet his ear bored, might
be free at the year of Redemption, at the seventh year: but if not, his ear was
bored that he might be a servant for ever according to that, Exodus.. 21.4. He
that loved his service so well as to have his ear bored, is a servant for
evermore. Mine ear Lord have thou bored, I will be thy servant for ever. Christ
took on him the form of such a servant; nay, Christ was more then an ordinary
slave: he was one b^und to an everlasting slavery, for he was the Son of an
handmaid: Now the Children of an handmaid were not to go forth at the year of
Jubilee. Exodus 21. The wife and her Children shall be her Masters, and he shall
go out by himself: meaning thus, he that was the son of an handmaid, must be
bound. Partus sequiter ventrem. Now that Christ was the son of an handmaid, we
have Mary's own confession, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, and he has
looked upon the low estate of his handmaid, Luke 1. Hence David says, Psalm.
116.16. O Lord I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid: I am not only
thy servant, but thy bond-servant: I am he who was born in thy house: and out
of thy house I will never go. Thus is Christ a servant in respect of God.

But it is not only thus, he is not only a servant in regard of God, but he
took on him the form of a servant in respect of men too. Look what relations
are between men that have superiority, and Subjects, Christ, who was born a
free child, yet made himself a servant unto man: he had a reputed father, but a
true, and a natural mother: from the twelft year of his age till the thirtieth,
he went with them, and was subject unto them, Luke 2.51. No Apprentice was more
subject to his Master in his Trade, then he was to his reputed father; he kept
him close unto his Trade. Look on him out of the family, in the Commonwealth:
He paid Tribute. He might stand upon his privilege: Of whom do the Kings of
the earth exact Tribute? etc. they answer, Of strangers: Then are the Children
free. If the son of a temporary Prince be free, how much more shall the Son of
God be free? But yet it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness. He would be a
subject unto Caesar, and in recognition of his subjection he would pay Tribute,
though he fetched it out of the fishes belly. Hence the Apostle tells us, Romans
13. For this cause you pay Tribute to testify your subjection. Neither was
Christ only a servant to them who were in some Authority, but generally among
men he was in the state of a servant. Mat. 20.28. The son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. Not to
be a Master to command, and have others to attend him; but he came to be a
servant; see in what esteem he was had. We account a servant in the next degree
unto a beast; for liberty is that whereby a man bre^^hs, and a man were better
be dead, then have his liberty took from him; and so Christ was not only a
bondman in regard of h^s Father, Christ accounted as a b^ndman.
but in regard of men. In the estimation of men he was vilified for a bondman:
and that will appear by the price for which he was sold. It was thirty pieces
of silver. To consider what the price was, is a considerable part of his
passion. There is a Prophecy cited out of Jeremy in your books, but it is
Zachary, though I have seen some copies which mentioned neither, but only,
according to the words of the Prophet, it is Zach. 11.13. Cast it unto the
potter, a goodly price that I was prized at of them. He speaks it with disdain,
And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the
house of the Lord. Exodus 21.32. There is a place parallel to it, which will
expound it clearly, If an Ox shall push a manservant, or a maidservant that
he die, the Owner of the Ox shall give to the Master of the servant thirty
shekels, and the Ox shall be stoned. It was the very price that was paid for a
slave: Thirty shekels, which is 3 l. 15 s. in our money. A base estimation they
had of Christ, as if he were a bondman; the same price that was given for a
slave that was killed by an Ox, for this same price was he sold. In the second
book of Josephus, cap. 12. Exam. Joseph for the calcu. 14400000. drachms.
When Ptolomaeus Philadelphus would redeem all the Jews which were bondmen:
Its set down what he paid for a slave. There is set down a great sum of money,
and the number of the Which were, 120000.
slaves: Here stands the valuation, divide the number of Drachms by the number
of slaves, and you shall Have the quotient 120 Drachms. Four Drachms went to a
Shekel: so divide 120. by 4. your quotient is 30. shekels for each man, which
was the ordinary rate, etc.
find the quotient for every man 120 drachms; four Drachms make a shekel,
thirty shekels was the ordinary rate cried in the Market for the price of a
bondman. Thus Christ took on him the form of a bondman, not only Gods
bondman, but in the estimation of men so despicable, that they valued him at
no higher rate then thirty pieces of silver. This is but the beginning and
entrance on Christ's humiliation, to be made in the similitude of sinful flesh,
and in the verity of true flesh. Christ had all infirmities, as weariness,
hunger, thirst, which follow a sinful man, which were not sinful: such a
nature he took upon him, and then he became obedient both by active and passive
obedience. That which remains of the pains of his life to the passage of his
doleful death, we will speak of the next time.

FINIS.
PHIL. 2.8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross.
IN these words, and those that went before, you see there is delivered unto us
the point of the humiliation of the Son of God. It stands in this.

1. That he took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness
of man. God the Son, the second person in the Trinity did assume our dust and
ashes, unto the Unity of his own sacred person.

2. This humane nature being thus assumed, he was content to deprive himself a
long time of that beatifical vision, which he might have still enjoyed, and in
that time was as obedient, as the meanest and poorest servant of his Father.
Nor was he only actively, but passively obedient; He was obedient unto the
death: he was content to lay down his life for our Redemption. And it was not
every death that would serve the turn, but it must be the death of the Cross,
the most accursed, shameful and painful death, that death which was most
suitable, and best able to answer the wrath of God.

First, He humbled himself by taking our nature upon him: He that thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, took upon him the form of a man. If it were an
abasement for God to look upon heaven the most glorious of his works, how much
more to take upon him a clod, or piece of this earth, and unite it to his own
sacred person for ever. This was a descending indeed, he descended first that
he might ascend. Ephesians. 4.9. Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he
descended first into the lower parts of the earth? That is, he descended into
the womb of the Virgin; and it was a great abasement indeed for him thus to
descend: Wherefore the Psalmist speaking of the wonderful framing of the Babe
in the womb, says, Psalm, 139.15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I
was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. So
that we see God descended into the lowermost parts of the earth, and there was
he fashioned. A great humiliation it was for him to be thus enclosed. Thus did
he humble himself in taking our nature. Had he taken the form of a King upon
him, it h^d been a great humiliation; how much more, when he took on him the
form of a servant? He came not in state to be ministered unto, but to minister,
as we showed the last day. Nor was he only his Fathers servant, but a servant
of servants, Genesis 9.25.
and therein underwent Canaans curse: A servant of servants shall thou be. Our
Savior became such a servant. He which was the Author of freedom. John 8.26.
If the Son make you free, then are you free indeed. He, I say, who was the
Kings son and so the most free, the Author of it to all that enjoy any
spiritual freedom, became a servant, that we which were servants might be made
free.

But besides this, its added here, that he humbled himself. Having taken on him
the form of a servant, he humbled himself. Where we may observe what made the
suffering of our Savior so meritorious: It was because it was active, free and
voluntary. Our Passions are contrary to our Will: We are drawn to it, as it is
said of Peter, When thou art old, they shall lead thee whether thou would
not, John 21.18. Peter dyed the same death our Savior did, according to the
external Passion: but they led him whether he would not. Our Savior was an
Actor in it; Humbled himself. A bare suffering God regards not so much, but
when it is done willingly, and in obedience to God. And as he was obedient in
his death, so also in his other passions. John 13.21.
In the Gospel, according to St. John, whereas the Text reads, he was troubled;
the marginal note has it, (...), he troubled himself: he was the Author of his
own sufferings, John 10.17. He was not humbled as a mere patient; but he
humbled himself, and so it is said in Scripture often, He gave himself for us,
and in all his passive obedience he had an eye to do the Will of God. The merit
of his passive obedience arises from a mixture with his active. This was a
great part of his Priesthood, his humbling. And how does he take his
Priesthood upon him? it was by his Fathers call. He was called unto it as was
Aaron. Heb. 5.4. No man, says the Apostle, takes this honor upon him, but he
that is called. Now Christ being called to it, he did it to follow his call.
And thus he did it actively: it was not a bare suffering as those in hell
suffer, but according to his Fathers call. Observe, Heb. 10.9. That place taken
out of the Psalm, I am come to do thy Will O God, etc. What, was it only in his
active obedience? No, it was thy Will that he should suffer: as the words
following in the tenth verse import, By the which Will we are sanctified, and
by the body of Jesus Christ once offered: so that Christ offered up himself to
do his Fathers Will, so that his passive obedience was in his active. So John
10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may
take it up again; no man takes it from me, but I lay it down. Our Savior when
he laid down his life, put it off, as a man that puts off his cloak, and lays
it from him. They wondered that he was dead so soon, it was because himself laid
down his life. His soul then was not dragged or forced out of his body. It was
not only passive, but active obedience. No man takes it from me; I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it up. This had I from my Father. They
are grossly deceived then, that say Christ's active obedience was not free and
voluntary, because he was commanded: for as well may they say, his passive is
not voluntary, and so not meritorious, because it likewise was commanded, which
none can deny. Thus Christ's offering was a free will offering, though it was a
most bitter one; yet this being a part of his Fathers Will, he went as
voluntarily to the pains of the Cross, as thou do to thy dinner when thou art
thoroughly hungry. For his meat and his drink was to do his Fathers Will, Jo.
4.34. And this makes it of such worth and efficacy, that he did it willingly:
See it in the type that went before him, in Isaac; Isaac was grown up, he was
no Babe, he was able to carry wood enough to burn himself when he went to be
sacrificed, and therefore sure he had strength; if Isaac had pleased, he might
have ran away from the old man his Father; yet he suffers himself to be bound,
and to be laid upon the wood; a true type of our Savior, his also was a
free will offering, and so a sweet smelling sacrifice unto God. It being the
highest active obedience, it presently pacifieth the wrath of his Father. He
humbled himself, and became obedient. This obedience of our Savior is the
matter and ground of our Justification. Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one,
Judgment came on all unto condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the
free-gift came on all to Justification of life. Now this Obedience is two fold,
1. Active. 2. Passiv^.

By the obedience of this blessed Savior many are made righteous; so that now
our Saviors obedience follows next.

Now this obedience is double. Active or Passive.

1. Active, And this was that whereby he did all the Will of his Father. The
reason why he came into the world, if we look the place before alleged, will
appear, Heb. 10.5. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice
and burnt-offering thou would not have, but a body have thou prepared me. In
burnt offerings and Sacrifice for sin thou have no pleasure, then said I,
Behold I come, in the volum^ of thy book it is written of me that I should do
thy Will, O God. When he comes into the world, says he, Lo, I come, For what?
to do thy Will, O God. The reason why he came into the world, was, that he
might be obedient unto his Father. Thus it behooves us (says he to John) to
fulfill all Righteousness. John wondered that he that was pure and spotless,
should come to him to be baptized. He knew Baptism presupposed some sin or
blot, some stain or corruption to be washed off, and therefore its said. Mark
1.5. That there came unto him all the Land of Judea to be baptized, confessing
their sins. And sure if one should come to John, and say, he had no sin, and
yet desired to have been baptized by him, he had no right to Baptism: yet our
Savior says, Let alone, let it be so, that we may fulfill all Righteousness.
I have no need indeed in regard of my self: but I have taken upon me the form
of a servant, and therefore what the lowest of them must do, that must I do:
therefore was I circumcised, and therefore am I baptized. I came not to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill it. And he fulfilled it to the utmost, both in his
active and passive obedience.

Now for his active Obedience, it had a double (...), or consummatum est.
First, For his active Obedience in the whole course of his life. 1. For his
active obedience in the whole course of his life.


I have glorified thy name, and finished the work that thou gave me to do.
Would you know what it is to glorify God in this world? It is to finish the
work which he gives us to do. Art thou a Minister? 2. For his active Obedience
after his Death.
if thou would glorify God, finish the work he gave thee to do; then may
thou say, Glorify thou me with thy Glory, etc. But now Christ's work was not
^ll ended when he said, he had finished it; the greatest part was behind, to
wit, his Passive obedience: All the works of his life were done; of which
actions, there Christ is to be understood: but then comes his Passion, and
that being finished, there is something to do yet after that: for he was to
rise again to our Justification: but for the oblation of the sacrifice it was
fully finished. If we look upon our blessed Savior in the whole course of his
life. For,

1. Though he lived in a whole world of sin, yet he was free from all manner of
sin.

2. He was enriched with all manner of good works, graces and virtue. Chrst had
both of these. He was free from any spot of sin, though in the midst of a
wicked world: and there was nothing in him which could expose him to any
temptations. He was continually assaulted, and yet he was spotless. The Prince
of the world came, and yet he found nothing in him. Satan could find nothing in
him whereon to fasten any temptation. Such a Priest it became us to have, who
was holy and harmless. Heb. 7.16. Undefiled, separate from Sinners.

There is the purity of his nature, he is holy, and in his carriage, harmless;
he did no man hurt^ Undefiled, a pure, and innocent Lamb, a lamb without
blemish, separate from sinners, and could not contract any guilt of sin. Though
he conversed with Publicans and sinners at the Table, yet they could not infect
him. He knew no sin, neither was there guil^ found in him, 1 Pet. 1.19.
Therefore we see when it comes to the point that the Devil would tempt him, yet
he himself must needs say, What have I to do with thee thou holy one of God? He
is forced to acknowledge him to be so. And so if we look on the place, where he
says, I do the Will of my Father always, there likewise he shows himself the
holy one of God. In a word, as he was thus obedient unto God, so was he subject
to men too; to his Father in the family, and to Caesar in the Commonwealth: As
he t^ught, he did: subjection toward Governors was his Doctrine, and rather
then he would not pay Tribute, he would have it out of the fishes belly: To
show a Recognition of his subjection unto higher powers, the text tells us, He
went about doing good. This man, say they, has done all things well: and at
the last cast, when all the quarrels and Accusations were brought against him,
they could bring nothing that could hold water: that he could boldly challenge
them all, as it were, Which of you can accuse me of sin? You that pick so many
holes in my coat, come forth, spare me not, accuse me; yet at the last he is
accounted a just man. Judas himself could acknowledge him to be blameless, and
that he had sinned in betraying his innocent blood. Pilates wife could say to
her husband, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: and Pilate himself
washed his hands, and would be free from the blood of that innocent person. The
thief crucified with him, acquits him; his whole life was a perfect obedience
to the Law of God. Christ is the end of the Law that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, not by us, we are not able to fulfill the Law:
but in us, Christ did it for us; and the Father is better pleased with the
thirty three years hearty obedience of his Son, then if Adam, and all his
posterity had been obedient throughout the whole course of the world; So
acceptable was this obedience to God. And thus much of his active Obedience.

2. Now for his passive obedience, his suffering. If our Savior will be a
sacrifice, he must be used like one; he must be slain, if he will make
satisfaction to his Father for us. He must for our eating sower grapes, have
his own teeth set on edge. Consider his humiliation both in life and death; if
we look on the service of Jacob, under his Uncle Lakan, his service was an hard
service, twice se^en years did he serve the drought consumed him by day, and
the frost by night, and the sleep depar^ed from his eyes; twenty years hard
service; fo^rteen y^ars for his two wives, and six years for his cattle, G^n.
31.41. Our Savior spent thirty three years in ^is hard s^rvice; and full often
did the sleep depart from his eyes. When Israel came to appear before P^a^ao^;
My days, s^ith he, have been 130 years: few and e^il have the days of thy
servant been. The true Israelite might say more. Jacobs days were few, but as
few as they were, they were 130 years; but if we look upon our Saviors days,
they were scarce a quarter so many.

And that is a part of our Saviors humiliation, that he was cut off in the
mid^l of his days. If we look into the Psalm, we shall find it a curse on the
bloody and deceitful man, that he shall not li^e out half his days. The
livelie part of a man's age, (from Moses his time to this day, in that Psalm of
Moses, Psalm 90.) is ^hreescore years and ten; half this is thirty five years;
and our Savior is taken off before this thirty five is expired. He was to take
on him all the curses due to sinners, to the bloody and deceitful man: he is
cut off and cropped off in the midst of his vigor: he that is that Melchisedeck,
that has neither beginning, nor end of days, was cut off as a branch, lopt off
as a ^wig from the land of the li^ing, I^a. 53. He Is ^ul'd cut, so his days
were few, far fewer th^n Jacobs: he was not suffered to live out half his days:
yet if we look upon his days they were evil too: evil enough as few as they
were: full of trouble, and full of misery: from his first coming into the world
to his last going out.

1. When he did descend into the lowermost part of the earth, He was nine
months in the womb of his mother: and if we take the opinion of the Schoolmen,
he had his full understanding and Judgment all that time, the free use of
sense and reason, though I do not aver it to be a truth; only I say, if it be
so, it makes his humiliation insupportable. What an extreme burden would it be
to us to be so long in the womb, and in ripe understanding? therefore there was
somewhat in that: But now:

2. Look at his coming forth into the world: though his mother were in her own
City, yet he was so despicable, that there was not room for them in the Inn.
Our Savior, that should, one would think, have been brought into a stately
Palace, was fain to have his lodging among the beasts, and a Cratch for his
Cradle. The wise men when they came to worship him, found him in no better
case: and what a disgrace was it, instead of a Palace, the Kings of the East
should find our Savior in a Cratch.

3. And now when eight days are over, he must have his skin cut off, he must be
circumcised, and give the first payment or earnest of his blood. How painful
and irksom a thing Circumcision was, appears by that story in Genesis 34 where the
sons of Jacob offering the Shechemites the condition of Circumcision, and they
accepting it, it was so troublesome a thing, that by reason of their soreness
and weakness by it, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Le^i, slew a whole
City. The pain was so great that they could not manage their weapons, therefore
two men slew thousands of them. Our blessed Savior was thus served, when the
eight days were over he was thus made sore, and this was the first effusion of
his blood.

4. After the eight days are over, then come the forty days, and then he must
be carried a long journey to be offered up to the Lord, and his mother, as if
she had brought an unclean and impure thing into the world, must be cleansed
and purified. And then she came to offer a sacrifice according to the Law of
the Lord. Luke 2.24. A pair of turtle doves or two young Pigeons: But was this
the Law? it were good if the Law were looked into. See Levit. 12.8. The Law is
this, She shall bring a Lamb, or if she be not able to bring a Lamb, then two
Turtles, or two young Pigeons. If she be not able; but the margent has it, If
her hand cannot reach to a Lamb, if she be so poor that she cannot offer a
Lamb. As if the Text should have said, Alas poor woman, poor Lady, all she had
was not able to reach to a Lamb, so poor was she: Doubtless her heart was as
large as another but she was not able to offer a Lamb, and is therefore
content with two Turtles.

5. Hence we may conceive in what state our Savior lived till he came into the
Ministry: questionless in a poor house: and he made many a hungry m^al, when
his mother was not worth a Lamb. All that they had, must be by hard labor.

6. Now our Savior, notwithstanding after he had traveled that weary journey
to Jerusalem, must return again, and be subject to his Parents: but how? even
as a servant in his Trade. They had not bread to spare, but what was gotten by
hard laborious work. At his Fathers Trade, I say, for so its said of him, Is
not this the Carpenter? Its put in the nominative case, The Carpenter. Mark 6.
And whereas this is cast as a curse on our first parents, and their seed. Genesis
3.49. That in the sweat of their brows they should eat their bread. Our Savior
must undergo this curse too: he must work hard for his living: with his own
hands he must get a living for himself, and his poor mother by a laborious
Trade. No wonder if he went many a morning without his breakfast, and made
many a hungry meal, that lived in so poor a house, and by so poor a Trade.

7. If we come now to the time he lived after he came from his Father and
Mother, that same three years when he showed himself more publicly in the
world, and you shall find him subject to those dangers, di^ficulties and
distresses which accompany evil days. He was a Pilgrim, and had no abode. The
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air, nests, but the Son of man had not
where to lay his head. He was a diligent Preacher of the Gospel, although he
had neither Prebend, nor Parsonage; he had nothing of his own, but was relieved
often by the Charity of certain devout and religious women.

2. Besides all the reproaches that could be cast on a man, were laid on him;
This man is a Wine-bibber, and a Glutton; a friend of Publicans and sinners.
And again, Do we not say, well, thou art a Samaritan, that is, a Heretic? He
was a caster out of Devils; and therein they denied not, but he did good, but
see the villainy of it: he was a good witch, as we call them, and though he did
good, yet it was by the help of Belze^ub: when he drew near his death; see Mark
12. the Text says, They accuse him of many things. Few things are expressed,
yet a great many comprehended in these words: those that are expressed, are
heinous and notorious crimes. First, Against the first Table, they accuse him
of Blasphemy, and therefore condemn him in the Ecclesiastical Court: Do you
hear his Blasphemy? say they. Then against the second Table, they post him to
the civil Court, and there they lay to his charge high Treason against Caesar:
for he, say they, That makes himself a King, is an enemy unto Caesar; and yet
the innocent Lamb for all this opened not his mouth. Insomuch that Pilate
wondered he spoke not a word in his own defense; and the reason was, because he
came to suffer, and to have all these slanders and reproaches put upon him, not
to excuse himself.

3. He led a life subject to dangers, when he went amongst his own people, to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord, they bring him upon an high hill, to
the brow thereof, with a purpose to cast him down, and break his neck. Others
threaten to kill him too. The Devil here follows him with temptations, even to
Idolatry it self. Man. 4.6. The Devil himself tempts him forty days, and then
left him: not as if he would return and tempt him no more, but as St. Luke
renders it, The Devil left him for a season, Luke 4. not as if he intended to
leave him quite, but to come and try him again. The Scribes and Pharisees they
tempt him too, and prove him with hard questions, which if he could not answer,
they would proclaim him an insufficient man, and all the people would have
laughed him to scorn. Nor was this all his Ministry. All his life was as it
were paved with temptations, every step was as it were a gin and trap to
ensnare him.

4. Add to all this, that he was not like us, He knew when, and by what death
he should die: He knew in all the time of his suffering what he should suffer,
and what should come upon him at his death. If any of us should know that he
must die a cursed, shameful, and painful death, and knew when it should be,
it would mar all our mirth, and put us to our dumps in the midst of our
jollity. Our Savior in the midst of all his joy on earth, says, I have a
Baptism to be baptized with: he knew the cruel death which he should suffer on
the Cross. And how is he pained, till it be accomplished. The pains of it run
through all his life, and might well make his whole life uncomfortable unto
him. In the twelft of John 23. a little before the Passover, says he, The hour
is come that the Son of man shall be glorified: and then verse 27. Now is my
soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. When the
time was drawing nigh, some five or six days before, the consideration of it
troubled him, though he knew he should be glorified, yet the fright of it
enwrapt him with fear. Now is my soul troubled; what shall I say, Father, save
me from this hour. Such a kind of life did our Savior lead: few but evil were
his days. As evil as few, he had no comfort in them.

Come we now to the point of his death, the last thing; and those things that
did touch him therein, are the Curse, Shame, and pain of it. If there were any
death more accursed, he must die that death: If any death more shameful, or
more painful then other, he must die that. All these do concur in the death of
our Savior which he suffered, in that death of the Cross. It was the most
accursed, most shameful, and most painful death as could be devised.

First, For the Accursedness of it, there was no death that had a more peculiar
curse on it then this. Howsoever all deaths are accursed when they light on one
that is without Christ; but this death had a legal Curse: for as there was a
legal uncleanness, so there was a legal Curse, and this was the curse annexed
to the Cross; a type of that real Curse. Now the type of a real Curse, Was
hanging on the tree: Thou shall bury him that day, for he that is hanged on a
tree is accursed by God, Deuteronomy. 21.23. so the Son of God was made a Curse for
us, alluding unto this, Galat. And here we see the blessed Son of God, he in
whom all the Nations of the earth are blessed: the fountain of all blessedness:
We see him stand in so cursed a condition, to be made as it were as an
Anathema, the highest degree of cursing that may be.

Secondly, Consider the shame of it there is a place in the best of Orators
that expresses the destableness and shame of this death of the Cross. Facinus,
etc. see what a gradation there is, it is hardly to be expressed in English.
Its a great fault to bind a Citizen of Rome and a Gentleman, what is it to beat
him? what to crucify him? His Eloquence failed him there, as being not able to
express the detestableness of it, and therefore the chief Captain was afraid
that he had bound Paul, after he had heard he was a freeman of Rome, but then
its worse to beat him; but what was it to crucify him? Our blessed Savior
went through all these indignities. First they come against him with swords and
with staves, as against a thief. They sold him for a base price. They beat him
with rods, pricked him, and after all, they crucified him. Consider then the
shame of it: he that was to be crucified, was stripped naked, as naked as ever
he came out of his mothers womb: However the Painters may lie in it. And was
not this a shame thus to be stripped before thousands? Wherefore it was a
custom among the Romans, that the greatest King, if he were baptized, was to
be stripped naked, which they did as a memorial of the shame of our Savior. So
shameful a thing it was that they thought him unworthy to suffer within the
walls. Christ that he might sanctify the people, suffered without the walls.
Let us go with him out of the Camp bearing our reproach. He was as a man unfit
to suffer within the walls. Pilate thought he would meet with them when they
were so violent to have him crucified, and therefore he joins Barabbas with
him, the vilest thief in the Country, and a Murderer: so that Peter cast this
in their teeth, That they preferred a Murderer before him. He was reckoned
with the Transgressors, as it was prophesied of him before. Isa. 53. They
crucify him between two thieves, as if he had been the Captain of them.

Thirdly, Consider the Pain of the Cross, whom God raised up, having loosed the
sorrows of death: not meaning there were sorrows that Christ endured after his
death, but its meant of the sorrows that accompanied his death. It was the most
dolorous death that ever could be endured. We scarce know what Crucifying is.
The Christian Emperors in honor of our Savior banished that kind of
suffering, that none after him might suffer it: but yet it is fit we should
know what it was, since it was so terrible a thing. And here, as the Apostle
said to the Galathians, Suppose you see Christ crucified before your face at
present. The manner of it was thus.

First there was a long beam, on which the party was to be stretched, and there
was a cross-beam on which the hands were to be stretched: they pulled them up
upon the Cross before they fastened them; they pulled him to his utmost length.
And this is that the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 22.17. You might tell all my
bones. His ribs were so stretched, as that they even pierced the flesh:
Conceive him now thus stretched with his hands and feet nailed to the wood: the
stretching of Christ on the Cross, was such a thing as the working of the
rack. Imagine him before your eyes thus represented. Your sins crucified him:
being thus stretched upon the Cross to his full length, the hands and the feet
were fastened and nailed to the wood. Its no small torment to have the hands
bored, especially if we behold the place, it was through the lower part of the
hand where the veins and sinnews all met together: It Is a place that is full of
sense, Consider withal the bigness of the nails: Psalm. 22. They have dug my
hands to show the bigness of the spikes: for the original bears it, They dig'd
him. Believe not the paynters: Our Savior had four nails: Not one through
both feet as they describe it, but two through his hands, and two through his
feet: And that you may the better comprehend it, you must know that toward the
lower part of the cross, there went along a ledge or thre-shold whereto his
feet were nayld, otherwise the flesh would have rent by reason of the nails, if
he had hung by the hands alone.

Then comes the lifting up; as the serpent was lift up, so must Christ be lift.
As when a man is stretched to the full length, and should be with a girk put
up; its like a strapado, as it were the unjoynting of a man; and this is that
the Psalmist speaks of, All my bones are out of joint. Consider withal the time
how long it was. St. Mark says, cap. 15.25. It was the third hour, and they
crucified him. In St. John it is the sixth hour, but the ancient and best Copies
have the third hour, and so has Nonus. The ninth hour he gave up the Ghost: so
that it was six long hours by the clock that our Savior did hang upon the
Cross. And it was not with him as with other men, in whom extremity of pains
disanul sense, and blunts pains, because they have not a perfect apprehension;
but Christ was in his perfect sense all the while. All that the Jews could do,
could not take away his life from him, till he would himself: and therefore it
is said in Mark, That immediately before he gave up the Ghost, that he cried
with a loud voice, whereas others are wont at that time to be so weak that they
can scarce be heard to groan: but never was Christ stronger, nor never cried
louder, than when he gave up the Ghost, Mark 15.35. this of it self made the
Centurion as soon as he heard it, conclude, certainly this man was the Son of
God. How does he gather this from his crying? thus; For a man to be in his full
strength, and cry out so strongly, and immediately to give up the Ghost, this
is a great Miracle: Truly this man was the Son of God. This adds unto the
greatness of his torment, that he had his full and perfect sense: that he was
six full hours thus on the Rack, and the extremity of pain took not away his
sense. He was as strong at the last, as at the first.

These things seriously weighed, Oh! how do they aggravate the depth of his
humiliation? Seriously weigh them: they are miserable, and lamentable matters;
yet in these lie our comfort. Through these words is there a passage open for
us into the Kingdom of Heaven: When he had overcome the terrors of death, he
opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers: these were now but the outside
of his sufferings which did belong to man for his sins. He suffered not only
bodily sufferings, but sufferings in soul, and that he did in a most unknown
and incomprehensible manner; But now may some say,

Object. Did Christ suffer the pains and torments of Hell?

Sol. No, He suffered those things that such an innocent Lamb might suffer, but
he could not suffer the pains of Hell. The reason is, because, one thing which
makes Hell to be Hell, is the gnawing worm of an accusing conscience. Now
Christ had no such worm. He had so clear a conscience, as that he could not be
stung with any such evil.

Another great torment in Hell is Desperation, arising from the appprehension
of the perpetuity of their torments, which makes them curse and blaspheme God,
and carry an inexpressible hatred against him; but Christ could not do so; he
could not hate God: God forbid that Christ should be liable to these Passions.

But it is certain God the Father made an immediate impression of pains upon
his soul; his soul did immediately suffer: Look on him in the Garden, he was
not yet touched, nor troubled by men, and yet he fell in a sweat: Consider the
season of the year; this was then when they that were within doors were glad to
keep close by the fire, he thus did sweat in the garden, when others freez'd
within; this was much: but to sweat blood, thick blood, clotted, congealed
blood (for so the words will bear it) not like that in his veins: and yet it
came through his garments, and fell to the ground: this is a thing not to be
comprehended. Our blessed Saviors encountering with his Father, he falls a
trembling, and is overwhelmed as it were with the wrath, beseeching God
intensively, saying Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; thou
may give free pardon: which affections in Christ are such a thing, as pussels
us all: we must not say Christ did forget for what he came: but he did not
remember: these words proceeded from the seat of passion, which while it is
disturbed, reason suspends its Acts. Christ had Passions, though no impurity in
them. As take a clean Vial full of pure water from the fountain, and shake it,
it may be frothy, yet it will be clean water still. Christ did not forget only
he had the suspension of his faculties for a time. As a man in a sleep thinks
not what he is to do in the morning, and yet he is not said properly to forget.
He cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He was contented to be
forsaken for a time, that thou mighst not be forsaken everlastingly, and this
was no faint prayer: if you read the place in the Psalm, He cried out unto God:
And Heb. 5.7. Its said, Who in the days of his flesh when he had offered up
prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears. He cried to the
Almighty: he made Gods own heart to pity: He would break, Isa. 53. yet his
heart is repenting, and rolled together, so that he sent an Angel to support
and comfort him. Psalm. 27. those strong cries are expressed with a more
forcible word, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, why art thou so far
from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? Consider how it was with
Christ before any earthly hand had touched him, when he beseeched God for his
life: this shows the wonderful suffering of Christ; and for that point, Why
have thou forsaken me? Consider it was not with Christ as with the Fathers,
they suffered a great deal of punishment and taches, and would not be
delivered, yet Christ was more courageous then they all. He had a spirit of
fortitude, he was anointed above his fellows, and yet he quivers. Our Fathers
cried unto thee, they trusted in thee, and were not consumed; they were
delivered: but I am a worm, and no man. I can find no shadow of comfort. Lord,
Why art thou so angry with me? this speech came not from the upper part of the
soul, the seat of reason, but from the lower part, the seat of Passion: My God,
my God, these were not words of desperation. He held fast to God; Why have thou
forsaken me? these are words of sense: thus you see the price is paid, and what
a bitter thing sin is. God will not suffer his Justice to be swallowed up by
Mercy. It must be satisfied; and our Saviovr, if he will be a Mediator, must
make payment to the uttermost farthing: Consider what a time this was when our
Savior suffered: The Sun with-draws her beams, the earth shakes and trembles:
What aileth thee, O thou Sun to be darkn^d, and thou earth to tremble? was it
not to show his mourning for the death of its Maker? The soul of Christ was
dark within, and its fit that all the world should be hung in black for the
death of the King of Kings. But mark, when he comes to deliver up his life, and
to give up the Ghost, the vail of the Temple rent in twain, and that was the
ninth hour; which in the Acts is called the hour of prayer; it was at three a
Clock in the afternoon. Hence it is said, Let the lifting up of my hands be as
the evening sacrifice. The Priest was killing the Lamb at that time, there was
a vail that severed the Holy of Holies, it was between the place of oblations,
nnd the Holy of holies, which signifies the Kingdom of Heaven. As Soon as Christ
died, the vail rent, and Heaven was open, the Priest saw that which was before
hidden. Our Savior, says the Apostle, entered through the vail of his flesh
unto his Father, and fit it was, that the Vail should give place when Christ
comes to enter: But what becomes of Christ's foul now? his soul and body were
pulled assunder, and through the vail of his flesh, as it were with blood
about his ears he entered the Holy of Holies unto God, saying, Lord, here am I
in my blood; and here is blood that speaks better things then the blood of
Abel, that cries for vengeance, this for blessing and expiation of our sins.

FINIS.
JOHN 1.12. But to as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
HHaving heretofore declared unto you the woeful estate and condition wherein
we stand by nature, I proceeded to the Remedy, that God of his infinite Mercy
has provided for the recovery of miserable sinners from the wrath to come. And
therein I proposed two things, that our Savior that was to advance us, and
raise us out of this condition, when we had lost our selves in Adam; We having
eaten sour grapes, he was to have his teeth set on edge; we accounted him
smitten of God, and buffeted; but we had sinned, and he was beaten. That when
the Lord in his wrath was ready to smite us, he underwent the dint of Gods
sword, and stood betwixt the blow and us; the blow lighted on him that was
equal with God, and deserved not to be beaten. Awake O sword against my
shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow. The sword was unwilling to
strike him; and thus being smitten he became a propitiation for our sins: The
chastisement of our peace was on him. He offered himself a sacrifice: Here are
two things considerable; 1. How Christ was offered for us. 2. How he is offered
to us.


First, For us, and so he offered up himself a Sacrifice, a sweet smelling
Sacrifice unto God. Mark the point is, he is not only the Sacrifice, but the
Sacrificer. He offered up himself, says the Apostle; He was the Priest, and it
was a part of Priesthood to offer up himself. The Sacrifices in the old Law
that typified him, were only sufferers. The poor beasts were only passive: but
our Savior he must be an Actor in the business. He was active in all that he
suffered: He did it in obedience to his Fathers Will, yet he was an Agent in
all his Passion. John 11.33. He groaned in Spirit, and was troubled; the Greek
is (...), or (as it is in the Margent) He troubled himself. With us in our
Passions it is otherwise: we are mere sufferers. Our Savior was a Conqueror
over all his passions, and therefore unless he would trouble himself, none else
could trouble him: unless he would lay down his life, none could take it from
him; unless he would give his cheek to be smitten, the Jews had no power to
smite it. Isa. 50.6. I gave my back to the Smiters, and my cheek to them that
plucked off the hair, and hid not my face from shame and spitting. In all these
we should consider our Savior, not as a Sacrifice only, but a sacrificer also;
an Actor in all this business: their wicked hands were not more ready to smite,
then he was to give his face to be smitten, and all to show that it was a
voluntary Sacrifice. He did all himself; He humbled himself unto the death. And
now by all this we see what we have gotten: we have gotten a Remedy and
satisfaction for our sins. That precious blood of that immaculate Lamb takes
away the sins of the world, because it is the Lamb of God, under which else
the World would have eternally groaned.

Object. But does this Lamb of God take away all the sins of the world?

Sol. It does not actually take away all the sins of the world, but
virtually, It has power to do it, if it be rightly applied, the Sacrifice
has such virtue in it, that if all the World vvovld take it, and apply it, it
would satisfy for the sins of the whole World: but it is here, as with
medicines, they do not help, being prepared, but being applied; Rhubarb purges
choler, yet not unless applied, etc. Exodus 39.38. there is mention made of a
Golden Altar. Christ is this Golden Altar, to show that his blood is most
precious: We are not redeemed with silver and gold, but with the precious blood
of Jesus Christ. He is that golden Altar mentioned in the Revelation, which
stands before the Throne. He was likewise to be a brazen Altar; for so much
was to be put upon him, that unless he were of brass, and had infinite
strength, he would have sunk under the burden. Its Jobs Metaphor: Job in his
passion says, Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh brass? Job
6.12. If Christ's flesh had not been brass: if he had not been this brazen
Altar, he could never have gone through these: now he is prepared for us a
sacrifice for sin. Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, (for sin) make a stop there, condemned sin in the flesh. This same (
for sin) has not reference to ( condemned) To condemn sin for sin is not good
sense; but the words depend on this ( God sent his Son) that is, God sent his
Son to be a Sacrifice for sin, (...), as the word is translated. Heb. 10.6. a
sacrifice for sin. It was impossible the Law should save us: not because of any
transgression, or failing in the Law, but because our weakness is such, as that
we could not perform the conditions: therefore God was not tied to Promises; by
reason then of the weakness of our flesh, rather then we should perish, God
sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and in that flesh of his,
condemned all our sins; we need not look that sin should be condemned in us,
when he bare our sins on the tree, then were our sins condemned; therefore its
said, Isa. 53. When he had made his soul an offering for sin: that is in the
Original (when he had made his soul, sin) then he saw his seed, Isa. 57.

We come now to the second thing, if Christ be offered for us, yet unless he
offer himself to us: unless any man may have interest in him, its nothing
worth. Here then stands the Mystery of the Gospel, Christ when he comes to
offer himself to us, he finds not a whit in us that is to be respected;
nothing. And that is the ground of all disturbance to ignorant consciences; for
there is naturally in men pride and ignorance, they think they may not meddle
with Christ, with Gods Mercy; unless they bring something, unless they have
something of their own to lay down. This is to buy Christ, to barter betwixt
Christ and the soul: but salvation is a free gift of God. As the Apostle
speaks, Christ is freely given unto thee, when thou had nothing of worth in
thee. Faith when it comes, empties thee of all that is in thee: To whom be the
Gospel preached? to the dead. Now before Christ quicken thee, thou art stark
dead, rotting in thy sins. Here Is the point then, when there is no manner of
goodness in thee in the world. In me, says St. Paul, that is, in my flesh
there is no good thing. When I have been the most outrageous sinner, I may lay
hold on Christ. Christ comes and offers himself to thee.

Now when Christ offers, the other part of the relation holds, we may take. We
have an interest to accept what he proffers. Consider it by an example: If one
give me a million, and I receive it not, I am never the richer: and so if God
offer me his Son, and with him all things, I am nothing the better, if I
receive him not. That he is born and given, what is that to us? unless we can
say, To us a child is born, to us a Son is given, Isa. 9.6. Faith comes with a
naked hand to receive that which is given; we must empty our selves of what is
in us. Consider thy estate, the Lord sets down how it is with us, when he comes
to look upon us. Ezekiel. 16.6. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted
in thy blood, I said unto thee, when thou were in thy blood, live. Why is this
set down? Its to show how God finds nothing in us when he comes to show Mercy.
He finds nothing in us that is lovely; when he comes to bestow his Son upon us.
For its said, Rev. 1.5, That Christ loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood. He does first cast his love upon us when we are unwasht, as I
may say unwasht and unblest: When no eye pitied thee, and thou wast cast out
in the open field; when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, live; when he
comes to m^king up of the match, verse 9. Then I washed thee with water, yea, I
thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil: I
clothed thee also with embroydered work, and shod thee with badgers skins, etc.
that is, when Christ comes to cast his affections on us, and to wed us unto
himself, he finds us polluted, not with a rag on us. Full of filth, just
nothing have we, he takes us with nothing; nay, we are worse then nothing: so
that here is the point, what ground is there whereby a man that is dead, and
has no goodness in him, (make him as ill as can be imagined,) what ground has
he to receive Christ? Yes, To as many as received him, to them he gave the
power to become the sons of God. First, The receiving of Christ, and then comes
Believing. It is the receiving of this gift, that is the means whereby Christ
is offered to us. The Apostle joining the first and second Adam together, makes
the benefit we have by the second to lie in the point of receiving. Romans 5.

Object. If it be a free gift why is faith required?

Sol. Because faith takes away nothing from the gift. If a man give a beggar an
Alms, and he reach out his hand to receive it, his reaching out the hand makes
the gift never the less, because the hand is not a worker, but an instrument
in receiving the free gift. Romans 5.15. If through the offense of one many be
dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace has abounded unto many
in Jesus Christ. And verse 17. If by one man's offense death reigned by one,
much more they that receive abundance of grace shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ: here is the point then, God is well-pleased, and therefore sends to us.
Will thou have my Son? with him thou shall have abundance of Grace, and
everlasting life, and my love too. There Is no Creature in this place, but this
shall be made good unto, if he can find in his heart to take Christ; thou shall
have a warrant to receive him. Now to receive Christ, is to believe in his
name, and to draw near unto him (The word Recei^ing) is a t^king with the hand
with free entertainment; as verse 11. immediately before the Text. Its not so
properly Receiving as Entertaining. He came to his own, and his own received
him not; they were like the foolish Gaderens, that preferred their pigs before
Christ; they would rather have his room then his company: and so when Christ
comes, and thou had rather be a freeman, as thou think, and wilt not have
him to reign over thee, then thy case is lamentable: Then self-will, self-have.
The only point is, whether we come to Christ, or he come to us, there is a
drawing near. If thou come to Christ he will not put thee back; if Christ
come to thee by any good motion, if thou shut not the door against him, thou
shall not miss him. Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, If any man
here my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and sup with him,
and he with me. The Lord by the knock of his mouth, by the sword that comes out
of his mouth, would fain come in, and be familiar with thee, and be friends
with thee. If thou will not let him in, is it not good reason that (as in the
Canticles) he withdraw himself? If he see thy sins, and would fain come in,
what an encouragement have thou to open? John 6.37. He that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out. Can thou have a better word from thy Prince then
this? When he holds out his golden Scepter, if thou take hold on it, thou
art safe, otherwise thou art a dead man: thou can not have a greater
security, all the point is, Faith is a drawing near unto Christ, and Unbelief
is a going from him. The Gospel is preached to those that are a far off, and to
those that are near. Ephesians. 2.17. He came and preached peace to you that are a
far off, and to them that are nigh. Who were they that were a far off? they
were those that had uncircumcision in the flesh, without Christ, Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, (...), those that had no hope; to these Christ came,
these that were a far off, by faith drew near: that expression is a singular
one. Heb. 10.38. Now the just shall live by faith; What is that? but if any man
draw back, that is, if any man be an Unbeliever, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him. Faith makes a man come, and draw near to Christ. Its a shamefast
bashfulness that makes a man draw back; its unbelief, if any draw back, and to
believe is to go on with boldness; We are not of them which draw back unto
perdition, but of them, etc. What an excellent encouragement is this, to come
with boldness unto the Throne of Grace* that we may find help in time of need?
So that now let thy estate be what it will: if thou will not hold off, but do
entertain Christ, though thy sins be as red as scarlet, be not discouraged,
they shall be made as white as wool. The very sinner against the Holy Ghost is
invited; and why is that unpardonable? Can any sin be so great as to overtop
the value of Christ's blood? there is not so much wretchedness in the heart of
man, as there is Grace, Goodness and Merit in Christ; but then it is
unpardonable, Why? because its the nature of the disease that will not suffer
the plaster to stick on. It counts the blood of the Covenant, wherewith we
should be sanctified, an unholy thing: if this sinner would not pluck off the
plaster, and tread it under foot, he should be saved; but this is it when God
is liberal, and Christ is free, we have not the heart to take him at his word,
and come, to open this Word, this is the point of all, this is the free
preaching of the Gospel indeed, when a man has nothing desirable in him, but
is stark naught, and stark dead, and is not worth the taking up; that yet he
may challenge Christ, and be sure of all. Unless thou have Christ thou have
nothing by Promise, not so much as a bit of bread by Promise; if thou have it,
it is by Providence. All the Promises of God are in him, that is, Christ, yea,
and Amen: Ye are the Children of the Promise in Christ, but you have nothing
till you be in Christ.

The Question is, What must I do in this case, what encouragement shall I have
in my rags? when I am abominable, worth nothing.

There are certain things that are preparations to a Promise, such as are
Commands, Precepts, Entreaties, which encourage them to it, and then comes a
proposition: I being a Believer shall have eternal life; If Christ be mine, I
may challenge forgiveness of sins, the favor of God, and everlasting life: But
how is Faith wrought? believe not that foolish conceit that is too common in
the world, that faith is only, a strong persuasion that God is my God, and my
sins are forgiven: this is a foolish thing, a fancy; a dream, unless it be
grounded on the Word of God. Its but a dream, else that will lead thee unto a
fools Paradise: Nothing can uphold faith but the Word of God: here is the point,
I being as bad as bad can be, what ground have I out of the word of God, of an
Unbeliever to be made a Believer? Now we must not take every Text, but such
only as may be appliable to a dead man, one that has no goodness in him, that
is yet out of Christ: we were all swimming at liberty till this word catched us
in: we never thought of the business before, till we were thus taken. Now there
are certain degrees to get faith in us.

1. The first word is a general proclamation; whereby Christ gives any one
leave to come and take him. Christ is not only a Fountain sealed, as in the
Canticles, but a Fountain open for sin and for uncleanness, as in Zachary: so
that now when he keeps open house, he makes proclamation, that none shall be
shut out. He puts none back; sins, not the greatest that can be, can keep thee
back: this is the first thing, and to confirm it, we have our Saviors own
proclamation. Isa. 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsts, come you to the waters,
and he that has no money, come, buy, and eat: yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money, and without a price. A strange contradiction, one would think;
What! buy, and yet without money, and without price. The reason is, because
there is a certain thing which fools esteem, a price which is none. Rev. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire: Why? How must this be done?
Truly thus; whenever a sinner comes to Christ to have his sins pardoned, and
to be a subject of Christ's Kingdom, thou must not then be as thou wast, but
thou must be changed. Thou must not live as thou did before in the state of
rebellion. Now to leave sin is not worth a rush, its not a sufficient price;
but yet we see a fool will esteem his own bables: I must lay down my lusts, I
must lay down my covetousness, intemperance, etc. and a man thinks it a great
matter thus to do: and to leave the freedom he had before, though it be a
matter of nothing. When a rebel receives his pardon, is the Kings pardon
abridged, because he must live like a subject hereafter? Why should he else
seek for the benefit of a subject? This is said in respect of the foolish
conceit of man, who thinks it a great price to forsake his corruptions. Again,
John 7.37. with the same loud voice, Christ cried when he offered himself a
Sacrifice for sin: he cried at the time of the great feast, that all should
come. In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood, and cried,
saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. In ult. Rev. there
is a quicunque vult, that is it I pressed: Its a place worth gold. And these
are the places which being applied, make you of strangers draw near: but now
these are not appliable to a man before he has grace: every one cannot apply
them. Never forget that place while you live: its the close of Gods H. Book,
and the sealing up of his Holy Book: What Is that? Its in Rev. 22.17. And the
Spirit and the Bride, say, come, and let him that is a thirsty come, and drink
of the water of life freely. Whosoever will let him come, what would thou
have more? Have thou no Will to Christ? No Will to salvation? then its pity
thou should be saved. No man can be saved against his Will, nor blessed
against his Will: If thou will not have Christ, if thou will try conclusions
with God, then go further, and fare worse: but whosoever will, let him come.
Oh! But I have a Will: Why, then thou have a warrant, take Christ:

Object. But O Sir, you are a great Patron of freewill: What? does it all lie
in a man's Will: Will you make the matter of taking Christ lie there?

Sol. I say, if thou see thou have a Will, then thou have a warrant: I say,
not that this Will comes from thy self. Its not a blind faith will do thee
good; the Word of God works faith in thee; thou have not a Will to it born in
thee. It is not a flower that grows in thine own Garden; but is planted by God:
John 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw
him. What? Will Christ offer violence to the Will, and draw a man against his
Will? No, there is no such meaning. Its expounded in the 65. verse, No man can
come unto me, except it were given him of my Father. By this Christ shows
what he meant. If thou have a Will to come, thank the Father for it; for of
Him, as in the Philippians, we have both the Will and the deed. Take for
example that general proclamation in the book of Ezra, Whatever Jew would
might be free, Ezra 1.3. So said the King that had power to make them free, Who
is there among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build the house of the God of Israel. Then we
read, verse 5. Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and
the Priest, and the Levites, and all them whom the Spirit of God had raised up
to go up. Observe here, though the proclamation were general, yet the raising
up of the Will was from the Spirit of the Lord. We must not by any means take
our will for a ground; the Will comes from God: but if thou have a Will, thou
have a warrant. Who ever will let him take the water of life freely without
covenanting: say if thou had but a measure of faith, and such a measure of
humiliation; for that were to compound with Christ: away with that, Whosoever
will, let him come. Christ keeps open house, Whosoever will, let him come:
whosoever comes to him, he will not shut out. John 6. If thou have a heart to
come to him, he has a willing heart to receive thee; as it was with the
Prodigal son, the Father stays not till he comes to him, but runs to meet him:
he is swift to show Mercy, and to meet us, though we come slowly on toward
him. But this is not all, there is a second gracious Word that is preached to a
man, not yet in the state of Grace. A man that keeps open house, he seldom
invites any particularly, but if he come, he shall be welcome. Christ he keeps
open house, but some are so fearful, and so modest, that unless they have a
special invitation, they are ashamed to come to Christ; they reason thus, if my
case were an ordinary man's, I should come, but I am so vile and wretched, that
I am ashamed to come; my sins have been so many, and so heavy, that I am not
able to bear so great a weight, they are more in number then the hairs of my
head; and yet alas they are crying ones too: But hearken here a second word;
Do thou think thy case more heavy because thou art out of measure sinful.
Lo, it pleases God to send thee a special invitation, who find thy self
discouraged with the great bulk and burden of thy sins. It pleases God, I
say, to send thee a special invitation. See Mat. 11.28. Though all apply it not
to this use, Come unto me all you that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. You of all others, are they that Christ looks for. Those that
can walk bolt upright in their sins, that desire to live and die in them: they
will not look upon me, and I will not look upon them; they scorn me, and I
scorn them: but you that are heavy laden, and feel the burden of your sins,
are invited by Christ. Let not Satan then cousen you of the comfort of this
word; that which Christ makes the latch to open the door to let himself in, we
do usually by our foolishness make the bolt to shut him out. Let thy wound be
never so great, thou have a warrant to come, and be cured: be of good comfort
then, as it was said to blind Bartemeus, so is it to thee, Lo, he calls
thee. When Christ bids thee come, and gives thee his Word that he will heal
thee, Come, let not the Devil or thy corruptions hinder thee, or make thee stay
back: have thee to this City of Refuge: he has engaged his Word for thee, and
he will ease thee: But now after all this there is a

Third Word, that though Christ keeps open house, so that who will, may freely
come, and though he sends special invitations to them that are most bashful,
because their case is extraordinary: What do you think now, that Christ will
come with his soldiers, and destroy those that do not come in? He might do it
when he is so free, and invites thee, and thou turnest it back again into his
hand: but yet here is another Word of comfort, Christ does not only send a
Messenger to invite thee, who have no goodness in thee, but he falls to
beseeching and entreating thee, and that is a third word whereby faith is
wrought in an Unbeliever. 2 Cor. 5.10. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us; observe the place, We pray you in Christ's
stead be reconciled unto God. This is the most admirable word that ever could
be spoken unto a sinner: Alas! thou may say, I am afraid that God will not be
friends with me; why? he would have thee to be friends with him; do not then
with the Papists make such an austere God, as though he might not be spoken
unto, as though thou might not presume thy self, but must make friends unto
him. We have not an high Priest that is not touched with our infirmities. Will
the Papists tell me, I am bold if I go to God, or lay hands on Chrst? I am not
more bold then welcome. Let us go with boldness to the Throne of grace. We are
commanded to do it: do not think but that he had bowels to weep over Jerusalam,
and he carried the same with him into heaven, when thou lie groaning before
him, he will not spurn thee. We pray you, and beseech you to be friends;
therefore in this case make no doubt, its Gods good pleasure to entreat thee,
and therefore thou have warrant enough. Christ wept over Jerusalem, and he is
as ready to embrace thee. You have now three words to make a man of an
Unbeliever, a Believer: Is there, or can there be more then these? Open
housekeeping, special invitations, Entreaties and Beseechings? yet there is
more then all this; which if thou have not a heart of stone, it will make thee
believe, or make thee rue it. And that is,

4. When God sees all these things will not work with us, but we are slow of
heart to believe, then he quickens us; and there comes a word of Command. God
charge, and commands thee to come; and then if thou breakest his Command, be
it to thy peril. It is the greatest sin that can be committed. Thou will not
draw near to God because thou art a sinner: thou now committest a greater sin
then before: thou returnest back, Christ unto God: thou bidst him take his
commodity into his hand again: thou will not believe: and this is an heinous
crime. John 16.8, 9. And when the Spirit shall come, it shall reprove the world
of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because they believe not in
me: this is that great sin he shall convince the world of, because they believe
not in him. Of all sins, this was the most notorious: this makes us keep all
other sins in possession: It is not only one particular sin, but it fastens all
other sins upon us, be they never so many. When faith comes, it will out them,
but till then they remain in thee; where there is no Commandment there is no
sin. How could it be a sin in not believing, if I were not commanded so to do:
but you shall here more then so. When the Apostle speaks of excluding Rejoicing
under the Law; Romans 3.37. Where is boasting, then says he, it is excluded: By
what Law? by the Law of works? No, but by the Law of faith: there is a Law of
works, and a Law of faith. God does not only give thee leave to come, and take
him, and draw near unto him: but he commands thee, there is a Law: by the breach
of that Law of faith thou art made guilty of a high sin. There Is a full
testimony of this. 1 John 3.23. And this is the Commandment, that we should
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. If a man should ask, may I love my
Neighbor? would you not think him a fool? because he must do it, he is
commanded. So should a poor soul come, and say to me, may I believe? thou fool,
thou must believe. God has laid a Command upon thee, it is not left to thy
choice: The same Commandment that bids thee love thy brother, bids thee to
believe on Christ. To entreaty is added Gods Command, and therefore if thou
shall argue, what warrant have I to believe? Why, God injoyns it thee, and
commands it. As the impotent man said, so may thou; He that healed me, said
unto me, take up thy bed, and walk: This is the very Key of the Gospel, and
this is the way to turn it right. When being thus clean n^ked, we have as it
were a Cable put into our hands to draw our selves out of this flesh and blood.

5. The last thing is, if keeping open house, special Invitations, Entreaties
and Commands will not serve the turn, then Christ waxes angry: What, to be
scorned, when he profer'd Mercy, and as it were invite all sorts, and compel
them to come in by his Preachers, and by a peremptory Command? Then he falls a
threatening, We are not of those which draw back unto perdition; if thou will
not come upon this Command, thou shall be damned. Mar. 16.16. He that believed
not, shall be damned. Christ commands them to go into the world, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature, unto every soul this Gospel which I speak: If you
will not hear, and believe, if you will not take God at his Word, you shall be
damned. John 3. He that believes not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him. Here Is an Iron scourge to drive thee, thou that art so flow of
heart to believe. In Psalm 78. where is set down Gods Mercy unto the
Is^aelites: afterward comes one plague upon another; verse 22. it is said,
They hardened their hearts as in the day of provocation. This is applied in
Heb. 3.12. to Unbelievers. The Lord heard this, and was wrath, a fire was
kindled against Jacob, and against Israel. Why was this? because they believed
not in him, because they trusted not in his salvation. Nothing will more
provoke God to anger, then when he is liberal and gracious, and we are
straightened in our selves, hearden our hearts, and not trust him: never forget
this Sermon while you live, this is the net which Christ has to draw you out
of the world. I shall hereafter tell you what faith is, which is to receive
Christ, and to believe in his name; but that will require a more particular
explication: and on that I shall enter the next time.

FINIS.
EPHE. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of truth, the
Gospel of your salvation; In whom also after you believed, you were sealed with
the Holy Spirit of Promise.
THE last time I entered on the declaration of that main point, and part of
Religion, which is the foundation of all our hopes and comfort, namely, the
offering of Christ unto us; that as he did offer himself a Sacrifice to his
Father for us upon the Cross, so that which is the basis, ground and foundation
of our comfort, he offers himself unto us. And here comes in that gracious
gift of the Father which closes in with God: That as God says, To us a child
is born, to us a Son is given, etc. so there is grace given us to receive him.
And as the greatest gift does not enrich a man, unless he accept it, and
receive it; so this is our case, God offers his Son unto us, as an earnest of
his love; if we will not receive him, we cannot be the better for him: If we
refuse him, and turn Gods Commodity which he offers us back upon his hand, then
Gods storms, and his wrath abides on us for evermore. That it is his good
pleasure that we should receive Christ, it is no doubt, we have his word for
it: all the point is, how we may receive him, and that is by Faith.

And in this Text is declared, how Faith is wrought, and that is by the Word of
truth; In whom also you trusted, after you had heard the Word of Truth. Now
after this Faith, there comes a sealing by the Spirit of God; In whom also
after you believed, you were sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. Now lest a
man should through ignorance and indiscretion, be misled and deceived, there is
faith, and there is feeling. Where this is not, I say, not that there is no
faith; No: for feeling is an after thing, and comes after Faith. If we have
Faith, we live by it; But after you believed, you were sealed. You see then
Faith is that whereby we receive Jesus Christ, and to as many as received him,
to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, to as many as believe on his
name. The blood of Christ is that which cures our souls, but (as I told you)
it is by application. A Medicine heals not by being prepared, but being
applied: so the blood of Christ shed for us, unless applied to us, does us no
good. In Heb. 12. Its called the blood of sprinkling: and that in the 51.
Psalm, has relation to it, where he says, Purge me with hysop. In the
Passover there was blood to be shed, not to be spilt, but to be shed: and then
to be gathered up again, and put into a Basin, and when they had so done, they
were to take a bunch of Hysope and dip and sprinkle, etc. Faith is this bunch
of Hysope that dips it self as it were into the Basin of Christ's blood, and our
souls are purged by being sprinkled with it. In Levit. 14.6. There was a bird
to escape alive; but see the preparation for it, You shall take it, and the
scarlet, and the Cedar wood, and the Hysop, and shall dip them, and the living
bird in the blood of the bird that was killed, etc. and then you shall sprinkle
on him that had the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and
shall let the living bird loose into the open field. We are thus let loose,
cleansed and freed; but how? unless we are dipped as the living bird was in the
blood of the dead bird, there is no escaping, unless we are dipped in the blood
of Christ Jesus this dead bird, and sprinkled with this Hysop, we cannot be
freed.

So that now to come to that great matter, without which, Christ profits us
nothing, which is Faith. The Well is deep, and this is the bucket with which we
must draw. This is the hand by which we must put on Christ; As many as are
baptized put on Christ: thus must we be made ready: we must be thus clothed
upon, and by this hand attire our selves with the Son of Righteousness.
Wherefore I declared unto you that this Faith must not be a bare conceit,
floating in the brain; not a device of our own. The devil taking hold on this,
would soon lead a man into a fools Paradise. To say, I am Gods Child, and sure
I shall be saved, I am persuaded so: this the Devil would say Amen to, and
would be glad to rock men a sleep in such conceits. Such are like the foolish
Virgins, That went to buy oil for their Lamps; and were perswad^d they should
come soon enough to enter with the Bridegroom; but their persuasion is
groundless, and they are shut out. So such groundless persuasions and
assurances in a man's soul, that he is the child of God, and shall go to heaven,
is not Faith; thou may carry this assurance to hell with thee: This Faith is
not Faith; For faith comes by hearing, and that not of every word or fancy, but
by hearing the word of Truth. Faith must not go a jot further then the Word of
God goes. If thou have an apprehension, but no warrant for it out of the Word
of God, it is not faith, for its said, After you heard the Word of Truth you
believed. So that we must have some ground for it out of the Word of Truth,
otherwise it is presumption, mere conceits, fancy, and not Faith.

Now I showed unto you the last time how this might be; for while a man is an
Unbeliever, he is wholly defiled with sin, he is in a most lothsom condition,
he is in his blood, filthy, and no eye pities him. And may one fasten comfort
on one in such a condition, on a dead man? And this I showed you was our case:
When Faith comes to us, it finds no good thing in us, it finds us stark dead,
and stark naught: yet there is a Word for all this to draw us unto Christ, from
that miserable Ocean in which we are swimming unto perdition, if God catch us
not in his Net. Hearken we therefore to Gods Call: there is such a thing as
this Calling. God calls thee and would change thy condition, and therefore
offers thee his Son. Will thou have my Son? Will thou yield unto me? Will thou
be reconciled unto me? Will thou come unto me? and this may be preached to the
veriest Rebel that is. It is the only Word whereby faith is wrought. It is not
by finding such and such things in us beforehand, No, God finds us as bad as
bad may be, when he proffers Christ unto us. He finds us ugly and filthy, and
afterward washes us, and makes us good. It is not because I found this or that
good thing in thee, that I give thee interest in my Son, take it not on this
ground. No, he loved us first, and when we were defiled, he washed us with his
own blood, Rev. Now there is a double love of God toward his Creatures.

1. Of Commiseration. 2. Of Complacency.
That of Commiseration, is a fruit of love which tenders and pities the
miserable estate of another.

But now there is another love of Complacency, which is a likeness between the
qualities and manners of persons: for like will to like: and this love God
never has but to his Saints after Conversion, when they have his Image
instamped in them, and are reformed in their Understandings and Wills,
resembling him in both, then, and not till then bears he this love toward
them. Before he loves them with the love of pity: and so God loved the world,
that is, with the love of Commiseration, that he sent his only Son, that
whosoever believed in him might not perish, but have everlasting life.

Now we come to the point of Acceptance: the Word is free, and it requires
nothing but what may consist with the freest gift that may be given. Although
here be something that a man may startle at.

Object. Is there not required a condition of faith, and a condition of
obedience?

Sol. Neither of these according to our common Understanding, do hinder the
fullness and freedom of the Grace of the Gospel.

1. Not Faith, because Faith is such a condition, as requires only an empty
hand to receive a gift freely given. Now does that hinder the freeness of the
gift, to say, you must take it? Why, this is requisite to the freest gift that
can be given. If a man would give something to a Beggar, if he would not reach
out his hand and take it, let him go without it, its a free gift still; so that
the condition of Faith requires nothing, but an empty hand to receive Christ.

2. Obedience hinders it not. I am required, may some say, to be a new man, a
new Creature, to lead a new life: I must alter my course: and is not this a
great clog and burden? and do you account this free? when I must crucify
lusts, mortify Passions, etc. Is this free when a man must renounce his own
Will? Yes; It is as free as free may be; as I showed you the last time. The
very touching and accepting of Christ implies an abnegation of former
sinfulness, and a going off from other courses that are contrary to him. If the
King give a pardon to a notorious Rebel for Treason, so that now he must live
obedient as a Subject, the King need not in regard of himself to have given the
pardon; if he give it, it takes not from its freeness, that he must live like a
Subject afterward; the very acceptance of the pardon implies it.

But now to declare Faith, and to open the Mystery thereof. Faith is a great
thing: it is our life; our life stands in the practice of it: that as in the
offering of Christ for us, there is given him a name above every name, That at
the name of Jes^s every knee shall bow: As, I say, in the purchasing of
Redemption, so in the point of acceptance; God has given unto this poor
virtue of faith a name above all names. Faith indeed, as it is a virtue, is
poor and mean, and comes far short of love: and therefore by the Apostle, love
is many degrees preferred before faith, because love fills the heart, and faith
is but a bare hand, it lets all things fall, that it may fill it self with
Christ. Its said of the Virgin Mary, That God did respect the low estate of his
handmaid: So God respects the low estate of Faith, that nothing is required,
but a bare empty hand, which has nothing to bring with it, though it be never
so weak, yet if it have a hand to receive, it is (...), a like precious faith,
that of the poorest Believer, and the greatest Saint.

Now that we may come unto the point, without any more going backwards. In the
words read, there is the point of faith, and a thing God confirms it withal, a
seal: In whom also after that you believed, you were sealed. Faith is of it
self a thing unsealed: the sealing with the holy Spirit of Promise is a point
beyond faith; its a point of feeling, and not only of believing of Gods Word,
but a sensible feeling of the Spirit: a believing in my soul, accompanied with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory: of which sealing we shall speak more
hereafter. Observe for the first.

1. The Object of it, In whom you trusted. We speak of Faith now as it
justifies, as it apprehends Christ for its Object: for otherwise Faith has as
large an Extent as all Gods Word. Faith has a hand to receive, whatsoever God
has a mouth to speak. What is the Object? He in whom you trusted. It is a
wonder to see how many are deceived, who make the forgiveness of sins to be the
proper Object of faith. A man may call as long as he lives for forgiveness of
sins, yet unless there be the first Act to lay hold on Christ, in vain does he
expect forgiveness of sins. Until thou do accept Christ for thy King and
Savior, thou have no promise. We are never Children of the Promise till we are
found in him. The proper and immediate Object of Faith is, first Christ, and
then God the Father by him: for Faith must have Christ for its Object. I must
believe in none else but God, in, and through Christ. Now that this is so, we
may see in that famous place. 1 Pet. 1.21. When he had spoken of the precious
blood of Christ, the Lamb without blemish, he goes on, and shows, that he was
manifested in those last times, for you, who by him do believe in God, that
raised up Christ from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope
might be in God. There is no true believing in God the Father, but by the Son.
The proper Object of Hope and Faith is God, and he that does believe, or hope,
or trust in any thing else, there is Idolatry in it; we believe in God by him:
so that the primary Object of Faith is Christ. Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ. What Is my Faith then? If thou will be
the Child of God, receive, hold Christ Jesus, accept him for thy Savior, and
for thy Lord: He is the proper Object of thy Faith. Again, you must have Christ
Jesus, and him crucified, that should be the highest knowledge in our account,
To know Christ, and him crucified, and by it to accept him. Hereupon the
Apostle to the Romans, when he speaks of faith, makes the Object of it Christ,
and Christ crucified. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood; to declare his Righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Whatsoever then thou
find in Christ, is an Object of thy Faith. John 6. The point is, He who eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, that is, he who receives me, and makes me as
his meat and drink, shall be partaker of me. Compare this, Romans 3.25. with Romans
5.9. for its worth comparing. We are said to be justified by his blood, Romans
5.9. By faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. Now both these come to one, and they
resolve the point, and clear the Question, whether Faith in it self as a Virtue
does justify, or in respect of its Object? surely its in respect of the
Object. You that have skill in Philosophy, know, that heat if considered as a
quality, its effects are not so great; but considered as an instrument, it
transcends the sphere of its own activity; it does wonders; for its the
principle of generation, and many other strange effects. So here take faith as
a Virtue, and its far short of love: but consider it as an instrument whereby
Christ is applied, and it transcends, it works wonders beyond its proper
sphere: for the meanest thing it lays hold on, is the Son of God. He that has
the Son, has life, etc. Some would think this an hard kind of speech, when we
are justified by faith, we are justified by Christ, apprehended by faith: and
yet that place is clear to be justified by his blood: and faith in his blood
becomes one faith. As if a man should say, I was cured by going to the Bath: so
faith comes unto me; faith is the legs. A man is not said properly to be cured
by going to the Bath, nor justified by coming to Christ by the legs of faith:
but the applying of the Bath, the coming to Christ, and applying his virtue, to
make him the Object of my faith, this is the way to be justified. As it is not
the making and preparing of a plaster that cures, but the applying it; so
that this concludes this point, that the true Object of faith is Christ
crucified, and God the Father in, and by him. Here then is the point, thou must
not look for any comfort in faith, till thou have Christ; and to think thou
shall ever have any benefit by God till thou have Christ, thou deceivest thy
self. It is impossible for a man to receive nourishment by his bread and drink,
till he partake of it in the substance: so thou must partake of Christ before
thou can receive any nourishment by him. Christ says not thou must have
forgiveness of sins, or thou must have my Fathers favor, but take my body and
blood, take me crucified. Buy the field, and the treasure is thine: but thou
have nothing to do with the treasure, till thou gettest the field. This is
preferment enough, to have the Lords Promise to Abraham, I am thy exceeding
great reward: I am my wel-beloveds, and my wel-beloved is mine. There is a
spiritual match betwixt Christ and thee: there are many who are matched with
Christ, and yet know not how rich they are: when a man reckons of what he shall
get by Christ only, when all his thoughts are on that, he marries the portion,
and not the man: thou must set thy love on Christ's person, and then having him,
all that he has is thine: how rich Christ is, so rich art thou: he must first
be thine. He that has the Son has life, but the Son must first be had. Is
there any now in this congregation who is so hard-hearted, as to refuse such a
gift as this? When God shall give thee his Son, if thou will take him, is there
any so profane, as with Esau to sell his birth, etc. to pursue the poor
pedling things of this life, and refuse salvation, so high a gift? A gift which
is not given to Angels, they think it an honor to wait at the Lords Table:
they have not this precious food given to them; they never taste it; and
therefore many Christians on serious consideration would not change their
estate for the estate of Angels. Why? because hereby Christ is my husband, I am
wedded to him, he is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, which the Angels
are not capable of. Our nature is advanced above the Angelical nature: for we
shall sit and judge the world with Christ, judge the twelve Tribes of Israel:
And what an high preferment is this? Nay, observe this, and take it for a Rule.
Never beg of God pardon for thy sins, till thou have done this one thing,
namely, accepted of Christ from Gods hands. For thou never can confidently
ask any thing till thou have him: For all the Promises of God are in him, yea,
and Amen. This may serve for the Object of faith: to show that the primary
Object, is Christ crucified, and God by him. We come now to declare;

2. The Acts of faith what they are, and there is some intricacy in that too:
There is much ado made in what part and power of the soul faith is: We must not
proportionate the Act of faith according to our own fancy. For its no faith,
but as it has relation to the Word: now look, how is the Word presented. After
you heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your salvation. Now the Word is
presented under a double respect.

1. Its presented Sub ratione very; After you had heard the Word of Truth; and
there comes in the Understanding.

2. Then Sub ratione boni, as a good word, that so we should lay hold on it,
and here comes in the Will. For the Will, we say, challenges that which is good
for its Object: Now the Gospel of salvation is a good Word, its glad tidings
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners. And now as the Word is presented as a good Word, so must my Act of
faith be answerable unto it. See in Heb. 11.13. The act of faith answering
hereto, These all died in faith, not having received the Promises. What did
their faith to them? It made them see the Promises a far off, and they were
persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers
and pilgrims in the earth. So that by comparing place with place, it appears
that first this Gospel was presented as the Word of Truth, they were persuaded
of it. It is the first Act of Faith, to persuade men of the truth of the Word:
and then as it is a good word, they embraced it: these are the two arms of
faith: as true, it persuades me, as good, I embrace it. We must not now be too
curious in bringing in Philosophical Disputes, whether one Virtue may proceed
from two faculties; whether Faith may proceed from the Understanding and the
Will. The truth is, these things are not yet agreed upon; and shall we trouble
our selves with things not yet decided in the schools, as, whether the
practical Understanding and the Will be distinct faculties or no? The Word of
God requires that I should believe with my whole heart. Act. 8.37. As Philip
told the Eunuch, if thou believe with all thy heart, thou may: If with the
heart: but with what faculties may you say? Why, I tell thee, believe with thy
whole heart: and what! shall I piece and devide the heart, when the whole is
required? Now to come to these two: The Word is presented, 1. As a true Word.
2. Then as a good Word; a word like Gospel, like salvation.


1. As a true Word. And the Act of faith answering thereto, is called in
Scripture (...). and (...), Knowledge and Acknowledgement, 1 Titus 1. 1 Peter 3.

1 Knowledge, that is a thing requisite: Why? because if there be a Remedy able
to cure a man's disease: if he do not know it, what is he the better for it?
Knowledge is so essential unto Faith, that without it there can be no faith. In
John 17.3. the terms are confounded, the one put for the other: This is life
eternal, to know thee to be the true God, and whom, etc. to know thee, that is,
to believe in thee, because knowledge is so essential to belief, as one cannot
be without the other: thou can not believe what thou have never heard of: I
know, says Job, that my Redeemer lives, that is, I believe he lives: and
hereupon its said in Isa. 53. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many: Knowledge is an Act primarily requisite to Faith? to be
justified by his knowledge, is to be justified by faith in his blood; this then
is the first thing, that I know it to be as true as Gospel: then comes the
acknowledgement.

2. The Acknowledgement. Joh. 6.69. We know, and are assured that thou art that
Christ. This is an assurance: I say, not the assurance of my salvation: for
that is another kind of thing: but an assurance that God will keep touch with
me, will not delude me, but that if I take his Son, I shall have life; I shall
have his favor. When God illuminates me, I find all things in him, when I have
him, I am made. When the Understanding clearly apprehends this, then comes the
next word, it is the Gospel of salvation, there being a knowing and
acknowledging the Act of the Understanding: then comes the Will, and it being,

2. Propounded as a good word, then follows, 1. Acceptance. 2. Affiance.


1. Acceptance, which receives Christ. 1 John 12. As many as received him, to
them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to as many as believed on
his name. Then a man resolves, I will take God on his word, and thereupon
follows.

A resting or relying on God, which is a proper act of faith. I need no other
place then Romans 10.13. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
saved: But how shall they call on him on whom they have not believed? that is,
on whom they have not reposed their confidence. Mark the ^postle, How shall
they call on him, on whom they have not believed? That Faith which was in the
antecedent must be in the conclusion: therefore our faith is a relying on God:
and so in this place this trust is made the same with faith; as it is in the
Text, in whom you trusted, after you had received the word of Truth: for our
trust and belief there is the self-same word, -- Nimium ne creed colori: this (
Credo) is to have a great confidence in fleeting and fading things; and so it
is in justifying faith. If I have a knowledge of God, and acknowledgement of
him, and from my knowing, my will is conformed to accept Christ; and if when I
have accepted him, I will not part from him; this is faith, and if thou have
this faith, thou will never perish: suppose thou never had one day of comfort
all thy life long, yet my life for thine thou art saved. Perhaps by reason of
thy ignorance thou have no feeling, yet if thou consent, thou art justified;
its the consent makes the match. If thou consent to the Father, and take Christ
the Son, know it, or know it not, thou have him; though thou know not
whether thy sins are forgiven; yet as long as thou keep thy hold, all the
Devils temptations shall never drive thee from him: thou art justified, and in
a safe case, though ignorance and other things in thee cause thee not to feel
it, if thou layest hold on him for his sake, thou art apprehended.

Object. Now then this is an easy matter, you will say.

Sol. Not so easy a matter as you guess it to be. It were easy indeed, were
there nothing but saying the word to make man and wife; there are terms and
conditions to be agreed upon. God casts not his Son away, he looks there shall
be conditions on thy side; he must be thy King and Head, if thou will have him
to be thy husband. But what shall I get by him, then says the wife? Get? there
is no end of thy getting. All is thine, Paul, Apollos, Cephas, Life, etc. Thou
art Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Every man will take Christ thus for the
better: but there is somewhat else in the match. If thou will have him, thou
must take him for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer. Indeed there are
precious things provided for you. Its your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom; you shall be Heirs with Christ, but for the present, while you are
in the Church Militant, you must take up your Cross; you must not look for
great things in this world: In this world you must have tribulation, you must
deny your selves, and your own Wills. What? would you have Christ the wife, and
you the husband? No, If you think so, you mistake the match. Christ must be the
Husband and the Head; and as the wife promises to obey her husband, to stick to
her husband in sickness and in health, and to forsake all others; so Christ
asks, will thou have me? if thou will, thou must take me on these terms, thou
must take my Cross with me, thou must deny thine own Will, yea, it may be thine
own life also. Let a Christian consider all these things, these are the words,
and these are the benefits and then compare them together, and then if he can
say, I will have Christ how^ver, for I shall be a saver by him, I Will take him
with^ll faults, and I know I shall make a good bargain, therefore I will have
him on any terms come what will; when a man can have his will so
perpendicularly bent on Christ, that he will have him, though he leave his skin
behind him, there is a true acceptance of him. We must not here distinguish
with the Schools about Velleities, a general wishing and woulding, and true
desires after Christ: Wishers and Woulders never thrive; but there must be a
resolution to follow Christ through thick and thin, never to part with him: a
direct Will is here required. And therefore Christ bids us consider before --
hand what it will cost us. If any man come to me, and hate not Father and
mother, wife and children, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Do
not think that our Savior here would discourage men from love. Does the God of
love teach us hatred? The phrase in the Hebrew is loving less, as it is said,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; that is, loved less. If a man has
two wives, one beloved, and the other hated, and they have born Children, both
the beloved and the hated. By hated is not meant, that the man hated one wife,
but less loved her then the other; so if any man come to me, and hate not
father and mother, and that is, if he love not all less then me; and that it is
so, we may see it expounded by our Savior. Mat. 10.37. He that loves father
or mother more then me is not worthy of me. There Christ expounds it. He that
will follow Christ in calm weather and not in a storm, is not worthy of him.
Luke 14.28. Which of you intending to build a Tower, sitte^^ not down first,
and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? What is that to
the purpose? See verse 33. So likewise w^osoever he be of you, that forsakes
not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple. Its a small matter to begin to be
a Christian, unless you consider what it will cost you. Do you t^^^k it a small
matter to be the Kings son? think not on so great a business without
consideration what it will cost you. It will be the denying of your own wills.
You must be content to follow naked Christ nakedly: follow him in his
persecution and tribulation, in his death and suffering, if thou will be
conformable to him in glory. When this case comes, it makes many draw back, as
the rich man in the Gospel, when he must forsake all, he drew back. When
troubles arise, many are offended; so when it comes to a point of parting, they
go back.

Now we come to speak one word of the sealing in the Text. After that ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise. This sealing, which
is a point of feeling is a distinct thing of it self from faith; no part of
faith. If I have faith, I am sure of life, though I never have the other: these
are two seals. We put to our seals to the counter-part that is drawn betwixt
God and us.

The first seal is our faith. I have nothing but Gods Word, and indeed I have
no feeling, yet I venture my salvation, and trust God upon his bare Word. I
will pawn all upon it: He that believes, says John, has set to his seal that
God is true. If men doubt, and trust God no further then they see him, it is
not faith. But when God gives me a good word, though I am in as much distress
as ever, yet I trust, though it be contrary to all sense, or outward seeming,
yet I put to my seal, and trust him still.

Then comes Gods counter-part. God being thus honored, that I believe his
Word, though contrary to all sense and feeling, even his bare Word; then God
sets to his seal, and now the Word comes to particularizing. Before it was in
general, now it comes and singles out a man, Say thou unto my soul, that I am
thy salvation, Psalm 35.3. that is, as I did apply the generality of Gods Word
unto mine own case to bear me up against sense and feeling: then comes the
Spirit of God, and not only delivers generalities, but says unto my soul, I am
thy salvation. This is called in Scripture a manifestation, when God manifests
himself unto us; as in Isa. 60.16. Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles,
and shall suck the breast of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy
Savior and thy Redeemer, etc. that is, when we have made particular
application by Faith, God will put to his seal, that I shall know that God is
my strength and my salvation: I shall know it. John 14.21. He that loves me
shall be loved of my Father, and I will manifest my self unto him. Christ comes
and draws the Curtains, and looks on with the gracio^s aspect of his blessed
countenance. When this comes, it cheers the heart, and then there are secret
love tokens pass betwixt Christ and his beloved. Rev. 2.17. To him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, save he that
receives it, that is, there is a particular intimation that I shall know of my
self more then any other; more then all the world besides. Its such a joy as
the stranger is not made Partaker of: such joy as is glorious and unspeakable;
such peace as passes all understanding. One minute of such joy overcomes all
the joy in the world besides.

Now consider, sure there is such a thing as this joy, or else do you think the
Scripture would talk of it, and of the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, by whom we
know the things that are given us of God. There is a generation in the world
that has this joy, though you that know it not, do not, nor cannot believe it,
there is a righteous generation that have it; and why do thou not try to get
it? do as they do, and thou may obtain it likewise. The secrets of the Lord
are revealed to them that fear him: These are hidden comforts; do you think God
will give this joy to those that care not for him? No, The way is to seek God,
and to labor to fear him. The secrets of the Lord are revealed to such, and
such, only as fear him; do as they do, and follow their example, and thou may
have it likewise.

Object. Many have served Christ long, and have not found it.

Sol. Its long of themselves; you are straightned in your own bowels, or else,
Open your mouths wide, and God will fill them. No wonder that we are so barren
of these comforts, when we be straightened in our selves. There is a thing
wondrously wanting amongst us, and that is Meditation. If we could give our
selves to it, and go up with Moses to the Mount to confer with God, and
seriously think of the price of Christ's death, and of the joys of heaven, and
the Privileges of a Christian; if we could frequently meditate on these, we
should have these sealing days every day, at lest oftener. This has need to be
much pressed upon us; the neglect of this makes lean souls. He that is frequent
in that, has these sealing days often. Could thou have a parle with God in
private, and have thy heart rejoice with the comforts of another day, even
whilst thou art thinking of these things, Christ would be in the midst of thee.
Many of the Saints of God have but little of this, because they spend but few
hours in Meditation. And thus as this hour would give leave, have we proceeded
in this point.

FINIS.
1 COR. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
I Have heretofore declared unto you the ground of our salvation, and have
represented unto you, first, Christ offered for us, and secondly, Christ
offered to us. Now it has pleased Almighty God, not only to teach us this by
his Word; but because we are slow of heart to believe, and conceive the things
we hear, it pleases his glorious Wisdom to add to his Word his Sacraments,
that so what we have heard with our ears, we may see with our eyes, being
represented by signs.

There is a visible voice whereby God speaks to the eyes: and therefore we find
in Exodus 4.8. God bids Moses that he should use signs, saying, It shall come to
pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first
sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign. Signs you know are
the Object of the eye, and yet see, they have it as it were a visible voice,
which speaks to the eye. Now God is pleased to give us these signs for the
helping.

1. Of our Understanding: The eye and the ear are the two learned senses, as we
call them, through which, all knowledge is conveyed into the soul: and
therefore that we may have a more particular knowledge of Christ, God has not
only by his Ministry given us audible voices, but visible also in his
Sacraments, by which, as by certain glasses he represents to us the Mystery of
Christ Jesus offered for us, and offered to us. And hence is it that Paul calls
the eyes to witness, as well as the ears, Gal. 3.1. O ye foolish Galathians,
who has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth, before whose eyes
Christ has been evidently fet forth crucified amongst you! that is, before
whose eyes Christ has been crucified, not by hearsay only, but evidently
before your eyes, not in any foolish Crucifix, with the Papists, but in the
blessed Sacrament, wherein he is so represented, as if his soul were before our
eyes poured out to death: so that by these Sacraments, heavenly things are as
it were clothed in earthly Garments, and this is the first reason, viz. to help
our Understandings: but besides this he does it.

2. To help our Memory; we art apt to forget those wonderful things Christ
has wrought for us. And therefore, verse 24. and 25. Of this Chapter we are
bid To eat his body, and drink his blood in remembrance of him. To take the
signs as tokens of him; the Sacrament is as it were a monument and pillar
raised up to the end, that when ever we see it, we should remember the Lords
death until he come. Its said, 2 Samuel 8.18. That Absolon in his life time had
taken, and reared up for himself a Pillar which is in the Kings dale; for he
said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance. He would fain be remembered,
but he had no Child whereby he might live after he was dead: therefore he
raises it, and calls it after his own name, Absolons place, as it is this day:
that so as often as any came that way, they might remember him. Christ does
thus by his Sacrament, and erects it as a Monument for the remembrance of his
death, and as it were calls it by his own name, saying, This is my body, and
this is my blood: that when ever we see them, we may call to mind, Christ
offered for us, and to us. But that I may apply this my Doctrine to the ears
also, know that,

3. These signs are for the strengthening of our faith, and therefore it is
considered as a seal. Romans 4.11. Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, as
a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised.
It helps our understanding by being a sign, and is a confirmation, as a seal:
by virtue whereof Christ is passed, and made over to us, so that we have as
true an interest and right to him, as to our meat and drink: yea, hereby he
becomes as effectually ours for every purpose in our spiritual life, as our
meat and drink does for our corporal. To which end these Elements are changed
spiritually in their natures; not in substance, but in use: so that which was
but now a common bread, becomes as far different as heaven is from earth, being
altered in its use. For instance, the wax whereby the King passes over an
inheritance to us, and by which conveyances of our estates are made, that wax
is but as another piece of wax differing nothing from that which is in the
shop, till the King has stamped it with his Seal: but being once sealed, one
would not give it for all the wax in the Kingdom, for now it serves to another
use; so is it here in these elements; but still know the difference is not in
the matter or substance, but in the use. And this is the reason why this
blessed bread and wine is termed a communion, namely, because it is an
instrument whereby Christ instates me into himself, and whereby I have
fellowship and communion with him.

In the words then we have these particulars, viz.

1. A sin. If any man shall presume to eat that bread, or drink that cup
unworthily. Its a dangerous thing, a great sin to eat and drink at the Lords
Table in an unworthy manner.

2. A punishment. He eats and drinks damnation, or judgment unto himself. So
that now what was ordained to life, and appointed to be a seal and confirmation
of Gods love and favor, is now changed and become a seal and confirmation of
Gods anger and indignation. The unworthy receiving of it makes it prove clean
contrary to what it was intended.

3. A reason, because he discernes not the Lords body, but takes them as
ordinary things, deeming the elements not different from the bread and wine
which we have at our Tables, not knowing that they are the dishes wherein
Christ is served in unto us, that by these the greatest gift is given us, and
nourishment conveyed for the maintenance of our spiritual life. This life was
given us in baptism, but in and by these signs is conveyed spiritual
nourishment for the continuance and maintenance of it, for the strengthening of
our faith, and making us daily stronger and stronger to fight the Lords
battles: Now when we discern not this, nor by the eye of faith see Christ Jesus
crucified for us, and by these elements conveyed unto us, but take them hand
over head without any consideration, we receive them unworthily, and a fearful
indignity is offered unto Christ, which he will certainly revenge. I Will then 1.
Show in general what it is to eat unworthily. 2. What it is to eat judgment;
and then 3. I Will come to the particulars, how this sin may be avoided, and what
the particulars are wherein the sin consists.


1. Concerning the first, What it is to eat unworthily.

Obj. And here may some say, is there any of us who can avouch that he eats and
drinks at the Lords Table worthily? is any so presumptuous to say, that he is
worthy to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood? As for bodily food and
entertainment, the Centurion could say, I am not worthy that thou shoulds come
under my roof; How then comes this to pass, that he which eats and drinks the
Lords body unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself?

Sol. But here understand what is set down; worthiness is not always taken for
a matter of merit, or proportion of worth between the person giving and
receiving; but in Scripture it is often taken for that which is meet, fitting,
and beseeming; And in this sense the Apostle uses it, 1 Cor. 16.4. If it be
meet that I go also, they shall go with me. If it be meet: the word in the
Original is (...), or worthy, which is here rightly translated meet; so in that
Sermon of Saint John Baptist, Mat. 3.8. bring forth fruits meet for repentance;
that is, fruits beseeming amendment of life. And in this sense are we said to
walk worthy of God, who has called us to his Kingdom and glory. Worthy of
God, that is, worthy of that calling God has imparted to us, 1 These. 2.12. And
therefore to use the similitude as I have elsewhere, If the King should
vouchsafe to come into a Subjects house, and find all things fit and beseeming
so great a Majesty, that Subject may be said to give the King worthy
entertainment; not that a Subject is worthy to entertain his Prince: but the
meaning is, he provided all things which were meet and fit for the
entertainment of him. So is it here: if we prepare our selves with such
spiritual ornaments to entertain the King of glory, as are requisite for those
who approach his Table, though our performances come far short of the worth of
his presence, yet we may be said to eat his body, and drink his blood worthily.
When the King in the Gospel had prepared his feast, two sorts of guests there
were who were unworthy.

1. Those that made light of the invitation, who had their excuses when they
should come to the feast; One must go to his farm, another to try his Oxen,
Luke 14.18.

2. Others there were who came, and yet were unworthy guests, for coming
unpreparedly; for in the midst of the feast the King comes in to view his
guests, and beholds a man that did not refuse to come, but yet came without his
wedding garment, and so came unworthily for not coming preparedly. Yea see then
there may be an unworthiness in those that do come, since they come unfitted
and unbeseeming such a banquet. They are unworthy receivers of the Lords body,
and he accounts it an irreverent usage of him. In like manner may some say
touching the Ministry of the Word; May not I read a good Sermon at home with as
much profit? what needs all this stir? Why, here is the advantage and
privilege you get in the public Ministry of the Word: God himself comes down
as a King amongst us, he views his guests, and considers who comes with his
wedding garment, who comes preparedly. Christ comes and looks on us, and where
two or three are gathered together in his name, there he has promised to be in
the midst of them: He walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks: the
Ministers of his Word; he takes a special view of those that come and frequent
his Ordinances, and to reward them. You see then what it is to eat worthily,
its to do it with that reverence that is requisite where the King of heaven is
the Master of the Feast. Now this being the sin, unmannerliness, and unprepared
approaching his Table; we come to the second thing, viz.

2. The punishment: and that is a terrible one: He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself: damnation, that is somewhat
hard, the word in the Margent is better, (...), judgment. True, there are such
as so come, that they deserve to eat condemnation to themselves, as openly
profane ones, in whom it is high treason, being Gods vowed enemies, to take his
Privy Seal, and put it to so vile a use: this I say deserves damnation; but
then others there are that have faith and repentance, and a portion in Christ,
yet coming unworthily to this feast, eat judgment to themselves: that is a
judgment of chastisement. There is a twofold judgment.

1. One of revenge: for those that put Gods Seal to a wrong evidence, having no
faith to make Christ his portion: in such a one its high treason to put forth
his hand to this tree of life.

2. Another of chastisement, for such a one as has repentance, and yet comes
too unmannerly, and carries himself too carelessly at the Lords Table: at this
the Apostle aims in the Text; not at that judgment of condemnation, but at a
judgment to prevent damnation; And this appears in the words following, where
we shall find the Apostle recounting up the particulars of this judgment of
chastisement, For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep, ver. 30. Mark what is the judgment he eats: why this? he is cast upon his
bed of sickness into a Consumption perchance, or some other corporal disease;
a cause Physicians seldom or never look into: they look to Agues, Colds, or
the like; they never once conjecture that their unworthy eating at the Lords
Table, cast them into the disease, and was the principal cause of the malady.
Nay death it self too often is the punishment of such bold attempts, so that
all the Physicians in the world cannot cure them. And thus God inflicts
temporal judgments to free them from eternal, as appears farther in the 32.
ver. When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world, that is, we undergo a judgment of chastisement, to
prevent the judgment of condemnation: which though it be a sharp and bitter
pill, yet by the mercy of God we eat that whereby damnation is prevented. This
judgment of condemnation is the portion of the profane person, who dares to
meddle with that belongs not to him, against whom the Angel of the Lord with a
flaming sword stands to keep the way of this tree of life. Those that come that
have faith, yet coming unpreparedly, they eat judgment too, yet by Gods mercy
it is that which preserves them from the damnation of the soul.

Now before I come to the particulars, note how careful God is, that spiritual
exercises should be spiritually performed. He Is very angry when he sees a
spiritual duty carnally undertaken. For this cause many are sick, etc. that is,
because you that are believers, have faith, repentance, and a portion in your
Savior come irreverently, come unpreparedly, perform a spiritual work so
carnally. We have presidents hereof in Scripture^* and chiefly two: First, for
circumcision, Exodus 4.24. At the 21. v. God sent Moses on a Message into Egypt,
and in the 24. verse. the Text says, It came to pass by the way in the Inn,
that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. This is very strange, this has
no dependence on that which goes before: a strange accident, God sought to kill
him, although he but a little before had sent him into Egypt, and told him he
would be with him. Why? what should we do then? how should the message be done,
and fulfilled? But what was the reason hereof? It Is not expressed, yet we may
gather from the following words, that it was by reason his sons were
uncircumcised, for verse. 25. Zippora took a sharp stone, and cut off the
foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a bloody
husband have thou been unto me: God would have smitten him for the neglect of
the Sacrament of Circumcision. Another instance we have for the Passover in
Hezekiahs time. 2 Chronicles. 30.17, 18. A multitude of the people, yea many of
Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulon had not cleansed themselves, yet did
they eat the Passover otherwise then it was written. There were many likewise
in the Congregation that were not sanctified; and therefore God punished them.
It Is not set down in what manner God punished them, yet by the consequent it
may be gathered that it was by sickness, for the next words are to that
effect: Hezekiah prayed for them saying, the good Lord pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his Father, though he be not
cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, and the Lord hearkened
to Hezekiah, and healed the people. So that you see for this God smites a
person, and it is to be feared least judgments temporal fall on the whole
Nation for this fault, that he even smites a people to death. But we pass from
this and come to the particulars.

3. The particulars of this offense, and wherein it consists that a man comes
unworthily, that so we may know whether we are guilty of the crime. Know
therefore that there are two sorts that come to the communion.

First, those to whom the business does not belong, that have nothing to do
with the thing as openly profane ones.

Secondly, such as have interest in the matter, but yet come unpreparedly, and
in an unbeseeming manner; the former take part in the sign, but enjoy not the
thing signified, and the latter coming unpreparedly depart without the comfort
which otherwise they might have. Now mark to whom Christ would say, if he were
now coming to judgment in the clouds, to whom I say, if he were now coming in
the clouds, he would say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit a Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world; to them he would likewise
say, Come to my Table, come to this banquet, partake of my body and blood, and
to as many as he would say, Depart from me you cursed into everlasting flames,
to so many would he say, go you from my Table, come not near.

Now there are two sorts of people, to whom, if the Lord Jesus were coming in
the clouds to Judgment, he would say, Depart into everlasting flames; and
those are those that know not him, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2
These. 1.8. Now to these two sorts of people, Christ would say, if he were on
earth, Depart from my Table, meddle not with those Mysteries: And they are,

1. Those that know not God: and indeed it is a most unworthy thing for an
ignorant man to come to Gods Table. Know whoever thou art, that art such an
one, that it belongs not to thee, it was appointed for an understanding people.
The Lord invites not fools and block-heads to his Mysteries. God will not know
them that know not him. If thou know not what the signs are, or the relation
of them to the thing signified, have no insight or understanding of the
Mysteries: Know that its to no other purpose to thee to come to the Sacrament,
then if thou wentest to a Mass, to see a Mass, to see the Gesticulations,
Elevations, or if thou wentest to see a play, not knowing to what end and
purpose it was done. Such a one is not a friend of God, but an enemy that shall
be destroyed in everlasting fire that knows not him. Deceive not then your
selves, but seriously weigh it, and consider what a Judgment falls on us for
this. What an unworthy thing is it, when as in one months space, or less, if a
man had any care, he might learn as much as would bring him to heaven. What
says the Apostle? 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak
this to your shame. And a shameful thing it is indeed, when the knowledge of
the Principles of Christian Religion may be had in so short a space, to be so
grossly ignorant as commonly many are. Its a most unworthy, and a shameful
thing to think the knowledge of Christ not worth thus much pains. Thou that
carest not for the knowledge of Gods ways, what have thou to do to take his
Word into thy mouth, to tread in his Courts? I doubt not but very many here too
are but Babes in Christ. An ignorant person then cannot possibly come worthily;
for we are to come with faith; and Faith cannot be without knowledge. And hence
are they joined both together: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many. Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge, not subjective, but objective,,
the knowledge of him: if thou know not him, his Nature, and Offices, the end
of his offering himself, and will be still a mere Ignoramus, come not to Gods
Table, go to Nebuchadnezzar, and feed with him amongst the beasts, thou have
nothing to do here. This is the first sort.

2. The second are those that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They have
wit enough, and can talk of Religion fast enough; but where is the obedience is
required? I know Christ gives me the proffer of Christ Jesus; Can I cast down
my own proud Will, and submit it, lay down my stately plumes, and take him not
only as my Priest to sacrifice himself for me, but as my Lord, and my King to
be guided, governed, and ruled by him? when such a one comes that has not the
power of grace in him, who is filled with nothing, but Rebellion and
profaneness; when such a one comes, and presumes to sit down at Gods Table, it
is a most unworthy Act; Its more fit that such a one should feed amongst the
swine, then eat the body, and drink the blood of his Savior. Nor is it an
unworthy Act for these only, but also for civil honest persons, though civility
be a good stock whereon the sience of grace may be grafted: but if a man had
nothing besides what nature and Education can teach, what moral Philosophy can
store us with, we have nothing to do at this Table of the Lord. How can I dare
presume to eat Christ's body, and drink Christ's blood, that am not acquainted
with God, know not the Principles of Religion, and will not be swayed by him,
nor be obedient unto his Gospel? These are the particulars then which make a
man an unworthy Receiver, when he is an ignorant person, and will not obey the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, such persons are to be discarded and casheer'd; they
eat the Judgment of condemnation unto themselves.

But there are (as I showed you) a second sort that come that have interest in
the business; such as have Knowledge, Grace and Faith in Christ, and shall
taste of the new wine with Christ in the world to come, and be with Christ,
which notwithstanding may eat and drink unworthily, and come unpreparedly, and
irreverently: whereby they lose that comfort that otherwise they might have:
and these, though they eat not the Judgment of condemnation, yet they do the
Judgment of chastisement: they put Gods seal to a blank, but the former sort
put it to a false instrument, they put it to a blank, I say, and by that means
loose much comfort, yea, life it self too perchance. They eat a Judgment of
Chastisement; by putting it thus to a blank they taste Gods displeasure in
sickness, weakness and death: but I will show you how you may avoid this: why?
come worthily. Fit your s^lves to the purpose, set to it, and thou shall see,
one Communion will even bring thee to Heaven. I say, if that thou could but
one Communion fit thy self to come worthily, thou would find exceeding
comfort in it. Try the Lord once, and see what a mighty increase of grace this
will bring unto thee. That you may know how you may come worthily, there are
three things requisite to every worthy Receiver at the Lords Table:

1. Some things are requisite before the Action be enterprized, or else I shall
come very unworthily.

2. Some at the time, and in the very act of Receiving.

3. Others after the Communion is ended. Many will be persuaded that there is
some preparation to be used before hand, but never do as much as dream of any
after: whereas if a man neglect this, the Lords meat is as it were lost in us.

1. As for those things which are requisite before we come to the Lords Table,
they are these.

1. A Consideration what need I have of the Sacrament. Is there any such
necessity of it? Examine then, what need have I to eat my meat and drink? When
we see God brings this before us, let us reason thus with our selves; it is as
needful for the nourishment of my soul to receive the Sacrament, as for my
body to take meat and drink. This is that whereby we are spiritually
strengthened and enabled to hold out to the last. And here I Will not stand to
dispute the case, whether a man may fall from Grace or not. And no doubt but he
may: yet I say, not that he does. I say, no doubt but he may; and why? there is
such an opposition and antipathy betwixt the flesh and the spirit, that did not
God refresh the spirit now and then, it might be overborn by the bulk of our
corruptions. Now Gods Ordinances are appointed to keep it in heart, and refresh
it, as the sick spouse was staid with Apples, and comforted with flagons. And
God has appointed his Sacrament of the Lords Supper to strengthen and continue
that life which we received in Baptism as by spiritual nourishment. In Baptism
our stock of life is given us, by the Sacrament is confirmed and continued. If
a child be born only and after birth not nourished; there is none but will know
what a death such a soul will die. So it is here, unless Christ be pleased to
nourish that life which he has breathed into me in baptism, and by his
Ordinances to give me a new supply and addition of grace; I am a dead man, I am
gone for evil upon this ground, therefore upon examination being conscious, and
privy to the weakness of my faith, to the manifold imperfections of my spirit,
to my want of knowledge, the frailty of my memory, my often doubtings, the
dangers of relapsing and falling back in my Christian progress, I cannot but
apprehend that it is no needless thing for me to come preparedly to the Lords
Table.

2. The next action requisite before my coming to the Sacrament, is the
whetting of my appetite, and preparing of my stomach; I must come with an
hungry desire, as a man that comes to his meat that would live and be strong:
we think meat very ill bestowed on him that has no stomach: Unless we eat
Christ's body, and drink his blood, we can have no spiritual life. All the
question, and the main business is, whether I come thirsty or not, as an hungry
and thirsty man with an Appetite after his meat and liquor; longing after
Christ, as the Heart after the water brooks. When a man comes dully, and as
Children that plays with their meat, cares not whether he eats or not; when a
man comes, I say, without an appetite, its time for God to take it away from
him. Its an unworthy coming to come with an unprepared stomach, and without
whetting our faith to feed on Christ Jesus crucified.

3. The third action requisite to a worthy Commer, is cleansing of himself. I
would fain come, may a man say, to the Lords Table, having such need of it, as
I have, and having such an appetite and desire to feed on Christ; but I am to
come before a great King, therefore I must wash mine hands in innocence. In the
Gospel according to Saint Mark, the Jews found fault with Christ's Disciples,
because they came with unclean or common hands: For so the word signifies, and
is so used by the Apostles as equivalent thereunto. I have learned to call
nothing common or unclean. Now when I come to meet the Lord in his Ordinances,
I must put off my shoes from off my feet, for the place where I stand is holy.
Wash your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts you double minded. The
purifying of the soul is that which is required of every worthy Communicant. We
come now not to receive life, but strength, and that it may strengthen us, we
must of necessity cleanse our selves. A stomach over clogged with choler what
ever meat be taken into it, it turns it into its own nature: so is it here,
unless the vessel be clean, Quodcunque infundis, acessit. Christ Jesus the
purest thing in the world is to come into my soul, as into a sanctuary, and
shall not I fit, trim and garnish it to receive him, but leave it as a
Pig-stie? Know therefore that thou come unworthily when thou come with
unwashed hands. The people were to be sanctified when they came to receive the
Law. And so must we if we will receive the benefit from the business in hand:
But I cannot stand on all. I pass from this therefore to the second thing I
proposed, and that was;

2. Those things which were required of us in the action. And there we have the
acts of the Minister in the administration: I must not look on these as idle
Ceremonies, but as real Representations, otherwise we take Gods name in vain. I
must look upon the Minister who represents the person of Christ, and by the
eyes of faith see Christ himself offered for thee, when thou see the bread
broken, the wine poured out. Behold him offered to thee when the Minister bids
thee take and eat, take and drink. And when the Minister bids thee take, know
that in as good earnest as the Minister offers thee the bread and wine, the
Lord offers thee his son Christ Jesus. Take Christ my son dead and crucified
for thee. Consider when thou see the Minister set the bread and wine apart,
how God from all eternity set apart his son for us. If we have not done this,
we must do it. Exodus 12.3. See the manner of the setting apart of the Lamb,
which was a Type of Christ; In the tenth day of the month they shall take to
them every man a Lamb, according to the house of their Father: This Lamb was to
be set apart, and taken out of the flock. And in the fifth verse, It must be a
Lamb without blemish: then you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the
same month. From the tenth day to the fourteenth it was to be kept: This
typified that Lamb of God that was so set apart. Then was the Lamb to be
killed: By whom? Verse 6. by all the Congregation of Israel, And thus was
Christ to be singled out, and to be slain: Every mothers son had a hand in
killing this Lamb of God. He is set a part to suffer for sinners, picked out as
a singled dear: which being desinged to the game, the hounds will follow only,
and no other. Thus was Christ hunted to death by one sorrow after another, till
he gave up the Ghost upon the Cross. In the Gospel according to Saint John, we
read how the people took branches of Palms trees, and went forth to meet
Christ, cap. 12.12. and that was the day the Lamb was set apart, and he was so
set apart till the Jews Passover. This concerns me, says Christ. Christ saw
himself typified in the Lamb that was set apart: Observe then on that very day,
Fathtr, says he, Deliver me from that hour. On that very day in the Lamb he
saw himself to be sacrificed by all the Congregation of Israel. We were all of
us actors in the business; not one here but had a hand in the offering up of
the son of God, in killing Christ Jesus.

Thus for these actions of the Minister, the setting apart of the bread and of
the wine; Then follows the Breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the
wine. At the breaking of the bread, consider Christ's flesh torn assunder, all
the lashes which made such scratches in his flesh, the ruptures which were made
by the nails, and the spear that pierced his side: The breaking of him by his
Father, the word signifies, crushing him to powder: God would break him, says
the Prophet, even to powder. At the consideration hereof how should our faith
be stirred and set awake! Thou take Gods name in vain, if with a dull eye
thou can see these things, and not take it to heart.

The next action, is The pouring out of the wine: This is my blood, says
Christ, Drink you all of this. Do thou see the wine poured out? at that very
instant, consider how much blood Christ spilt, how much he poured forth: and
that not only in the very time of his passion, when he hung upon the Cross,
when the spears peirced his sides, when the nails bored, and dug his hands
and feet: But that which he shed in the garden in the cold winter time when he
shed great drops, great clots of blood, thickest blood that pierced his
garment, and ran down upon the ground. Consider how much blood he lost when he
was whipped and lashed: when the spear came to the very Pericardium; thus let
us weigh his torments, and it will be a means to make us much affected with his
sufferings for us.

But this is not all, there is another thing yet in the blood: this was but the
outward part of his sufferings. Yet some there are who are against Christ's
sufferings in his soul; If it were so, say they, then something either in the
sacrifices of the old Testament, or in the new Testament, should signify it.
What ever such persons object against it, I am sure there was as much in the
sacrifices of the old Testament, as could possibly be in a Type to signify it.
Now that I may make this to appear, know that in every sacrifice, there were
two parts, or two things considerable, and those were the Body and the Blood:
the whole was to be made a sacrifice, viz. both Body and blood; the body was to
be burned, the blood to be poured forth: Now nothing in a beast can signify
the sufferings of Christ in soul, better then the pouring out of the blood.
Lev. 17.11. The blood was the life, and this is that which had a relation to
the soul, and was therefore, as in the same place appears, poured out as an
atonement for the soul: And to this in our common prayers, there is an
allusion, viz. Grant us gracious Lord so to eat the flesh of thy dear son Jesus
Christ, and to drink his blood, that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his
body, and our souls washed through his most precious blood. And in Isa. 53.12.
The Metaphor holds, He poured out his soul unto death for us. So that whatever
some have fondly thought, its evident and manifest that Christ suffered both in
soul and body: both soul and body were made an offering for sin, who knew no
sin. I should have gone further, but the time cuts me off.

FINIS.
HEB. 4.16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
IN handling heretofore the Doctrine of the conversion of a sinner, I declared
and showed you what man's misery was, and what that great hope of mercy is that
the Lord proposes to the greatest sinner in the world. I showed unto you the
means whereby we may be made partakers of Christ; and that was by the grace of
faith, which does let fall all other things in a man's self, and comes with an
open and empty hand, to lay hold on Christ, and fill it self with him. I showed
you also the acts of Faith as it justifies.

And now because it is a point of high moment, wherein all our comfort stands,
and in which it lies, I thought good to resume it all again, so far as may
concern our practice, that we may see what the work of Gods Spirit is from the
first to the last, in the conversion of a sinner from the corruptions and
pollutions of the flesh in which he wallowed; and to this purpose have I chosen
this place of Scripture, wherein we are encouraged by Gods blessed Word, that
what ever we are, though accursed, and the greatest sinners in the world, and
that whatever we want, we should come to Gods throne of grace.

And we are to think that whatever sins are or have been committed, and
though our sins are never so great, yet that they are not so great as the
infiniteness of Gods mercy; especially having such, not only an Intercessor,
but Advocate to plead the right of our cause, so that Christ comes and he
pleads payment; and that however our debts are great, and we run far in
score, yet he is our ransom; and therefore now Gods justice being satisfied,
why should not his mercy have place and free course? This is the great comfort
that a Christian has, that he may come freely and boldly to God, because he
comes but as for an acquittance of what is already paid: As a debtor will
appear boldly before his creditor, when he knows his debt is discharged, he
will not then be afraid to look him in the face. Now we may come and say,
Blessed Father, the debt is paid, I pray give me pardon of my sins, give me
my acquittance. And this is that boldness and access spoken of, Romans 5.2. In
whom we have access by faith.

Now that I may not spend too much time needlessly, come we to the ground and
matter in the words: Wherein there is 1. A preparative for grace. 2. The act it
self whereby we are made partakers of the grace of God.


First, the preparatives are two, The law and the Gospel, and wrought by them.

The first preparative.

1. Wrought by the Law. The Law works in a time of great need; this is the
first preparative, for a man to be brought to see he stands in great need of
Gods mercy and Christ's blood, so that the sinner cries out, Lord, I stand in
great want of mercy. His eyes being thus opened, he is no longer a stranger at
home, but he sees the case is wondrous hard with him, so that he concludes,
Unless God be merciful unto me in Christ, I am lost and undone for ever: This
is the first preparative; and till we come to it, we can never approach the
throne of grace. The second is,

2. Wrought by the Gospel: I see I stand in great need; but by this second
preparative we see a Throne of grace set up, and that adds comfort unto me: If
God had only a throne and seat of Justice, I were utterly undone; I see my
debt is extreme great; but the Gospel reveals unto me, that God of his infinite
mercy has erected a Throne of grace, a City of refuge, that finding my self in
need, my soul may fly unto.

And now to fit us for this, Gods blessed Spirit works by his Word, to open
unto us the Law and our wants; to enlighten our understandings that we stand in
great need; to win our affection, and open the Gospel and its comforts.

Therefore first for the time of need, the Law reveals unto us our woeful
condition, to be born in sin, as the Pharisee said, and yet not able to see it.
Every man may say in generalities, I am a sinner; yet to say and know himself
to be such a sinner as indeed he is, to stand in such need, that he cannot do.
This one would think to be a matter of sense, but unless Gods Spirit open our
eyes, we can never see our selves to be such sinners as we are; or else what is
the reason that the child of God cries out more against his sin and the
weight thereof, after his conversion than he did before? What, are his sins
greater or more than they were formerly? No, but his Light is greater, his eyes
are opened, and now he sees more clearly what sin is. When the Sun shines,
and its rays come in, what a number of motes do we discover, which before we
saw not? Not as if the Sunne-beames made them, or the Sun raised the dust;
no, there are here as many motes, and as much dust flying about as if the Sun
shined here: What Is the matter then? Why this: the Sun discovers them to us.
So that here is the point, Our sins in our souls are as motes in the air, and
are not more than they were before conversion, but we cannot see them till the
glorious beams of Gods Spirit shine upon us. The sight of sin, and of the
danger that comes by it, is the work of Gods Spirit. The Spirit discovers sin
unto us, John 16.8. When the Spirit comes, he shall convince the world of
sin, the word is (...), the Spirit shall convince them; and the same word is
used; Heb. 11.1. where Faith is said to be the evidence of things not seen,
(...)^ Heretofore we had a slight imagination of our sins, but to have our
mouth stopped, and to be convinced, is not a work of flesh and blood, but of
Gods Spirit, Romans 3.19. Till we are awakened by his Spirit, we cannot see nor
feel the mountains and heaps of sins that lie upon our souls. Thou art dead
in sin, Romans 8. Thou art in bondage; and to know it is a work of the Spirit,
not of nature. The spirit of bondage, what is that? Why, however we are all
bondmen, until the Son has made us free; in a woeful estate, slaves to sin
and Satan: yet till Gods Spirit convince us, and show it us, and make us know
it, we sleep secure, are not afraid, but think our selves the freest men in the
world, and see not this to be a time of need: This therefore is the first
preparative, when God brings his people by Mount Sinai, Heb. 12.18. For you are
not come unto the Mountain that may be touched, and that burned by fire, nor
unto the blackness and darkness, and tempest: so Gal. 4. Mount Sinai is made a
figure of the Law, which begets bondage. Not that Mount which might be touched,
and that burnt with fire, where was the sound of the Trumpet, and voice of
words, such a sound as never before was heard, nor never will be till one day
we shall hear the same. The sound of the Trumpet which sounded at the delivery
of the Law, Exodus 19.19. where it is described; for when the voice of the
Trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, that Moses heard, it was
such a noise, a great noise at first, but it grew higher and and higher, and at
last it came to that height that it was almost incomprehensible; then Moses
spoke: And what spoke he? The Holy Ghost sets not down what he spoke in that
place. Look in Heb. 12.21. So terrible was the voice, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake: Such a kind of lightning and loud voice this was;
the Lord commands such a voice as this, Esaias 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift
up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the
house of Jacob their sins. When God shall sound with the voice of the Trumpet
of his holy Word, of his Law, and show thee that thou art a traiterous Rebel,
and that there is an Execution gone out against thee, body and goods: when God
sounds thus to the deaf ear of a carnal man, then comes the spirit of bondage
of necessity on him, which shows that we have a time of need. The Law must have
this operation before thou come to the Throne of grace. None will fly to the
City of Refuge, till the revenger of blood be hard at his heels: Nor any to
Christ till he sees his want: Thus the Lord makes us know our need by turning
the edge of his Axe toward us. Offenders when they are brought to the bar at
Westminster for Treason, have the edge of the Axe turned from them; but when
they have received the sentence of condemnation, and are carried back to the
Tower, the edge of the Axe is turned toward them. Thus is it here; The Law
turns the edge of Gods Axe toward us; and therefore it is said of St. Peter's
hearers, Acts 2.38. That they were pricked to the heart. The Law puts the point
of Gods sword to our very breasts as it were, and brings us to see that we stand
in great need of heaven. This is the first preparative; when God enlightens our
minds to see our dangerous estate; and then there must of necessity follow
fear, and desire to be rid of this condition; for the will and affections
always follow the temper of the mind: And hence, when a man has a false
persuasion that he is in a good case, that he is safe and well, what works it
but pride, presumption, confidence and security? So on the contrary, contrary
effects must follow. If a man be in health and jollity, and on a sudden be
proclaimed a Traitor, that he must lose his life and goods, is it possible it
should be thus, and he not wrought on, nor have any alteration? So when news
comes from the Law that thou art a dead man, and everlastingly must perish, the
Law then works wrath, that is, it manifests unto us the wrath of God. When it
is thus, there follows a shaking and a trembling, and it is impossible but with
Moses thou should exceedingly quake and tremble.

2. For all this, there is a Throne of grace erected; God has not forgotten to
be merciful, though thy sins be never so great: This is the next preparative
for faith, namely, the discovery and acknowledgement of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus; We see in Ezra 10.2. We have trespassed against our God, and have taken
strange wives of the people of the Land; yet now there is hope in Israel
concerning this thing; we have trespassed; What then? must we be the subjects
of Gods wrath? No: Yet notwithstanding though we have committed this great
offense, there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. What though we have
provoked God to indignation, must we be the matter for his wrath to work on?
No: There is balm in Gilead, Jer. 8. ult. Is there no balm in Gilead? Is
there no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my
people recovered? What though then we are sick to death? yet there is an help
in time of need. And this knowledge of the people, that there is a Throne of
grace, is the first comfort comes to a miserable and sinful soul. A man that
has a deadly disease, though the Physician do him no good which he has made
use of, yet this he comforts himself in, when he sees a Physician that has
cured the same disease, he sees then there is some hope. Thus it is with a
sinful soul. When the welcome news of the Gospel comes, after the Law has
discovered his disease, and says, Be not discouraged, there is a Throne of
grace prepared for thee: God has a seat of justice to deal with Rebels and
open Traitors; but if thou art weary of thy estate, if thou will submit to God,
take Christ for thy King, and cast down all thy weapons, if thou will live like
a subject, he has prepared a Throne of grace for thee. Christ is thy Attorney
in the Court to plead for thee; he is not as the Papists make him, so stout,
and one that takes such state on him, as that a man may not come near him. This
is the highest injury that can be offered to Christ, to think that any creature
has more mercy and pity than he has: It is to rob Christ of the fairest
flower in his garden, when we rob him of his mercy and pity. Mark that place in
Heb. 4.15. that we may not think him austere, We have not an High Priest that
cannot be touched with our infirmities, with the feeling of our infirmities.
Christ is no hard-hearted man; when you were his enemies he loved you, insomuch
that he humbled himself; and suffered death, even the death of the Cross for
you. And he has the self-same bowels in heaven that he had on earth; he wept
over Jerusalem, and the self-same weeping heart carried he to heaven with him,
the self-same weeping eyes: Believe not then the Papists, that he is so
hard-hearted or so stately, and that his mother is more ready to speak for us
than he; fie on it. This is to pervert the Gospel, and make Christ no Christ.
We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 2.17. In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, etc. Alas poor
soul, says Christ, what the malice of the Devil is, I know by mine own
experience in the flesh; for Christ was tempted in all things according to us,
sin only excepted. I know what the temptations of the world are; but whereas
we have three enemies, the Devil, the world, and the flesh, only the two former
were his. Christ had the temptations of the world and the Devil, not of the
corrupt flesh; for he had no corrupt flesh: A man that has been himself in
terrible Tempests on the Sea, when he sees a storm, out of his own experience
he pities those that are in it; when as others are not a jot moved: for he has
seen that consternation of mind, which on every side appeared. That -- plurima
mortis imago; whereas others having not been there, lay not their miseries to
heart. Christ having suffered himself, and being tempted as we were, is
sensible of our miseries; and therefore never count it boldness to come boldly
to him that gives thee this encouragement: Come boldly to the Throne of grace.
We must understand that all this is before faith, we must

1. Know that we have a need.

2. That there is a Throne of grace, when God enlightens my conscience, and
encourages me to come. And thus having spoken of the preparatives, I come to
the work, the main thing it self. Now this is,

2. The Act, Coming; this coming is believing; as the feet which carry a man to
the place he would be in; his feet carry him nearer and nearer. If a man cannot
be cured but by the Bath, his feet must carry him thither. Now faith is the
legs of the soul, the feet that carry us unto Christ; whereas we are afar off,
and draw back as all unbelievers; now by believing we draw near. Now as
unbelievers draw back, so believers draw forward; and therefore John 1.12. and
John 6.35. To come to Christ and to believe in him are the self-same thing. He
that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst. Coming is there made an act of faith, and the same thing with it: The
one is the explication of the other; thy coming to Christ is thy believing in
him. When thou hear of a Throne of grace, and see the Lord of glory
stretching out his golden Scepter, come and touch it, take the benefit of the
Kings pardon. If a man know there is such a Throne of grace, he must come unto
it; And now begins faith to work.

And that thou may understand it the better, know that faith then begins
first to work, when thou set the first step toward the Throne of grace.
And this is the hour in which salvation is come unto thy house. None can come
to me, says Christ, except my Father draw him. If thou see a virtue to come
from Christ, and to draw thee as an Adamant, and thou feel that loadstone
working on thee, then begins faith: It makes thee draw near to Christ; whereas
before thou were a stranger: Till then thou art like thy Grandfather Adam, thou
runnest away, and think thy self most secure, when thou wast farthest from
God; but now thou see no comfort, unless thou draw nigh unto him; now as the
Apostle says, Phil. 2.13. It is he that works in us the will and the deed;
this must be wrought in us by God.

First, a will, then the deed; and then it is not only I would do such a thing,
but I do it: God works not only the will of coming, but the deed of coming; and
all his acts are acts of faith, and have a promise; God makes no promise till
we be in Christ; till we have faith, we are no heirs of the promise; when a
man sets his face toward Jerusalem, and begins to set himself to go to Christ,
all he does then has the promise; not a tear now that he sheds but is
precious, God puts it into his bottle; not a cup of cold water that now he
gives but shall have a great reward; this is a blessed thing when every thing
we do has a promise annexed to it, when every step we step has a promise made
to it. Now then the will is the first thing that is wrought in us; this is that
which makes the act of faith, that is, I have a will, a resolution to do this:
And the Apostle makes it more than the very deed it self, 2 Cor. 8.10. as I may
so say, For this is expedient for you, who have begun before not only to do,
but to be forward. So we translate it, but look in the Margent, and its
rendered, ( to be willing) (...), as the Greek has it; as if the will were more
than the deed it self; for a man to come unwillingly, it is nothing worth; the
groundwork is the will, which is a greater matter than the deed. Nothing more
separates a man from Christ, than to say, I will not have this man to reign
over me; but if thou can frame thy will that it shall go perpendicularly on
the object, and accept Christ on the terms offered, that is faith, and that
has the promise. And therefore the Scripture compares it to conjunction with
Christ. And as in the Sacrament we spiritually eat his flesh and drink his
blood; the conjunction is between Christ and his Church. And therefore the
Scripture compares our conjunction by faith to the mystery of wedlock. What
makes a marriage? its consent. Will thou have this man to be thy husband? she
answers, I will; that expression makes the marriage: The knot is knit by this
mutual pledging of troth, all other things are but subsequents of it. So God
says, Will thou have my Son? Thou shall have with him all his wealth, though
for a time thou must go bare, and fare hard; yet thou shall have a Kingdom:
When a man considers deliberately, here is the loss, I must deny my self and
obey him, but I shall have a Kingdom, Gods blessing, and peace of conscience;
All things considered, casting the best with the worst, then the resolution is,
this is a true saying worthy of all acceptance, etc. I Will take him on any
terms, be they never so hard, for I shall be a saver in the end: when we can
take Christ as it were with all his faults, this is the will which God
requires. There is another comparison in Scripture, John 6.35. its compared to
hunger and thirst. Believing was expressed by coming. Believing is expressed by
hungring and thirsting. So when I see such a will and desire after Christ; that
I hunger and thirst after him, that a hungry man longs not more for bread,
nor the Heart thirsts more for the waterbrooks, than my soul does for Christ;
why then there is a promise made unto us; and a promise is never made unto us
till we be in Christ. Matthew. 5. Rev. 22. Esaias 55. We find promises in them
all; in Mat. 5.6. Bl^ssed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness;
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven, they shall be filled. Consider here what
the nature of hunger and thirst is; they shall be filled, which implies they
were empty before, but now they shall be filled. Suppose now I am not filled
with Christ, What am I without him? No, I want him; yet there is a blessing to
the hungry and thirsty, and there is no blessing without faith. If we be not
heirs of the faith, we cannot be heirs of the blessing. Do thou find in
thy self an hungring and thirsting after Christ? Thou art blessed, this faith
will save thee. Now faith will say, I am wonderfully pained, faint, and even
starved, that I cannot be filled with Christ; yet be content man, thou shall be
filled with him; in the mean while thou have him, and have blessedness, and
shall be blessed. It Is said, 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you
that believe in the Name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have
eternal life, and that you may believe on the Name of the Son of God. Mark
how the Apostle distinguishes these two things; thou believe on the Name of
Christ, yet say thou, though I believe, I am not sure of my salvation, I do
not know it. Why, let not that much trouble thee, that is a consequent of it,
and that assurance will follow after; therefore you should not confound it with
believing: These things have I written unto you that ye might know, etc. then
there is a conclusion to be deduced from the premises, so that a man may have
full hold of Christ, and yet not be fully assured of his salvation. So then
here is the will, which is the first thing.

But the Lord works the deed also. And whereas it is said that God takes the
will for the deed, the place had need be well understood: when we say God takes
the will for the deed, it is not always true, unless it be thus understood.
When a man has done to the utmost of his power what he is able, has
endeavored by all means, then God will take the will for the deed; but if
there be ability in me, and I do not as much as I am able, I do not my utmost
endeavor, then God will not take it; but now God works the will and the deed;
when a man comes to the Throne of grace, and sets forward in his journey
toward God, the first thing he does is to come to the Throne of grace with
Christ in his arms, and then having fast hold on Christ, he hastens and
delays not, having hold as Joab on the horns of the Altar. He hastens, he sees
its no time to delay, he sees its now a time of need; and Need, as the old
proverb is, makes the old wife trot. Is it not need to make haste (when the
pursuer of blood follows) to the City of Refuge? who would make delays and
demurs, and not run as fast as his legs would carry him? Asson as I apprehend
my need, and see the golden Scepter stretched out, then I come with might and
main with Christ in my arms, and present him to the Father, and this is the
approaching and drawing near in the Text, to the Throne of grace.

But now when I am come thither, what do I say there? What shall I come and say
nothing? The prodigal soon resolved to go to his Father, and say, I will up and
go, there is the will; and say, there is his speech. The believer is not like to
the son that said to his father, I will go, but went not; but when his father
bids him come, he will come, he will not only say so, but will draw near, and
then he has a promise, He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast off. But
when we come thither, what must we do? why we must take unto our selves words,
according to the Prophets expression, Hos. 14.2. Take unto you words, and go
unto the Lord, and say, Take away all our iniquities, and receive us
graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. When he comes to the
Throne of grace, the thing that he does, is, he presents unto the Father Christ
bleeding, gasping, dying, buried, and conquering death; and when he presents
Christ to him, he opens his case, and confesses his sin to the full, and says,
Lord, this is my case: As a beggar when he comes to ask an alms of you, he
will make a preface, and tell you his extremity; Sir, I am in great want, I
have not tasted a bit of bread in so many days, and unless you help me by your
charity, I am utterly undone. Now when these two concur that there is true need
in the beggar, and liberality in him of whom he begs, it encourages the beggar
to be importunate, and he prevails; you may know when the beggar has need by
his tone, accent or language: The needy beggars tone and accent is different
from the sturdy beggars that has no need; but yet, though the beggar be in
great misery, if he see a churlish Nabal go by him, he has no heart to beg,
and follows him not, nor begs so hard, because he has but little hope to
attain any thing from him. But I say let both these meet together; first, that
the beggar is in great need, then, that he of whom he begs, is very liberal, it
makes him beg hard; but now cannot he pray without book? Think not that I speak
against praying by the book; you are deceived if you think so; but there must
be words taken to us besides, which perhaps a book will not yield us. A beggars
need will make him speak, and he will not hide his sores; but if he has any
sore more ugly or worse than another, he will uncover it; good Sir, behold my
woeful and distressed case, he lays all open to provoke pity. So when thou
come before God in confession, can thou not find out words to open thy
self to Almighty God, not one word whereby thou may unlap thy sores, and
beseech him to look on thee with an eye of pity? I must not mince my sins, but
amplify and aggravate them, that God may be moved to pardon me; till we do
thus, we cannot expect that God should forgive us. A great ado there is about
auricular confession, but its a mere babble; It were better to cry out our
sins at the high Cross, than to confess in a Priests ear. Thou whisperest
in the Priests ear; what if he never tell it, or if he do, art thou the
better? Come and pour out thy heart and soul before. Almighty God, confess
thy self to him as David did, for that has a promise made to it, Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that
thou may be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Why
so? Why, one main cause why we should confess sin, is to justify God. When
a sinner confesses, I am a child of wrath; and of death, if thou castest me
into hell, as justly thou may, I have received but my due: when a man does
thus (as the Kings Attorney may frame a Bill of Indictment against himself) he
justifies Almighty God: Thus did David, Against thee, against thee, etc. Now
when we have thus aggravated our misery, comes the other part of begging, to
cry for mercy with earnestness, and here is the power of the Spirit. It Is one
thing for a man to pray, and another thing for a man to say a prayer. It Is the
easiest thing in the world to say a prayer, but to pray and cry for mercy as
David did, in good earnest, to wrestle with God, to say, Lord, My life lies in
it, I will never give thee over, I will not go with a denial; this is termed
(...), this is the work of Gods Spirit. I named you a place in Jude ver. 20.
where the Apostle exhorts, but ye beloved, build up your selves in your most
holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost; there is the prayer of the faithful, to
pray in the Holy Ghost. And in the Ephesians we read of an Armor provided for
all the parts of a man's body, yet all will not serve the turn, unless prayer
come in as the chief, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, etc.
This is the prayer of faith, that procures forgiveness of sins; we must pray
in faith, and in the Spirit; that is the language which God understands. He
knows the meaning of the Spirit, and knows none else but that: Many men are
wondrously deceived in that which they call the Spirit of prayer. One thinks it
is a faculty to set out ones desires in fair words, showing earnestness, and
speaking much in an extemporary prayer. This we think commendable, yet this is
not the Spirit of prayer. One that shall never come to heaven, may be more
ready in this than the child of God; for it is a matter of skill and exercise;
the Spirit of prayer is another thing. The Spirit helps our infirmities, for
we know not what we should pray for as we ought; the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. What
shall we think then, that the Holy Ghost groans or speaks in prayer? No: but it
makes us groan, and though we speak not a word, yet it so enlarges our hearts,
as that we send up a volley of sighs and groans which fit the Throne of grace.
And this is the Spirit of prayer, when with these sighs and groans I beg as it
were for my life. This is that ardent affection the Scripture speaks of. A cold
prayer will never get forgiveness of sins; it is the prayer of faith which
prevails. The prayer of the faithful avails much, if it be (...), fervent.
In the Ancient Churches those that were possessed with an evil spirit, were
called (...), because that caught them up, and made them do actions not suitable
to their nature; Prayer is a fire from heaven, which if thou have it, will
carry all heaven before it; there is nothing in the world so strong as a
Christian thus praying: Prayers that are kindled with such a zeal, are compared
to Jacobs wrestling with the Angel, Hos. 12.4. whereby, he had power over the
Angel. The Prophet expounds what this wrestling was, he wept and made
supplication unto him; he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with him.
This is the wrestling with God, when thou fillest heaven with thy sighs and
sobs, and bedewest thy couch with thy tears as David did; and have this
resolution with Jacob, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. God loves
this kind of boldness in a beggar, that he will not go away without an
answer. As the poor Widow in the Parable that would not give over her suit, so
that the Judge though he feared not God, nor cared for man, by reason of her
importunity granted her desire. Mark the other thing in the Apostle, he bids us
pray with the Spirit, and with perseverance; and he that comes thus, has a
promise made to it: He that calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved.
Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee; it is set down fully,
Matthew. 6.7. Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you; for every one that asks receives, and he that
seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. One would think
this were idem per idem, but it is not so. He bids us ask and it shall be
given, seek and you shall find, etc. There is a promise annexed to asking,
seeking and knocking, but it is also proved by universal experience: for every
one that asks, etc. It Is every man's case; never any man did it yet, that has
lost his labor, in not attaining what he asked. If thou have it not yet, thou
shall have it in the end; it is so fair a petition to ask, to have thy sins
pardoned, that God would be friends with thee, and that Christ would make thee
love him, and that God would be thy God, that God delights in it. This is the
point then; Suppose God answer not presently, yet knock still, seek still; that
is perseverance, the thing whereby it is distinguished from temporary asking.
The hypocrite will pray in a time of need and adversity, but his prayer is not
constant, Job 27.10. Will the hypocrite always call upon God? If they come and
seek God, and he will not answer, as Saul did, they will try the Devil. God
would not answer Saul, and he presently goes to the Devil. It Is not so with
Gods children; they pray, and pray, and wait still; they pray with the Spirit,
and with perseverance: God deals not always alike with his children, but
differently; sometimes he answers presently, sometimes he makes them wait his
leisure, Psalm. 32.5. I said I would confess my sin, (says David) and my
transgressions, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin; so Dan. 9.21. When
he set himself to seek God, even while he was speaking and praying, the man
Gabriel appeared unto him, and touched him about the time of the evening
Oblation. Before the word was out of his mouth God was at his heart, and
presently sends him a dispatch. The like we see in Esaias 65.24. Mark what a
promise there is; It shall come to pass that before they call I will answer;
and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. This is a great encouragement;
but it may be God will not always do this, and what is the reason? Why, he has
a wonderful great delight to be wrestled withal, and to hear the words of his
own Spirit; nothing is more delightful to him, than this, when the Spirit is
earnest, and will not give over. I will not let thee go, unless thou bless
me. It Is said in the Canticles, honey is under the lips of the Church; why so?
it is because there is no honey sweeter to the palate, than spiritual prayer to
God. And therefore God delays to answer thee, because he would have more of
it. If the Musicians come and play at our doors or windows, if we delight not
in their Music, we throw them out money presently that they may be gone; but
if the Music please us, we forbear to give them money, because we would keep
them longer, for we like the Music. So the Lord loves and delights in the
sweet words of his children: and therefore puts them off, and answers them not
presently: Now Gods children, let him deny them never so long, yet they will
never leave knocking and begging; they will pray, and they will wait still,
till they receive an answer. Many will pray to God, as prayer is a duty, but
few use it as a means to attain a blessing. Those who come to God in the use of
it as a means to attain what they would have, they will pray and not give over;
they will expect an Answer, and never give over petitioning till they receive
it.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
HAving declared unto you heretofore the nature of faith, and that point which
concerns the practice of it in our near approach unto God; I am now come to
show unto you the fruits and benefits Christians receive from this
Mother-grace; and that the Apostle sets down in these words.

He sets down,

1. The Mother-Grace, Justification; that whereas we were afar off, we are
made near, and of enemies made friends of God. Then,

2. There are the daughters or handmaids of this grace: For when we are
justified by Faith, then,

1. We have peace with God: that peace of conscience which passes all
understanding; then,

2. We have free access by faith unto the Throne of grace, so that we need not
look for any other Mediators. Christ has made way for us to God, so that we
may go boldly to the Throne of grace, and find help at any time of need.

3. There follows a joyful hope, that a Christian has by it, a taste of Heaven
before he come to enjoy it. We rejoice in hope, says the Apostle; hope being
as firm a thing as faith, faith makes things absent as present; hope has
patience with it, and would have us wait. We shall be sure of it, but yet we
must wait patiently.

4. Not only rejoicing in hope, but even that which spoils a natural man's joy,
as crosses, troubles, afflictions: and these are made the matter of this man's
joy, not delectable objects only. Not in time to come after afflictions, but in
afflictions; so as that which spoils the joy of a natural man, is fuel to
kindle this man's joy.

Now concerning justification by faith; though it be an ordinary point, yet
there is nothing more needs Explication, than to know how a man shall be
justified by Faith. It Is easily spoken, hardly explicated; Therefore in this
mother-Grace, I shall show you,

1. What faith is that does justify. And,

2. What this justification is. For it is not so easy a matt^^ neither.

1. Concerning the nature of faith, I have spoken sufficiently already wherein
it consists; but yet notwithstanding, there is a certain thing as like this
faith as may be, and yet comes short of it. Many there are who are like the
foolish Virgins, that thought they were well enough, and thought they should
come time enough. So many think, verily they have faith, yea and perchance go
with such a persuasion to their very graves, and think they have grace, and
that they labor after Christ, and lay hold on him, and are free from worldly
pollutions, so as that they have a taste and relish of the joy of the world to
come, and yet are carried all this while in a fools Paradise, and think there
is no fear of their safety, never knowing that they are cast-awayes, till they
come to the gates of hell, and find themselves by woeful experience shut out of
heaven. And their case is woeful that are thus deceived. Know then that it is
not every faith that justifies a man; a man may have faith, and yet not be
justified. The Faith that justifies, is the Faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1.
there is a faith that may belong to them that are not Gods elect, but that
faith does not justify. In the Epistle to Timothy, that faith which justifies,
must be a Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.5, Now here is the skill of a
Christian to try what that faith is which justifies him. Now this justifying
faith is not every work of Gods Spirit in a man's heart: for there are
supernatural operations of the Spirit in a man's heart, that are but temporary,
that carry him not through, and therefore are ineffectual: but the end of this
faith is the salvation of our souls. We read in Scripture of Apostasy, and
falling back. Now, they cannot be Apostates that were never in the way of
truth. This being an accident, we must have a subject for it; Now there is a
certain kind of people that have supernatural workings; some that are drawn up
and down with every wind of Doctrine; these are they that have this cold and
temporary faith; temporary, because in the end it discovers it self to be a
thing not constant and permanent. We read in John 11.26. That they that are
born of God, never see death, shall never perish eternally; but yet we must
know withal, that there may be conceptions that will never come to the birth,
to a right and perfect delivery. And thus it may be in the soul of a man, there
may be conceptions that will never come to a ripe birth; but let a man be borne
of God, and come to perfection of birth, and the case is clear, he shall never
see death. He that lives and believes in me shall not see death. And this is
made a point of faith: Believe thou this?

There is another thing called conception, and that is, certain dispositions to
a birth that come not to full perfection. True, a child that is borne and
lives, is as perfectly alive as he that lives an hundred years: yet I say,
there are conceptions that come not to a birth. Now, the faith that justifies,
is a living faith: there is a certain kind of dead faith; this is a feigned,
that an unfeigned faith; The life that I now live, I live by the faith of the
Son of God. Do thou think a dead faith can make a living soul? It Is
against reason. A man cannot live by a dead thing, not by a dead faith. Now a
dead faith there is. A faith that does not work is a dead faith, Jam. 2.22.
See thou how faith wrought with his works and by his works was faith made
perfect? for verse 26. As the body without the spirit is dead, (or without
breath is dead) so faith without works is dead also. See how the Apostle
compares it, as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead also. The Apostle makes not faith the form of works, as the soul is the
form of the man: but as the body without the spirit is dead, so that faith
that works not, that has no tokens of life, is dead; but then does not the
other word strike home? Faith wrought with his works. It seems here is not as
the Papists say, fides informis, and works make it up as the (...) of it.
Compare this with the other places of the Scripture, 2 Cor. 12.9. where the
Apostle prayed to God that the messenger of Satan might be removed from him;
and he said unto him, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness. What? does our weakness make Gods strength more perfect,
to which nothing can be added? No, it is, My strength and the perfection of it,
is made known in the weakness of the means that I made use of for the
delivery of man's soul from death. So here the excellency and perfection of our
faith is made known by works; when I see that it is not an idle but a working
faith, then I say it is made perfect by the work: when it is a dead faith, that
puts not a man on work, never believe that will make a living soul. In St.
Judes Epistle, ver. 20. it has another Epithet, viz. the most holy faith: not
holy only, but most holy. That faith which must bring a man to God the holy of
holies, must be most holy. It Is said, that God dwells in our hearts by faith.
Now God and faith dwelling in a heart together, that heart must needs be pure
and clean. Faith makes the heart pure: It were a most dishonorable thing to
entertain God in a sty; a filthy and unclean heart: but if faith dwell there,
it makes a fit house for the habitation of the King of Saints, therefore it
purifieth the heart. Well then, do thou think thy sins are forgiven thee;
and that thou have a strong faith, and yet art as profane and as filthy as
ever? How can it be? It is a most holy faith that justifies, it is not a faith
that will suffer a man to lie on a dunghill, or in the gutter with the hog.
There may be a faith which is somewhat like this, but it is but temporary, and
comes short of it.

But now there is another thing which distinguishes it: it is the peculiar work
of faith. In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but the new creature, Gal. 6.15. and again, Gal. 5.6. Neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but faith which works by
love. It Is twice set down. Now what is a new creature? why, he that has such a
faith as works by love: not a dead faith, but a faith that works: but how does
it work? it not only abstaines from evil, and does some good acts, which a
temporary may do, but its such a faith as works by love. The love of God
constraines him, and he so loves God, as that he hates evil for Gods sake; the
other does it not out of love to God; all the love he has, is self-love: he
serves his own turn on God, rather than has any true love to serve him.

Now that we may the better distinguish between these two, I shall endeavor to
show you how far one may go farther than the other. I know not a more
difficult point then this, nor a case more to be cut by a thread then this; it
being a point of conscience; therefore, First, I declared unto you the nature
of faith; How God first works the will and the deed, and that there is a
hungring and thirsting after Christ. First, I say there is a will and desire to
be made partaker of Christ and his righteousness; then there is the deed too.
We are not only wishers and woulders, but do actually approach unto the Throne
of grace, and there lay hold on Christ, touch the golden Scepter which he
holds out unto us; but,

Object. Now you will ask, Is there not an earnest and good desire in a
temporary faith, a desire unfeigned?

Sol. Yes, there may be for a time, a greater and more vehement desire in a
temporary then in a true believer, then in the elect themselves all their life.

Object. Where Is the difference then? I thought all had been well with me, when
I had such a desire, as I could scarce be at rest till it were accomplished.

Sol. I answer, beloved, It is a hard matter to tell you the difference: but
you must consider,

1. From whence this desire flows; whether it come from an accidental cause:
as if by accident my heart be made more soft, and I more sensible of my
condition, or whether my nature be changed; to give you an instance, in iron:
when iron is put into the forge it is softened, and as soon as it is taken
forth, we say it is time to strike while the iron is hot; the fire has made a
change in it, it is malleable, the hammer is able to work on it; but let the
fire be gone, and it is as hard as before; nay, we say steel is harder, so that
there is no change in the nature of iron, it is hard still, redit ad ingenium,
it goes back into its own estate. If it be softened, it is by an accidental
cause; so here, as long as the temporary faith is in the furnace of
afflictions, when God shall let loose the cord of his conscience, and makes him
see that there is no way for salvation but by Christ, then the sense of his
torture will make him desire with all the veins in his heart to have Christ.
See a singular example of this temporary desire in Psalm. 78.34. When he slew
them, then they sought him, and returned and enquired early after God. So Prove.
1.27. When their fear was on them as desolation, and their destruction as a
whi^le-wind: when distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall they call
upon me, etc. Not with a feigned desire, but in truth and reality they desire
relief; They remembered then that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer; they saw a Redeemer when he was slaying of them, and they believed
that God would free them, though it was but temporary: Nevertheless they
flattered him with their mouths, and lied unto him with their tongues; for
their heart, was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant. Observe then this was but a temporary case, a temporary change; there
was no new creature, no new nature wrought: but being in the furnace of
affliction, as long as the fire was hot they were pliable; they were not
steadfast in his Covenant. Let this be an admonition to them that think they
never can have true faith till God slay them. I am not of that opinion. God
sometimes uses this means; but it is not so necessary, as that it cannot be
otherwise; and to speak truly, I had rather have faith that comes another way;
the difference is this, The temporary believers will have Christ while God is
slaying of them, whilst they are in the furnace of afflictions: but the other
in cold blood when Gods hand is not on them. The true believer is sick of love,
and when he has no affliction, nor Gods hand on him, with the Apostle, he
accounts all things dung and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus. There Is an ardent desire when this external cause draws not. If
when thou art out of the forge, thou have thy heart softened, and find this
work of grace and faith to drive thee to Christ, thou have a faith unfeigned,
and so the faith of Gods elect.

Again, there is not only this desire in him who has a temporary faith; but
having understood the Word, he so desires it, that when he knows there is no
having Christ, nor happiness or salvation by him, unless he deny himself, and
part from his evil ways, being persuaded of this, out of self-love he would
have Christ; and seeing these be the terms, that he must turn a new leaf, and
lead a new life, or go to hell, therefore he will do this too; this is much*
yet I say, he does this too; but how shall this be proved? most evidently in 2
Pet. 2.20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome, the latter end with them is worse than the beginning.
Here is that Apostasy, and here is the subject of the temporary faith. It had
been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after
they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them; this
was a temporary conversion, as Ephraim, like a broken bow, turned back again in
the day of battle. Observe what they did, they were like the foolish Virgins,
they kept their maiden-heads in respect of the pollutions of the world; they
lived very civilly, they escaped the corruptions of the world, and no man could
challenge them of any filthy act; they knew that Christ was the King of Saints,
and had the knowledge of him; they knew that it was not fit that the King of
glory and holiness should be attended on by the black guard; that they must
have sanctity that will follow him; and therefore they labored to be fit to
attend him: They escaped the pollutions of the world; but yet it continues not;
why so? For it happened to them according to the true Proverb, the Dog is
returned to his vomit, and the Sow that is washed, to her wallowing in the
mire. Mark, the Dog turns again to his own vomit. This proceeds from some pang
in his stomach, that enforces that filthy beast to disgorge it self that it
may have some ease; but he quickly gathers it up again as soon as the pang is
over. Some there are that would be content to hide their iniquity under their
tongues, as Job speaks; but there comes a pang sometimes, a pang in their
consciences which forces them to vomit up their sweet bits again; but well,
the fit is gone, and being gone, they, like the filthy dog, return to their
vomit again, considering the pleasure which they took in that filthy thing;
that they did disgorge themselves, was but from that pang and present pinch,
not from the loathing or hatred of the thing, and therefore they return again
unto it.

By the way then take notice* of the filthiness of sin; how filthy is it,
that the Lord compares it to the vomit of a dog? Then there follows another
comparison of it: It Is as the So^ that is washed, and returns to her wallowing
in the mire: See another loathsome resemblance of this temporary faith; the Sow
was washed, but how? her swinish nature was not washed from her; as long as the
Sow is kept from the mire, in a fair Meadow with the Sheep, she looks as sleek
and clean as they; she was washed, there is an external change, but her nature
remained; bring the Sow and the sheep to a puddle, the sheep will not go in,
because it has no swinish nature; but the other, retaining its swinish nature,
though before in outward appearance as clean as the sheep was, yet she goes
again to her wallowing in the mire. There may be the casting away of a man's
sins, and yet no new creature wrought in him. That I may show this to you,
take this example. A man known to be as covetous a man as lives, he loves his
money as well as his God, yet perchance this man is brought in danger of the
Law, and must be hanged, for some misdemeanour committed; this man to save his
life will part with all he has; what; is his disposition changed? no not a
whit, he is as covetous as before, he is the same man, he does it to save his
life, and to this end he is content to part with his money; the same mind had
those in the Acts of the Apostles, who in a storm cast their wares into the Sea
with their own hands; Acts 27. (...); willingly, and yet half unwilling; for
the saving of their lives they would part with these things, yet it was with a
great deal of repining and reluctance. As we read of Phaltiel; when his wife
was taken from him, he followed behind weeping, till they bid him be gone, and
return back. So these men forsake their sins and hate them, but it is but
imperfectly; they part with them, but they part weeping. Well, at this parting
there may be a great deal of joy, it may taste not only the sweetness of the
Word of God, but because they are in a disposition and way to salvation, they
may have some kind of feeling of the joys, and taste of the powers of the
world to come; as the Apostle speaks, H^b. 6.4. It Is impossible for those who
were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partak^rs of the Holy Ghost, etc. There Is a supernatural work wrought in them,
and they have tasted the good Word of the Lord; they begin to have some hope,
and rejoice in the glory of the world to come: what is the difference then?
here is a tasting; but as it is John 6. it is not said he that eats my flesh, and
tastes my blood; but he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood shall live for
ever. There is a difference betwixt tasting and drinking, there may be a
tasting without drinking; and the Text says, Matthew. 27.34. When they gave
Christ vinegar, he tasted thereof, but would not drink. He that can take a full
draught of Christ crucified, he shall never thirst, but shall be as a springing
fountain that springs up to everlasting life; but it shall not be so with him
that does but taste. The Vintner goes round the Celler, and tastes every
Vessel; he takes it only into his mouth, and spits it out again, and yet knows
by the tasting whether it be good or bad; the wine goes but to his palate, it
reaches not to the stomach. So a temporary believer tastes and feels what an
excellent thing it is to have communion with Christ, and to be made partaker of
his glory, but he does but taste it. Look in Hosea 5.15. where we have another
instance of this temporary Believer; Ye would think they sought God in a good
sort, and in as good a manner as one could desire: well, but how did they seek
him? it was only upon occasion, in time of affliction: I will go and return to
my place until they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face; in their
affliction they will seek me early; and again, Hosea 6.4. the Lord complains of
them notwithstanding. They will in their affliction seek me early: was not this
a fair returning? Come (say they) let us return unto the Lord, for he has
torn, and he will heal us, etc. What a deal of comfort did they seem to gather
from the ways of the Lord! but see what follows, Hosea 6.4. O Ephraim, says
the Lord, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do unto thee? for
your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away; that
is, it is but a temporary thing, wrought by affliction, which will not abide.
As when a wicked man on his deathbed desires that God would spare him and
restore him to his health, and that he would become a new man, all this comes
but from the terrors of death; for it often proves that if God restores him he
becomes as bad, if not worse than ever he was before. But that I may not hold
you too long;

2. Take this for another difference: That Gods children can as earnestly
desire grace as mercy; The temporary desire mercy, but never desire grace. The
believer desires grace to have his nature healed, to hate his former
conversation. The temporary never had, nor never will have this desire; should
one come to the temporary believer, and tell him God will be merciful unto him,
you may go on and take your fit of sin, you shall be sure of mercy; he would
like this well, and think it the welcomest news as could be, because he only
fears damnation, and self-love makes him only desire freedom from that; but
now the child of God hates sin, though there were no Hell, Judge nor
Tormentor; he begs as hard of God for grace, as for mercy, and would do so,
were there no punishment. His nature being changed, he desires grace as well
as mercy, which the temporary never does.

3. The last mark is from the words of the Apostle, Neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Love
and the new creature puts Gods children on work; their hearts are first altered
and changed by being made new creatures. As the Scripture says, his flesh is
circumcised, he is a dead man; deadness argues impotency of doing those
things which a living man does; he cannot walk, etc. The temporary will not
sin for fear of after-claps,; but this man cannot sin, his heart is
changed, he is dead to sin; we see how both abstain from sin, but the
perusal and disposition is not alike. The temporary sinner perchance commits
not the sin, but he could find in his heart to do it; he says not with
Joseph, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against my God? the other
says, I could do this evil well enough, but I will not. Thou can not bear
those that are evil, as in the Revel. Now he that is born of God cannot sin,
there is that seed, that spring in him, that for his life he cannot sin, but it
turns his heart from it; for his life he cannot tell how to swear, lie, etc. or
join with others in wickedness; but this must be understood of the constant
course of their lives; I speak not what they may do in afflictions, when they
are surprised, but in the course of their lives, they commit sin as if they
knew not how to do it; the other does it skilfully; these coblingly and
bunglingly, they do it ill-favouredly; thus it is with a wicked man in doing a
good work, he cobles it up. Thy faith then must be a faith that works by
love; can thou do those good works thou do out of love? then my soul for
thine thou art saved. Get me any temporary that loves God, and I shall say
something to you. Have thou then a faith that causes thee to love God, a
working faith, and a faith that will not suffer thee to do any thing
displeasing to him? if thou have such a faith, thou art justified before God.

2. And so I come now to the point of justification, the greatest of all
blessings: Blessed is he (says David) whose transgression is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered; blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity; it is the most blessed condition as can be; it is set down by way of
Exclamation. O the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity! For justification, see what it is; the Scripture in St. Paul's
Epistles, speaks of justification by faith; and in St. James, of justification
by works. Now it will be useful for us in this point to know whence
justification comes; it comes from justice, Tsedeck as the Original has it,
and to justify; so that justification and righteousness depend one upon the
other; for what is justification but the manifestation of the righteousness
that is in a man? and therefore in Gal. 3.21. they are put for one and the same
thing: For if there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily
righteousness had been by the Law; that is, justification had been by the Law.
Again, If righteousness be by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. Gal. 2.
that is also if justification had been by the Law, etc. justification is a
manifestation of righteousness; and as many ways as righteousness is taken,
so many ways is justification, which is a declaration of righteousness; so
that if there be a double righteousness, there must be also a double
justification; Beloved, I bring you no new doctrine; be not afraid of that; but
I show you how to reconcile places of Scripture against the Church of Rome, and
those things which the Papists bring against us in this point. It stands by
reason, seeing justification is a declaration of righteousness, that there
must be so many sorts of justification as there be of righteousness.

Now there is a double sort of righteousness, Romans 8.4. That the righteousness
of the Law may be fulfilled in us; see then there is a double righteousness;
there is a righteousness fulfilled in us, and a righteousness fulfilled by
us, that is walking in the Spirit. The righteousness fulfilled in us, is
fulfilled by another, and is made ours by imputation; so we have a
righteousness without us, and a righteousness inhaerent in us; the
righteousness without us, is forgiveness of sins, and pardon of them, which
is a gracious act of God, letting fall all actions against me, and accounting
of me as if I had never sinned against him all my life time; then there is a
righteousness within me, an inherent righteousness. And if a righteousness,
then justification; for that is but a declaration of righteousness. And so
that which the Fathers call justification, is taken generally for
sanctification; that which we call justification, they call forgiveness of
sins; that which we call sanctification, they call justification; so that the
difference is only in the terms. Justification we must know, is not taken only
as opposed to condemnation, which is the first kind of righteousness, Romans
6.7. He that is dead, is freed from sin; if you look to the Greek or to the
Margent, it is, he that is dead, is justified from sin; this is not took in
the first sense as opposed to condemnation, but in the other sense as it has
relation to final grace; The perfection of sanctification is wrought in me; for
where there is final grace, there is a supersedeas from all sin; so Rev.
22.11. Let him that is righteous, be righteous still; the Greek is, let him
that is righteous, be justified still. See then the difference between Saint
Paul, and Saint James. Saint Paul speaks of that which consists in remission of
sins, as in comparing the Apostle with David will appear, Blessed is the man
whose sins are forgiven. Saint James speaks of justification in the second
acception. You need not fly to that distinction of justification before God,
and justification before men; think not that Saint James speaks only of
justification before men. Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when
he offered up Isaac on the Altar? What justified by killing his son? this was a
proper work indeed to justify him before man, to be a parricide; to kill his
son, though it were not so before God. So Psalm. 106. we read how God
accounted the act of Phine as for righteousness; thus you see how works are
accounted righteousness in the second kind of righteousness. In the former
righteousness we are justified by faith; for in righteousness inherent there
is a goodly chain of virtues: Add to your faith virtue, etc. add one grace
to another; Add to virtue knowledge; faith is but one part of the Crown. Now
this justification in the first sense whereby my sins are forgiven, is called
the righteousness of God, because of Christ which is God, because its wrought
by Christ, Dan. 9. he is called an everlasting righteousness, which continues
for ever world without end; for do not think the Saints in heaven have only
the second kind of righteousness; for they have the same covering by
justification by Christ in heaven that they had before; God covers their sins
not here only, but there also; justification follows them for ever.

Quest. But now what parts has justification in it? we are wont to say that
there are two parts; one imputation of righteousness, the other forgiveness of
sins.

Sol. I answer; for my own part I think Justification is one simple act of God,
and that it is improperly distinguished as parts; but rather as terminus a quo
is distinct from terminus ad quem. And this I shall show unto you both by
reason and authority, that faith is but one act.

Let none say that I take away the imputation of the righteousness of Christ;
No: the bringing in of light, and the expulsion of darkness is not two acts,
but one; but there is terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem. We are accounted
righteous, and that is, we have our sins forgiven. And the reason is this; if
sin were a positive thing, and had a being in it self, then the forgiveness
of sin must be a thing distinct from the imputation of righteousness. Scholars
know the difference between adversa and privantia; white and black are both
existent; but darkness and light are not, but only a privation one of another,
Darkness is nothing of it self but the absence of light; The bringing in of
light is the suppression of it; you must understand sin has no being, no
entity; it is only an absence of righteousness, the want of that light which
should be in the subject; which want is either in our nature, and then it is
called original; or in our person and actions, and then its called actual
transgression. Sin is an absence of that positive being, which is, as I said,
either in our nature, or works. Then thus I will resolve you in another point:
viz. If sin were a positive thing, all the world cannot avoid it but God must
be the Author of it; for there is nothing can have a being, but it must derive
its being from the first being, God. Now how can we avoid Gods being the Author
of sin? Why thus, it is nothing.

But what is sin nothing? Will God damn a man, and send him to hell for
nothing?

I answer; its not such a nothing as you make it; a man is not damned for
nothing. It Is a nothing privative, an absence of that that should be, and that
a man ought to have. As when a Scholar is whip't for not saying his lesson, is
he whip't think you for nothing? indeed he has nothing, he cannot say a word of
his lesson, and therefore it is he is whip't; it is for a thing he ought to
have, and has not. Well, if you will say there are two parts of justification,
do if you please; but this I take to be the more proper and genuine explanation.

Besides, it appears by testimony of the Apostle, Romans 4.6. As David describes
the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without
works, etc. Saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered. The Apostle cites the Prophet David, Psalm. 42. Mark the
Apostles conclusion, and how he proves it. His conclusion is, That man is
blessed unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works. His argument
then must needs be thus framed.

He whom God forgives is blessed; But, He to whom God imputes righteousness
without works, has his sins forgiven him: Therefore he is blessed.
Now, how could this assumption hold, if imputation of righteousness, and
remission of sins were two distinct acts? for not imputing righteousness is
not to bring in light, which keeps out darkness; but observe, the Apostle to
the Colossians and Ephesians, makes this forgiveness of sins, the whole work,
way, foundation of our redemption. But here remember I deny not the imputation
of righteousness; for that is the foundation of the other; here is the point.
How is Christ's righteousness imputed to me? that positive thing which expels
the other? Not so as if Christ's righteousness were in me subjectively; for it
was wrought by his passion as well as his action; The Apostle calls it faith in
his blood; by faith in Christ Christ's passive obedience is imputed to me: What
do you think the meaning is that God does esteem me as if I had hanged on the
Cross, and as if I had had my sides pierced? No, that would not stead me, or
do me any good; that which was meritorious and singular in him, did reach to
us; so that the meaning is this, as it is in the Articles of the Church of
England, That for the merits of Jesus Christ, God is well pleased with the
obedience of his Son, both active and passive, as that he takes us to be in
that state for his sake, as if we had fulfilled all his Laws, and never broken
them at any time, and as if we owed him not a farthing; this is imputative
righteousness, however the Papists may scoff at it. And this kind of
justification must of necessity be by imputation: why? because when a man has
committed a sin, it cannot be undone again; God by his absolute power cannot
make a thing done undone; for it implies a contradiction. The act past cannot
be revoked, nor the nature thereof changed; murder will be murder still, etc.
How then can I be justified, the sin being past, and the nature of it still
remaining? I say, how can I be justified in the first sense any other way than
by imputation? its said in 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, etc. This kind of justification which consists in remission of
sins, cannot be but imputative; sin cannot be changed, nor the thing done,
undone.

But now comes a greater question; If by justification our sins be forgiven
us, what sins are forgiven I pray? sins past, or sins to come? we are
taught that in the instant of justification, all our sins past and to come
are remitted; which is in my mind an unsound doctrine: for if we look narrowly
into it, we shall find that in propriety of speech, remission of sins has
relation to that which is past; its said therefore, Romans 3.25. Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past through the
forbearance of God. And remission of sins has relation to those that are
past, as appears by inevitable reason; for what is remission of sins, but
sin covered? Now can a thing be covered before it be? blot out mine
iniquities, etc. says David; can a thing be blotted out, before it is written?
this is the thing makes the Pope so ridiculous, that he will forgive sins for
the time before they are committed; but what, do we get nothing for the time to
come? yes, yes, when the sin is past, by faith we have a new access unto
God; and having risen by repentance, we get a new act, not of universal
justification, but of a particular justification, from this and that particular
sin.

But if there be forgiveness of sins past already, and I know that I am
justified, and my sins remitted: may I now pray for forgiveness of sins
past? The Papists say it is active infidelity, and as absurd as to pray to God
to create the world anew, or incarnate his Son again.

But there is no conversion where there is no praying; and there is need of
praying for the remission of sins past, and against sin for the time to
come, as I shall show next time; as also consider whether there be any
interruption of the act of justification by falling into great sins. There Is no
man has a mind more against quierks and quillets than I; yet for the opening
of these things, and staying and settling the mind, and clearing the
understanding, give me leave the next time to clear these things unto you.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.
IN this Chapter, especially in the beginning thereof, I showed unto you that
the Apostle sets down unto us those special comforts that a man receives after
God has wrought that supernatural grace of faith in his heart; so that here is
set down The Mother-Grace, Justification by faith; and then the blessed issues
or daughters thereof; and those are, a free access to God, a joyful hope of the
glory to come, and not only a patient, but a joyful suffering of all
afflictions that shall befall us in this life.

Concerning justification by faith, I labored to open it unto you the last
day, three things may well be considered therein.

1. What that faith is whereby we are justified.

2. What that justification is we have by faith.

3. What relation the one of these has to the other.

Concerning the first of these I told you that it was not every faith that
justifies, not every kind of faith that a man can live by. There is a dead
faith, and a man cannot live by a dead thing: And there is a living faith, and
that is called a faith unfeigned. And though it be in Scripture called the
common faith, yet it is with some restriction; it is the faith of Gods elect.
There is a faith also which is but temporary; that being touched with the sense
of sin, and seeing there is no deliverance from the curse due to sin, but
by Christ; and that there is no part to be had in Christ, but by renouncing all
corruptions; the consideration of the desperateness of his case without
Christ, makes him long after him; and since he cannot have Christ without
leaving sin, he will resolve on that too; he will make toward Christ, and
perhaps he comes to taste of the sweetness of Christ, and feels the power of
the world to come; he forsakes sin, and thereby comes so near the true
believer, that a man must as it were, cut a hair to divide between them. And
this is a thing very necessary to be considered of.

And I showed unto you also that these are not moral things; not a faith that
is wrought by the power of men, but by a work of Gods Spirit; for it humbles a
man for sin, and makes him make toward Christ, and seek him above all things,
and having laid some hold on him, he escapes the pollutions of the world, and
yet this faith is but temporary; a thing supernatural it is, yet it is without
root. Now as I noted unto you, this is not different in the circumstance of
time; for time alters not the thing. A child that lives but half an hour,
does as properly and truly live, as one that lives a hundred years. But it is
called temporary, not that therein stands the difference, but therein it is
shown, and that proves the man to have something wanting. Our being united to
Christ, and being nigh unto him, is as a graft or scyons put into a Tree; there
are two grafts put into one stock, and each of them have all the several things
necessary done unto them, as cutting, binding, etc. yet time discovers that the
one thrives, and the other withers; so that there was a fault unseen; though he
that put in the grafts never saw it, yet time discovers it. Now the difference
is not in the time, but in the foundation of the thing it self. Now what the
difference is between these, I labored to declare unto you the last day.

The use of it is in brief this, faith is not in all these. All have not faith;
yet some come so near, and have faith so like that it will trouble a wise man
to make the distinction. These are like the foolish Virgins, that lived very
civilly, and kept their maiden-heads in regard of the world; none could accuse
them for any evil they had done; yet they are at length shut out. Many think
themselves in a good way, and a safe condition, yea, and go out of the world in
this conceit, and think they are entering into the gate of heaven, till they in
a moment are cast down to hell: Try we therefore, search and sift our selves;
if this grace were as grass that grows in every field, it were something; but
it is a precious flower, which if we have not, Christ profits us nothing.
This is the means of Christ's being applied unto thee; how does it therefore
behoove every one of us to look to it, and not to slubber over the matter
slightly, but to search and try, and examine our selves. And in the marks I
showed you before that it was such a thing as may be likened to a conception
which never comes to the birth; such a thing is this temporary faith.

Among others let me add the tokens of love; it is twice set down in the
Galatians, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, etc. but faith which
works by love; and again, neither circumcision, etc. but the new creature.
They that have a temporary faith want nothing but the new creature; what is
that? its faith that works by love. They that love God, it is a sure token
that God has loved them first, and God never gives this love, but they have
faith unfeigned.

The next thing is, he is ever careful to try himself, to prove himself. The
temporary cannot endure to be brought to the touch or trial. He accounts every
beginning of grace in himself very great; every Molehill to be a Mountain. Now
Gods children know that they may be deceived with counterfeits, and therefore
he tries himself.

Mark the speech of the Apostle, Examine your selves, prove your own selves;
know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? us understand the words; first, we see then it is a thing that is
possible to be known, whether we are in the faith or no; and this is flat
against the Papists; for they think a man can have but a conjectural knowledge
that he has grace and faith. It may be probable, they say, but it cannot be
certainly known; but does not the Apostle say, Examine your selves, prove your
selves, know you not your selves, etc. No Papist can know it, yet it is
possible to be known. Prove and try, you shall not lose your labor. If you
take pains in it, you shall attain it in this world. Make your calling and
election sure, says the Apostle; on Gods part it is sure enough, for the
foundation of God stands sure: but make it sure unto your selves, in respect
of your own knowledge. Know you not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? It is a thing may well be made sure of; therefore
search, try, examine, etc. Others are content with bare beginnings that never
come to any maturity; but those that have true faith, are ever bringing
themselves to the trial and touchstone.

But may some say, I have tried and examined my self, and I do not find that
Christ is in me; what am I a reprobate therefore?

No, God forbid: I say not the man is a reprobate that cannot discern that
Christ is in him; See what that is that will explain this, 1 Cor. 11.19. For
there must be heresies among you, that they which are approved, might be made
known; there must be (...), men that are approved, such as have endured the
dint and shot of the Musket: such as have put themselves to the trial, and come
off well; these are the (...), and are opposed to those (...), who are such men
as take things hand over head, do not search, and try, and examine, and put
themselves to the proof; it is a sign these have not true faith: for what, is
the having of Christ so slight or poor a thing, as that they will take no pains
for him, or care not for knowing whether they have him or no? what, neglect
Christ so much, as not to adventure on the trial? these are those (...). But he
which has this saving faith, he is ever putting himself to the trial. Again,
Gods child, not only uses all the means in himself to try himself, but he
prays for the aid of God also; he knows that his own heart is deceitful,
and may cozen him, but that God is greater than his heart, and knows all
things. And therefore he cries unto God to try him, as Psalm. 139. Try me O
God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts; look well whether there
be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way everlasting; there is an
everlasting righteousness, and an everlasting way that leads unto it, about
which these are not content to try themselves only, but they desire God to try
them also; and to make them know the uprightness of their own hearts, and not
to suffer them to be deceived thereby. Now that I have done with.

Consider now what that justification is, that is obtained by this true lively
faith; I showed unto you that justification is ordinarily taken for an
acquittance from a debt. It is derived from justice or righteousness;
therefore I showed that justification and righteousness are taken for one and
the self same thing; for if there had been a Law given which could, etc. that
is, justification had been by the Law. Now as there is a double righteousness,
so there is also a double justification. Not that I hold there is any other
justification as it comprehends remission of sins, but only one, but
otherwise, as many righteousnesses as there are, so many justifications there
are. Now there is a double kind of righteousness, the one imputed, and the
other inherent; the one is the righteousness of Christ, an act transient from
another, which cannot be made mine but by imputation. Besides this there is
another which is inherent, a righteousness in us. St. James speaks of the one,
and Saint John of the other. One is opposed to condemnation, and the other to
hypocrisy. The soundness of the heart is respected of God for righteousness,
in respect of the graces inherent in us.

Now to give you a touch of the difference between the one and the other, and
therein to declare the difference between us and Rome: Know then that the
question between us and Rome, is not Whether justification be by faith or no?
but Whether there be any such thing as justification or no? The doctrine of the
Church of Rome is, that there is no such grace as this.

But concerning the first of these, that justification which is by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, I showed unto you that imputation in this
case, is, as when a man comes to hold up his hand at Gods Bar, as it were,
and it is demanded of him what he has to say for himself, why he should not
dye; and then this justification by Christ's righteousness is opposed to
condemnation. Then justification by faith is, that when I come to stand before
God, though conscience say I am guilty of a thousand sins, yet I may go
boldly and plead my pardon, which will acquit me as if I had never sinned at
any time. God was thus in Christ reconciling us (the world) unto himself, not
imputing their sins unto them. Now sin is a thing past, which being done,
cannot be made undone, the sin remains still; murder is murder still, and
adultery is adultery still; it cannot be undone again. Now how shall this man
that is guilty of murder and adultery, be made just? it cannot possibly be but
by not imputing his sin unto him, so that God should account it to him, as if
it had not been done at all by him; he puts it upon Christ's account; Account:
The word is used in the Epist. to Philemon, where St. Paul says, If he has
wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine account. A man's sins being
thus put upon Christ's account, he is accepted of God as freely as if he had
never owed him any thing, or as if he had never offended him. Now this is done
by transferring the debt from one person to another; so that we see this
imputation of sin to Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to us is most
necessary. It must be so: And if there were no testimony for it in Scripture,
yet reason shows that there can be no righteousness but by Gods acceptance
of us in Christ as if we had never sinned; there is the difference then. To him
that works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is accounted to him for righteousness.

But does God justify the ungodly? that is a hard speech; we read in the
Proverbs, He that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, even they
both are abomination to the Lord.

But here we must understand this as we do some other Scriptures; we read in
John, that the blind see, the lame walk, the dumb speak. It Is impossible for a
man to be blind and see, to be dumb and speak all at once; yet take the chief
of sinners, suppose Paul, and he was so in his own account; but the act of
justification alters him. God justifies the ungodly, that is, him that was even
now so; but by the imputation of Christ's righteousness he is made righteous,
that is, righteous in Gods account.

But in proceeding in this point I did reflect a little back. God finds a man
with a number of sins, full of sin, and forgives these sins; now I
demanded this; how far does this justification and forgiveness extend? to
sins past alone, or to sins past and to come? And I answered that we must
consider this matter two ways.

First, to justify a man's person simply; and then to justify a man from this
or that particular act: The phrase is used in Scripture, Acts 13.39. And by him
all that believe, are justified from all things, from which we could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. There is justification from this or that thing.
There is first, Justification of a man's person; he that was an enemy, is now
made a friend; he is now no longer a stranger at home, but is in the list or
Gods household. Now this we say, no sooner does a man receive it, but the
selfsame hour that he receives it, the bond is canceled, the evidence is
torn, and fastened to the Cross of Christ, and hangs up among the Records,
whereas before it was an evidence against us, and would have layen heavy on us
at the bar; but now it is fastened to the Cross as a canceled Record, the bond
is become void.

Secondly, but now when we consider justification from this or that particular
act; I declared that so a man is only justified from sins past; for it is
contrary to reason and Scripture, that a man should be justified from sins to
come: For Scripture, the Apostle has it, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation through says in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; and it
is clear also from the nature of the thing. A thing cannot be remitted before
it be committed, nor covered before it had an existence, nor blotted out before
it be written. Therefore justification from such or such a fault, must have
relation to that which is past; but for justification for the time to come, I
will speak anon; there I left the last time.

I have now faith, and I believe in Christ; I have now relation to him, and
remission of sins past. But why then do I pray for it? to what end is that?
Bellarmine objects that it is an act of infidelity to pray for it afterward;
but we do it, and we ought to do it; see Psalm. 51. David made that Psalm after
the Prophet Nathan had told him his sin was pardoned: See the title of it,
(and we must know that the title is a part of Gods Word as well as the rest) A
Psalm of David when Nathan came unto him, after he had gone in unto Bathsheba:
Nathan told him that God had took away his sin: Yet he cries here throughout
the whole Psalm, to have his sin pardoned and blotted out; so that though
there were faith and assurance, yet he still prays for it. Now Bellarmine
says, this cannot be; but does he dispute against our opinion? no, he disputes
against the Holy Ghost; for David having received a message of forgiveness,
yet prays. Therefore if the Jesuit had grace, he would join with us to salve
the matter, rather then through our sides to strike at God.

But it is a Fallacy to join these two together; for a man to pray for a thing
past, it is an act of infidelity; as to pray that God would create the world,
and incarnate his Son.

I answer, there is difference between an act done, and an act continued; when
the World was made by God, God had finished that work. And when Christ took our
flesh upon him, the act was done; but the forgiveness of sin is a continued
act, which holds to day and to morrow, and world without end. God is pleased
not to impute thy sins, but cover them; Now this covering is no constant act.
I may cover a thing now, and uncover it again; now forgiveness of sin being
an act not complete, but continued, and continued world without end (and
therefore we say the Saints in heaven are justified by imputative
righteousness, Gods continuance of his act of mercy.) The point then is this;
As long as we continue in the world, and by contrary acts of disobedience
continue to provoke God to discontinue his former acts of mercy, and our sins
being but covered, therefore so long must we pray for forgiveness. When the
servant had humbled himself before his Lord, it is said, The Lord of that
servant loosed him, and forgave him the debt; but though he forgave him, yet he
did another act that caused his Lord to discontinue his pardon, Matthew. 18.33.
Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, as I had
pity on thee? He had pity on him; yet since he does another act, which turns
his Lords heart against him, therefore he is now cast into prison, and he must
not come out thence till he has paid the utmost farthing. He had forgave him
to day and to morrow, and would have continued his forgiveness if he had not
thus provoked him; we must pray to God to continue his acts of mercy, because
we continually provoke him by new acts of rebellion. Add to this, The King
grants a pardon to a man; In all Patents of pardon there is a clause that the
man must renew his Patent. If forgiveness may be renewed, then those things
are to be renewed again, by which the renovation of my remission may be
wrought. God would have me renew my acts of faith; and if of faith, why not of
repentance, and of prayer? There is a singular place in Ezekiel. 36.29, 35, 37.
that makes it plain, That though God intends to do the thing, yet he appoints
this to be the means. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired
of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; (i. e.) though I have done it,
and intend to do it, yet will I do it by the means of prayer. Howsoever that
God had promised Eliah, that rain should come upon the face of the earth; yet
he goes upon the Mount, and saw no show of a cloud. The Text says not what he
did; but he put his head between his knees. Saint James says, he prayed, and
he opened heaven, and brought down rain. It was an humble secret gesture. A
man may be more free in private, than in public. He prayed, and the heavens
opened. God had promised it, and would do it, but yet he would be sought too.
So we see the mediate cause is prayer; so though the Lord will do this, yet for
all this he will be enquired of: It is not with God as with men; men who have
promised, would be loath to be sued to not to break their promise; they account
that a dishonor to them, but it is not so with God; God has promised, yet
thou shall have no benefit of it, until thou sue him for it; therefore thou
must go to God and say, Lord fulfill thy promise to thy servant, wherein thou
have caused me to trust. God loves to have his bond sued out. Lord, make good
this word, perform that good word that thou have spoken. God would have his
bond thus sued out. And as thy faith, repentance, prayer is renewed, so is thy
pardon renewed. When God will make a man possess the sins of his youth, when
a man is careless this way, it pleases God to awaken him. Thou writest bitter
things against me, and make me to possess the iniquity of my youth, Job
13.26. When a man forgets the iniquities of his youth, and renews not his
repentance, and has not new acts of faith and petition, then God makes him to
possess the iniquities of his youth; he makes his sins stand up and cry out
against him, and by this means his old evidences are obliterated. When a man
has a pardon, and its almost obliterated, the letters almost worn out, that
they cannot be read, he would be glad to have it renewed, to have a new
exemplification. Every sin it puts a great blur upon thine old evidence that
thou can not read it. It may be firm in heaven, and yet perhaps be blur'd
that thou can not read it, and therefore if thou would get them cleared
again, thou must go to God by prayer, and renew them again; so that whether our
evidences be blur'd, or whether it be that God will make us possess the
iniquities of our youth, it is necessary to pray for the forgiveness of those
sins which have been before forgiven.

But now you will say, when I have sinned afterward, how come I then to be
justified? Then a man would think repentance only does it, and without
repentance a man cannot be justified.

But you must understand, repentance is not an instrument at all; faith only is
the instrument, ^aith justifyeth me from sin hereafter as well as before. The
case is this, faith brings life. The righteous shall live by his faith, as the
Prophet Habakkuk speaks.

What does then new sins do?

There are two sorts of sins; one of ordinary incursion, which cannot be
avoided; these break no friendship betwixt God and us; these only weaken our
faith, and make us worse at ease. But there are other sins which waste a man's
conscience; A man that has committed murder, adultery, and lives in
covetousness, which (in the Apostles) is Idolatry; as long as a man is in this
case, he cannot exercise the acts of faith; we must know faith justifies not
as an habit, but as an act applying Christ to the comfort of the soul. Now a
wasting sin it stops the passage of faith, it cannot act till it be opened by
repentance; Physicians give instances for it. Those that have Apoplexies,
Epilepsies, and the Falling sickness, are thought to be dead for the time, as
it was with Eutichus, yet says Saint Paul, his spirit was in him. Every one
thought him dead, yet his spirit is in him; however in regard of the operation
of his senses it did appear he was dead. So, if thou art a careless man, and
lookst not to thy watch, and to thy guard, but art overtaken in some gross and
grievous sin, thou art taken for dead. I say not, a man can lose his life
that once has it; but yet in the apprehension of others, and of himself too,
he may appear to be so. As in Epilepsies, the nerves are hindered by
obstructions; so sin obstructs the nerves of the soul, that there cannot be
that life and working till these sins be removed. Now what is repentance?
why, it clears the passages, that as faith could not act before, now it gives
him dispositions unto it. As a man in a swound, cannot do the acts of a living
man, till he be refreshed again; so here its repentance which clears the
spirits, and makes the life of faith pass throughout. Now when repentance
clears the passages, then faith acts, and now there is a new act of faith,
faith justifies me from my new sins; faith at first and at last is that
whereby I am justified from my sins which I commit afterward.

But this forgiveness of sins, what does it free us from?

In sin, we must consider two things; the fault and the punishment. Now
consider sin as it is in it self, and as it respects the sinner, as acted by
him, as respecting the fault of the sinner, it is (...), a transgression of the
Law; The punishment is death; as it respects the sinner, it is guilt. The sin
is not guilt, but the guilt the sinners. For instance, a man that has told a
lie, or sworn an oath, the act is past, but a thing remains which we call the
guilt. As if a man commit murder or adultery, the act is past, but yet if he
sleep, or walk or wake, the guilt follows him. If he live an hundred years, he
is a murderer still, and an adulterer still, the guilt follows him; and nothing
can take away the murder or adultery from the soul, but the blood of Christ
applied by faith.

First, God takes away the punishment. There is now (says the Apostle) no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit; what, nothing in him worthy condemnation? God knows we
are worthy of a thousand condemnations. There are two Judges; there is a double
guilt; when a man is brought to the bar, first, the Jury judge the fact, and
then the Judge that sits on the Bench, he judges the punishment; one says
guilty or not guilty? the other says guilty, then he judges him. Now when we
are justified, we are freed from both these guilts; sin when it is
accomplished, it brings forth death: You know the natural work of sin,
(...), it labors with death; now God will stop the acts of it, that it shall
not do that which it is apt to do, which is as good as if the sin were taken
away; when there were wild guords sliced into the pot, 2 Kings 4.31. it is said
the Prophet took that venomous herb away; (i. e.) though the thing were there,
yet it is as if it were not there, it shall do no manner of hurt: Bring now and
pour out, and there was no evil thing. So in respect of us, though there be an
evil thing in punishment, and if we had our due, would bring condemnation, yet
when we are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, it can do us no evil, no hurt;
it is said in the Scripture, that the stars fell from heaven; why the stars
are of that bigness that they cannot fall from heaven to the earth; but they
are said to fall, when they give not their light, and do not that for which
they were put there; so though I have committed sin, yet when God is pleased
for Christ's sake to pardon it, it is as if it were not there at all.

This is a great matter, but I tell you there is more; we are not only freed
from the guilt of the punishment, but which is higher, we are freed from the
guilt of the fact. I am now no more a murderer, no more a liar; when I have
received a pardon from the blood of Christ, he frees me from that charge, the
world is changed with me now. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? If the Devil lay any thing to thee, thou may deny it. Such a one I
was, but I am justified, but I am sanctified. A man has committed High Treason
against the King, and the King gives him a pardon for the Treason; if I call
him a Traitor, he can have no remedy against me, for he is one; the pardon
takes not away the guilt: But if his blood be restored unto him by Act of
Parliament, then if I shall call him Traitor, he may have remedy against me,
because he is restored fully, and is not liable to that disgrace. This is our
case, though our sins be as red as scarlet, yet the die shall be changed; it
shall not be so bloody: Thou have the grace of justification, and this does not
only clear thee from the punishment, but from the fault it self; See in Jer.
50.20. the place is worth gold: In those daye^, and in that time says the
Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and
the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I
reserve: what is the matter? what a sinful man, and no sin? what when there
is search made for sin in such a man, shall it not be found? you will say
this is meant of the grace of sanctification; no: I will pardon them, that
pardoning of sin makes the sin not to be found. What a wonderful comfort is
this? when I shall come at the day of judgment, and have the benefit of my
sanctification, the last absolution, such sins shall not be charged on me, my
sins and iniquities shall not be remembered. I will remember their sins no
more, says God; it is a wonder^ul thing, and a strange mistake in many men,
e^pecially the Papists; Did they ever write comfortably of the day of judgment?
never; they make that a terrible day. Alas poor souls, they knew not that
just^fication is that, that makes sinn^s that they shall never be remembered:
Mark, it is said, Thou shall hear of all thy good deeds for thy honor and thy
praise; but for thy sins, there shall search be made, and they shall not be
found; when God forgives sins, he does it fully, it shall never be cast in
thy teeth again; but thou shall hear of all thy good deeds, not of thy bad.
Then lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near; here is the blessed
grace of just^fication, that we being justified by faith, have not only no
condemnation, but no guilt; whereas all the sins of the wicked man, shall be
set before his face, and he shall stand quaking and trembling by reason
thereof; not one good thing that he has done shall be remembered, but in the
iniquity that he has committed, in that shall he dye; and so I have said
somewhat of that point

You may remember that I said (a word perhaps that some think much of) that the
question betwixt us and Rome, is not Whether we be justified by faith or no?
but Whether we be justified at all; I will make it good. The^e are two graces,
righteou^nesse imputed* which implies forgiveness of sins; and
righteousness inherent, which is that grace of sanctification begun. They
utterly ^eny that there is any righteousness but righteousness inherent. They
say forgiveness of sins is nothing but sanctification. A new doctrine never
heard of in the Church of God, till these last days, till the spawn of the
Jesuits devised it. Forgiveness of sin is this, that God will never charge
me with it again. They say that forgiveness of sin is an abolishing of sin
in the subject, where is true remission; as much as to say, There is no
justification distinct from sanctification: whereas the Apostle distinguishes
them, when as he says, The Son of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: He is made unto us (of God.) By
the way let me expound it unto you. Christ has three offices; A Prophetical,
Regal and Sacerdotical office. He exercises his Prophetical office to
illuminate our understanding. He exercises his Kingly office to work on our
will and affections; there are two branches of it, the Kingdom of grace, and
the Kingdom of glory. How am I made partaker of Christ's Prophetical office? He
is made unto me wisdom, before I was a fool, but now by it I am made wise.
First, he enlightens me, and so he is made unto me wisdom; well, he is my
Priest; how so? he is made an expiation for my sin; he is said to be (...) in
Saint John, A propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the
sins of the whole world. There is a difference between (...) and (...), that
is a bare pardon, but this is such a propitiation as the party offended is
well-pleased with Christ's being made a ransom; he is made unto us (...), by
the oblation offered unto his Father. He is righteousness imputed to us. And
as a King* he rules me in the Kingdom of grace, and in the Kingdom of glory;
in the Kingdom of grace he is made unto me sanctification, and in the Kingdom
of glory he is made unto me redemption; it is called by the Apostle, the
redemption of our bodies; these two are thus clearly dist^nguished. The work of
Christ's Priestly office is to be a propitiation for our sins; sanctification
proceeds from the Scepter of his Kingdom: The one is without me, the other
within me. The one receives degrees, the other not. As a man that is holy may
be more holy; but imputed righteousness does not more forgive one man than
another. Imputation is without augmentation or diminution. Those things which
have diverse contraries, cannot be one and the same thing. Justification and
Sanctification have diverse contraries. The contrary to justification is
condemnation; but the contrary to sanctification is wickedness, and
false-dealing, etc. Aristotle distinguishes homonymous words, and bids you
consider their contraries; thus you see the difference between these two.

I should now come and descend unto the dependence one has on the other: ( i.
e.) in what respect does faith justify? Is faith an instrument to work
justification, or to receive it only?

The answer is clear, it justifies in regard of the object. If you remember
the two places I bid you compare, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood; is that all? compare this place with
chap. 5.9. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him; we are justified by his blood, and by faith in his
blood: here are two acts which signify the same thing. It is no more then to
say, I was cured by the Bath, or by going to the Bath; so that faith is the
legs of the soul that bring a man to Christ. And so my faith is an instrument,
not to procure my justification, but to receive it; so then seeing faith is an
instrument to receive justification, and not to procure it, then the weakest
faith carries away as much forgiveness as the strongest. A strong faith rids
a great deal of work, because it is an active instrument. The stronger faith
works the greater work; but in the point of justification, it is an
instrument whereby my justification is wrought, an instrument whereby Christ is
received. And the weakest hand may receive a piece of gold as well as the
strongest; we must know that in the point of receiving, we live on Gods alms.
All our justification is his free gift, and faith is that Palsy hand which
receives all our comfort. It is not then a faith that justifies, but faith; it
is called by Peter, a like precious faith. Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle
of Jesus Christ to them that have obtained like precious faith with us, through
the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ; it is (...), in the
meanest Christian that has a trembling hand to pitch on that, and draw virtue
from him; it is a like precious faith in them, as in the most great Apostle
Peter, and all the rest.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Have heretofore declared unto you, that in the^e words, and the words
following, th^re are set down these great graces and great blessings which you
have in Christ in ^his Kingdom of grace, before you come to the K^ngdome of
glory.

First, here ^s set down the mother and radical grace of all the rest, and that
is justification by faith; and then follows the bl^^sed fruit that issues
from thence.

1. Peace with God.

2. A graci^us access into his presence.

3. A joyfu^ hope arising from that great glory that we shall enjoy for the
time to come.

4. In the ^orst of our troubles, and midst of our afflictions, this ^oy is so
great, that it cannot be abated by any of them; ^ea, it is so far from being
abated by them, that they are a fuel to kindle it: we rejoice in affliction
(says the A^ostle) that which would undo the joy of a carnal man, is made the
matter of this man's joy.

Concerning the first of these; justification, that is the ground or foundation
of all the rest; being justififyed by faith, that is the root and ground,
without which there is no fruit, no peace, no joy, no hope, much less any
kind of rejoicing in tribulation. Faith is that which seasoneth all; we must
first be justified by faith, before we have any other comforts; for that is the
first ground, the first rudiment of a Ch^istian in the School of Christ.

Therefore I proposed unto you three things for the understanding of it.

1. What that faith is that justifies. 2. What that justification is that is
^btained by faith. 3. What relation the one of these hat^ to the other.
Concerning the first of these I sheved you that it is not every faith that
justifies. I shew'^ you that there is a dead faith, whereupon the Apostl^
says, The life that I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God. A
dead thing cannot make a living man; it must be (and I showed you how) a living
faith.

Again, I showed that beside the tr^e faith, there was a temporary faith, which
is active (...), and comes near the other. It had the operations of the Spirit,
but it wanted root. It had supernatu^^ll works, but it wanted the new creature.
There w^^ a conception that was but an abortive kind of birth; it came not to
maturity, not to a full growth, it did not continue. And I showed unto you how
a man mig^t discern one of these from the other; for herein lye^ the wisdom of
a Christian, not to content himself (...) be deceived with flashes; therefore
the Apostle exhorts us to prove and try, and examine our selves; it is an easy
matter to be deceived, and therefore Gods people should be careful to examine
themselves, to have their senses exercised herein, that however others may
slight and slubber over the matter, they must and will be careful in it; and
then they will not only do it themselves, but they will crave the aid of God
also: Prove me O my God, etc. try me, etc.

Then for the second thing concerning that justification that is obtained by
faith. I showed you that the word justification was derived from justice or
righteousness; and as many ways as justice and righteousness may be taken,
so many ways may justification be taken: Sometimes for justification of
righteousness in a man, and sometimes it is opposed to condemnation; so its
taken in Saint Paul, and it signifies an acquital; sometimes its opposed to
hypocrisy and pollution in a man's soul; so it signifies sanctification,
whereby God not only covers our sins past, but heals our natures. The first
is perfect, but imputed; the second inherent, but imperfect. When the time
comes that God will finish his cure, he will then make a perfect cure; when
final grace comes, we shall not need to think of a Popish Purgatory. Death is
the Lords refining pot; then there is not a jot of sin shall be left in a
Christian. Now when God has taken away our dross, then to think we shall be
put in a refining fire; that an entire soul that has no blot, that one that
has no spot, should be purged after final grace has made him clear and whole,
this is against reason and common sense. They might have learned better of
their own Thomas; all the fire in the world will never put away sin without
the infusion of grace. This by the way concerning them.

I showed besides, that these two being both righteousnesses, the Church of
Rome confounds them both together: Saint James his justification w^^h Saint
Paul's. They confound inherent righteousness which is begun, and shall be
perfected in final grace, with the other; so that the point is not between us
and Rome, Whether faith justifies by works or no? but Whether it justifies at
all? in truth that is the state of it: The question is this, whether there be
another justification that is distinguished from sanctification, or whether
there be another grace besides justification? Do not think that we are such
block-heads as to deny faith and sanctification; yet faith is but a piece or
part of that train of virtues. There justification is taken for
sanctification; we acknowledge a man is justified by faith and works; but the
question is between us and them, whether there be any justification besides
sanctification? ( i. e.) whether there be any justification at all or no? we
say sanctification is wrought by the Kingly office of Christ; he is a King that
rules in our hearts, subdues our corruptions, governs us by the Scepter of his
Word and Spirit; but it is the fruit of his Priestly office which the Church of
Rome strikes at: ( i. e.) whether Christ has reserved another righteousness
for us, besides that which as a King he works in our hearts; whether he has
wrought forgiveness of sins for us? we say he has, and so says all the
Church, till the new spawn of J^suites arose. They distinguish not remission of
sins from sanctification. Bellarmine says remission of sins is the
extinguishing of sin in the soul; as water though it be cold, yet the
bringing in of heat extinguishes the cold; and so remission of sins is the
bringing in of inherent righteousness which extinguisheth all sin which was
before. A strange thing, and were it not that the Scripture does speak of a cup
in the hand of the Harlot of Rome whereby she makes drunk the inhabitants of
the earth with the wine of her fornications; except men were drunk, it were
impossible that a learned man should thus shake out an Article of their Creed,
which has ever been believed by all the Churches. When the Scripture speaks of
forgiveness of sins, see how it expresses it, Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one
to another, Brethren, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Observe, in the Lords prayer, we pray that the Lord would forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us. Let him that has
common understanding judge, Do we forgive our neighbors by extinguishing sin
in the subject? I forgive you; ( i.e.) I take away the ill office you did me:
Does he forgive thus? Alas no! forgiveness is without a man. I have an action
against you, perhaps an action at Law; I will let fall my suit, my charges I
will forgive, this is forgiveness. God justifies, who shall condemn? Though
God has just cause to proceed against me as a Rebel, yet he is content to let
fall his action, to fasten it upon the Cross of his Son, there to fix the
Chirographum, the handwriting against us. He will let fall that which was the
ground of a suit against us, all that he could say against us.

That you may understand the thing the better, there are two things, two kinds
of righteousness; the one of justification, the other of sanctification. The
Holy Ghost distinguishes them by several terms 1 Cor. 1. ult. Of him are ye in
Christ Jesus who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. You see here are two distinct graces; righteousness and
sanctification; they make them but one, sanctification and remission of sins.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Here
justification and sanctification is nothing else but justification and
glorification; Saint Paul speaks of a thing past, not of the glory to come: (
i. e.) sanctification which is inchoate glory. For what is the glory we shall
have in heaven but the enlargement of those inherent graces God begins in this
world? Here is the seed, there is the crop; here thou have a little knowledge,
but there it shall be enlarged; now thou have a little joy, there thou shall
enter into thy Masters joy; here some knowledge, but there thou shall have a
full knowledge, and a full measure. Here glory dwells in our Land, but there
we shall with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and be
changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. (i. e.) we are more and more conformed to the image of
Almighty God, by ^^edience and holy qualities infused into us, that we grow
from one degree of sanctification unto another. And so you see how these are
distinguished by their terms. Justification and glorification, justification
and sanctification. There is another place in Saint John, an hard place; but
yet as I take it, these two righteousnesses that have the same name, to be
distinct in their terms. It is said, Joh. 16.8. That when the Spirit shall
come, he shall reprove, or (as we should translate it) he shall convince the
world concerning sin, righteousness and judgment. Thus I say it should be
translated, for it is no sense to say that God shall reprove the world of
righteousness; on what occasion this was spoken we must not stand to speak:
but righteousness and judgment is justification and sanctification. And the
drift of the place is this, when the Spirit shall come, how? not upon me or
thee; but the Spirit here spoken of is that Spirit that should come upon the
Apostles, it shall begin at the day of Pentecost; and these 1. should set forth
like twelve Champions to conquer the world, and to bring them unto the Scepter
of Christ. He shall convince the world; ( i. e.) when the Spirit shall come on
you, and your tongues be tip't with that spiritual fire, which shall be active,
it shall convince the world concerning three particulars, of sin,
righteousness and judgment: O^ the point of humiliation for sins; the point
of justification by righteousness imputative; and the glory of sanctification
in judgment, and righteousness inherent. This method Saint Paul uses in the
Romans to stop every man's mouth. First, He convinces the Gentile, which was
easy to be done; after he convinces the Jew, that there is righteousness to
be had in another, though none in my self. He shall convince the world, etc. As
if he should say, To be shut up under unbelief, is to be convinced of all
sins. Now consider what is the nature of unbelief; it is to fasten all sins
upon a man; and when I have faith, all my sins are put out of possession,
they are as if they were not; but if we are shut up under unbelief, we are
dead. The second work of Gods Spirit, is the Ministry of the Word, He shall
convince the world that there is righteousness to be had by a communion with
another; though we are guilty in our selves, yet he will set us free; and the
reason is, because I go to my Father. As if he should say, though you be
convinced of your sins, that you are wholly dead in trespasses and sins.
and have no means in the world to put that away; yet notwithstanding the second
work of Gods Spirit, is to convince of righteousness; that there is a
righteousness to be had in Christ, because he was our surety arrested for our
debt; he was committed to prison where he could not come out till he ^ad paid
the utmost farthing. There is a justification to be had in me; I go to the
Creditor, I have made no escape, not like one that brake the prison and run
away, but I am now a freeman. I have not made an escape before the debt is
paid, then I might be brought back again; but the debt is discharged, and
therefore I go to my Father to maintain my place and standing. I was given unto
death for your sins, but I am risen again for your justification, and I now sit
at my fathers right hand; this is the second thing. But is there not a third
thing that the work of the Ministry must do? Yes, to convince the world that
there is judgment or righteousness inherent. There is a hard place, I shall
speak of it; it is usual in Scripture to join righteousness and judgment
together. The words of the Lord are righteousness and judgment. And the
integrity of a man's heart which is opposed to hypocrisy, is called judgment;
as God lives who has taken away my judgment, Job 27.2. How did God take away
his judgment? is it meant that he had taken away his wits? no, but but he has
put his heavy hand on me, that has put a conceit in the mind of my friends
that I am an hypocrite; and therefore he falls on him, ver. 6. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live. His judgment was taken away; ( i. e.) the opinion they
had of his integrity; and this will expound another place in Matthew. 12.20. A
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, until
he send forth judgment unto victory? what is that, until he send forth
judgment? This judgment signifies nothing but those inherent graces, those
infused qualities that God sends into the heart of a Christian. In a man's first
conversion there are but beginnings of grace; what is faith, hope, patience and
fear? it is like a smoking flax; ( i. e.) like the smoking wick of a candle
made of flax: as when a candle burns in the socket, its now up, now down, you
know not whether it be alive or dead; so in the first conversion of a
Christian, infidelity and faith, hope and despair mount up and down. There Is a
conflict in the beginning of conversion, but he will not give it over until he
bring forth judgment, until he get the victory of all opposition from the
flesh. And what is the reason? Because the god of this world is judged. He
shall convince the world of an inherent righteousness in spite of the Devils
teeth, because he is condemned. He that before worked in the children of
disobedience, is now cast down. The strong man is cast out, and therefore upon
that ground you have the third point; Besides the grace of justification
following upon Christ's death, there is another; the Devil shall be
dispossessed; the Devil is strong where he does wicked things; but he shall be
disarmed, he shall not touch thee, the wicked one shall not hurt thee.

I now go forward.

The third thing I noted besides faith and justification, was, That we must
observe what relation one has to the other; and how it comes to pass that
justification is attributed to faith, there being more noble graces in us than
faith.

I answer; the reason is because faith is brought as the only instrument
whereby we receive our justification, purchased by the merits of Christ's death.
When we say faith is an instrument, we must understand it right well; we say
not faith is an instrument to work my justification, Christ alone must do that;
it is no act of ours, nothing is in us; faith is said to be an instrument
whereby we get our justification in respect of the object, it is a nearing us
to Christ; it is the instrument of application, the only instrument whereby we
apply the medicine, and the plaster of Christ's blood; whereby we that were
strangers and afar off, are made near; faith is the only hand which receives
Christ; when the hand lays hold on a thing, it lays hold on a thing without
it self; so is faith a naked hand, not as a hand that gets a man's living, but
like a beggars hand that receives a free alms given by the donor; as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 5.17. For if by one man's offense death reigned over all by
one; much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jes^^ Christ. There is abundance of
grace, and a gift of righteousness; faith is the only means whereby we receive
this gift; whereupon I inferred this which was of great consequence; seeing
faith did justify not as an active instrument, but as it did receive the gift
of grace, it did follow that the weakest faith that was did get as much
justification as the strongest faith of any whatsoever; because faith
justifies not only as a work, but as it did receive a gift; therefore our
Savior says, O ye of little faith! yet as little as it was, it was builded
upon the Rock; and though Satan desired to winnow them, and sift them as wheat,
yet they remained firm; as our Savior says of the faith of miracles, If ye
had faith as much as a grain of mustard seed, ye should say to this Mountain
be removed, and it would obey you: So for common faith, which the Apostle
calls so, because it is common to all the Elect, if thou have so much faith,
thou shall be able to remove Mountains of corruptions; suppose thou have a
trembling hand scarce able to hold, yet have the persuasion of the woman in the
Gospel, If I may but touch him I shall be whole: I shall be saved, healed, if I
can but touch him; And mark our Savior, The people thronged about him, and he
says, Who is it that touches me? A wonder that he when they crowded him,
should ask such a question; but Christ knew that some body touched him beside
the touch of the multitude; its said in the Text, The poor woman came trembling
and told him all the truth: And he said Be of good comfort, though thou have a
paralytick, and palsy sick-hand, yet the touch is enough; the least faith
brings as much life as the greatest.

Object. But then what need a man look for a great faith?

Sol. Yes by all means; for though thou have much comfort by a little weak
faith, yet the more faith, the more comfort; and therefore it is to very much
purpose to labor after a strong faith. Abraham (it is said) staggered, not
through unbelief; if thou have a strong faith, thou will have a strong
consolation: Thou may by thy weak faith be healed of thy disease, yet by the
weakness of thy faith may want much of the strength of thy comfort;
therefore thou must go from faith to faith; but know this, that a newborn
child, (...), is not yet so strong as a man, yet he is as much alive as the
strongest and tallest man; so that again thus, thou art yet but a newborn
babe, not so strong or so lively as one more grown, but yet thou have all the
lineaments of the new creature in thee, though thou art not so strong and
lively as another may be.

Object. Did not you tell me that it was not every faith that did justify, but
a working faith? how then does faith alone justify?

Sol. I answer, When faith justifies, there is one thing said of another; the
subject and the predicate; faith justifies. Justification is attributed unto
faith; Look on the word ( only) whether it does determine the subject or the
predicate; does faith which is alone severed from good works, justify? so the
proposition is false. First, that faith which is alone, separated from love and
the fruits of good works, does not justify; but let the word ( alone) be put
to the predicate; faith justifies alone; (i. e.) faith is the only virtue in
the soul whereby a man is justified, that is true: As if a man should say, the
eye alone sees, it is true; if we put it thus, the eye severed from the members
of the body, sees its self. If the eye were taken out of the head, it would
neither see alone, nor at all; but the meaning is this, the living eye is the
organ whereby a man discerns a visible object; so faith, though joined with
other graces, yet takes not other with it for helps of justification.

Object. But why should God select this virtue among others that are more noble?

Sol. I say as before, God had respect to the low estate of his handmaid, it
was reason that God should choose the lowest, and the meanest: God selected
this poor beggars hand for two reasons.

First, in respect of God.

I say 1. Therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace, to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the Law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,
Romans 4.16. so that here are two strong reasons; in respect of God, that God by
so mean a thing as a beggars hand, should bring a man to justification; and the
other in respect of faith it self, that it might see by grace, that when thou
bring nothing but a bare hand ready to receive a pardon must needs be this
of grace. If God say Thou must love me, this were an exchange, not a free gift.
I lay down something, and I take up something for it. Faith is that naked hand
which fills it self with Christ, it lays fast hold of justification. As if a
man were ready to be drowned, there is a cable cast to him to lay hold on, and
he laying hold on it is drawn safe to the Land; but a man when he lays hold of
the cable, must let go all his other holds which he laid hold on before. Thus
must a man let go all other holds, and lay fast hold on Jesus Christ.

Faith has two faculties; it opens it self to let fall all other things, then
when it is a naked hand, it lays hold on Christ, and then it is of grace,
when he esteems all dross in comparison of Christ; it has all fullness by
grace: Where is then rejoicing and boasting? Romans 3.27. it is excluded; by what
Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of faith. And then chap. 4.2. For if Abraham
were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God; faith
takes away all boasting. Let him that glories, glory in the Lord. Therefore
it is of faith that it might be of grace. This is the reason in respect of God.

2. In respect of our selves; To the end the promise might be sure to the seed;
what is the reason why people doubt and think nothing sure? it is because they
come not with a naked hand; I must have such a measure of faith, love, such a
measure of humiliation, of patience, all to bring somewhat with us; whereas if
we look on these things we shall never be heard. If the bare acceptance of
Christ with a trembling hand will not make thee sure, what can thou have more
than the bare receiving of a gift by faith? The reason why we are not more
sure, is because we come not with a naked hand.

By the way there are many means, some ( a priori) others ( a posteriori.)

1. For the first; they are those things by which faith is wrought, though they
are not so evident, yet they are most sure; when I consider God calls me in my
blood, having nothing in me, and will be friends with me, bids me take his
Son, and I do not, bids me take his Kingdom and glory with him, and I refuse
it, though this be a matter not so evident, yet it is most sure.

2. Then there are other arguments which come from the fruits of faith ( a
posteriori) they are more evident, but not so sure. And thus have I declared
unto you the first point of justification by faith, it is so sweet a string
that I cannot tell how to leave it.

Now let us come from the Mother to the Daughters; the eldest Daughter is peace
with God, then this is the first birth; And we are at peace, etc.

In this peace we will consider these three particulars.

1. What is that peace which we have.

2. With whom we have it.

3. By whom, and by whose means we have peace with God, etc. It is procured by
Jesus Christ.

What we have; peace.

With whom; God.

By whose means? Our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. What this peace is. You know the point of peace is a great matter; it is
the Apostolical benediction: Grace and peace in all the Epistles; Grace and
peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.2. and
chap. 3.16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace by all means always.
This is a thing by all means to be desired, you must labor to get i^; this was
the Angels song when Christ was born, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace,
good will toward men. This peace is a thing by all means to be sought after,
and what it is, you may know by the contrary; you know what a miserable thing
war is; God grant you may not know it too soon: You know what it is to have
an enemy among us. This is our case till we be justified, we are at daggers
drawing, at point of hostility with God. It is a foolish conceit for a man to
think that by reason of Gods predestination he is justified before he was; this
is a foolish conceit; until thou art justified by faith, thou art not
justified; Gods predestination does not make a change in the subject; if I
intend to enrich a beggar, he is in rags still for all my intention, till my
intention be put in execution. Paul was elected before the foundation of the
world; but till he was converted he was an enemy, and a persecutor, the chief
of sinners, as he speaks of himself, Romans 5.10. so the Scripture speaks in that
point: If when we were enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life? Before the
time of peace came, we were unbelievers, enemies, in the state of enmity; when
as before God was thy enemy, as soon as thou have touched Christ by a lively
faith, presently all the actions he had against thee are gone; God is friends
with thee; this is a high and a deep peace, and this comprehends all kind of
blessings; Amasa, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. one of the valiantest Captains that David
had, speaks there of peace; one would think it not so proper, it belongs not to
them to talk of peace, but because peace comprehends all kinds of blessing, it
is said, Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Amasa, who was chief of the
Captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side thou son of
Jesse; Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy helpers, for thy God
helps thee. This is a speech from a Soldier to a Soldier, and this is done
in a military way; Peace is welcome though coming from a Warrior, because it
comprehends all manner of blessings; Its said, 2 Samuel 11.7. That when Uriah
came unto David, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did,
and how the War prospered. Look unto the Margent according to the original, and
it is, He demanded of the peace of Joab, and the people, and of the peace of
the War. A man would think it a contradiction that he should demand of the
peace of the war; so then, this peace which we have with Almighty God, after
we are justified by faith, is the comprehension of all manner of good. This
having of peace with God is the fruit of the Spirit.

But with whom is this peace? with God; it is not peradventure so with thy
self: Thou may have a turbulent conscience, insomuch that thou would give
all the world to have it quiet, to be assured that there is peace between God
and thee; that is not the point: The thing thou gettest by faith is peace with
God: When thou art troubled with thy self, and have but a weak act of faith,
yet if thou believe, thou art more afraid than hurt; thou art Cock-sure, and
shall be calm and quiet.

Object. But why should Christians be so foolish, so troubled? what is the
reason the children of God do so disquiet themselves?

Sol. Because they are fools, they stand in their own light, are strainted in
their own bowels. God is liberal and free, but there is some hope of
worthiness in us, and we do things we should not do. We are always poring on
our selves, and do not bring a naked hand; and this is the reason we are so
full of distractions.

Again, it is the nature of many peevish people amongst us, that they will not
be comforted; when news was brought to Jacob that Joseph was slain and lost, it
is said, All his sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to
be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son,
mourning; Genesis 37.35. They have a kind of pettishnesse and peevishness, and
wilfulness; they will not be comforted, and it may be there is some kind of
pride in it too; they would perhaps be thought to be the only mourners of
Israel, of the Kingdom. As Rachel mourned for her children, and would not be
comforted; they shut up their eyes against all comforts; God commands them to
be comforted, and they will not; it is no marvel then that they eat the fruit
of their own hands; it is a part of our office to bring comfort, we have an
injunction to it; Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people, says the Lord; we bring
the tidings of peace, and our feet should be beautiful, Romans 10. we bring good
news, all is w^ll; as Noah's Dove coming with an Olive branch in her mouth.
Comfort ye, comfort ye, cry aloud, spare not. If you stop your ears, who can
help it? the Lord is gracious and charge us to comfort you: and can there be
any better news, than to say, All is peace, all your sins are done away. I have
blotted as a thick cloud thy transgressions: as who should say, it is the
tidings of such good things, as all within thee is too little to praise the
Lord, and therefore it is not a thing to be slighted over; blessed is the man
whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32. which is no Noun Adjective, nor of the
singular number neither; it signifies blessedness, as it were an heap of
blessings. They commonly call it the eight beatitudes, it is but varied upon
diverse subjects; were there eighty-eight, that were all one: To have thy sins
forgiven thee, is the comprizing of all happiness.

Again, when a man sets his eyes too much upon his sins; more upon his sins
than upon the mercies of God freely offered in Christ, this is a wonderful
hindrance of the peace; Thou look on the wrong object, looking too much on
thy sins, when thou should look on Christ, that brazen Serpent offered unto
thee; then it is no wonder that thou see not Christ though he be near thee:
Mary Magdalen complains and weeps to the Gardener, that they had taken away her
Lord, and she knew not where they had laid him, when as he stood at her elbowe;
her eyes were so full of tears that she could not behold her Savior. Now
therefore stand not in thine own light, but look upon Christ as well as upon
thy sins; observe, though there be a peace and a calm, yet presently all
turmoyles will not cease after humiliation: When there is a great storm at Sea
which lasts perhaps twenty four hours, and then cease, what are the waves
presently quiet, as soon as the storm is over? no, there will be tossing and
rolling many hours afterward, because there must be a time of settling; and so
though there be peace between God and thee, and the storm over, yet there must
be a time of settling.

I should now show you the difference between the peace that wicked men have
and this other peace; theirs is not peace; there is no peace to the wicked: It
is a truce only, and we must make a great difference between a truce and a
peace. A truce when it is expired, commonly ends in more bitter War. With
them there is a cessation of trouble, their consciences do not accuse them, but
when the time limited is over, and conscience again breaks loose, it will be
more unquiet and unsettled than ever before; it will be at open War against
them.

ROMANS 5.1, 2. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ; By whom also we have access by faith into this
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
HAving out of these words declared unto you, the Mother-grace justification by
faith, I proceeded to the consideration of her Daughters, those fruits or
graces which spring from a true justifying faith. So that here we have the
great Charter and Privilege that a justified man is endowed withal. First, He
has peace with God. Secondly, Free access unto him. Thirdly, Unspeakable joy,
and that joy not only in respect of that delectable object, the hope of the
glory of God in heaven hereafter; but here also, that which spoils the joy of
a natural man, (afflictions, etc.) are made the matter of this man's joy.

Now concerning peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, the first of
these, I considered three parts in it.

1. What that peace was which the justified man enjoys. 2. The parties
between whom this peace was made. 3. Who was the peace maker.
Concerning the peace I declared unto you what it was, that it was an
unconceivable thing, The peace of God that passes all understanding; a thing
which our shallow understandings cannot reach unto, we cannot apprehend the
excellency of this grace: Consider its excellency by the contrary, there is no
misery in the world like that as when a man stands at enmity with God: Do we
provoke the Lord? are we stronger than he? If a man sin against a man, says
Eli, the Judge shall judge him; another man may take up the quarrel, but if a
man sin against God, if the controversy be between God and us, who shall
intercede for us? were it not for this our peacemaker Christ Jesus, we should
be in a woeful condition, unless he put to his hand, and took up the matter.

Now it is a great matter to come to the fruit of peace; the fruit of peace is
to them that make peace; we have this fruit of peace, we do not sow fruit but
seed, the fruit comes afterward: It is not so with a Christian, he is as sure
as if the thing were in hand, he sows not only the seed, but the fruit of
peace; as soon as he is justified, at that instant he has the fruit of peace.

2. So we have peace, but with whom is it? it is between God and us. God and a
justified man is at peace through Jesus Christ; at the very same instant that a
man is justified, he is at peace with God. This peace as I declared unto you,
is a gift of an high nature, which belongs not to every man, but to the
justified man only; he who is justified by faith, he only has peace. In the
Eph^sians and Isaiah there are general proclamations of peace: Peace be unto
them that are near, and unto them that are afar off: and Isa. 5.7. The word
the Apostle uses in the Ephesians, has allusion to this in Isaiah, ver. 19. I
create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to them that are afar off, and to
them that are nigh, says the Lord, and I will heal them; but the wicked are
like a troubled Sea, that cannot rest. There is no peace (says my God) to the
wicked. Though the proclamation be never so general to Jews and Gentiles, yet
it belongs only to those who have peaceable minds toward God, those who will
not stand on terms of rebellion against him; what madness is it to think that
if I stand in point of rebellion against God, I should have peace with him? But
I must cast down my treasons, and I must come with a subjects mind, then there
will be peace, otherwise no peace: When Jehu came to revenge the quarrel of
God, Joram asked him, Is it peace Jehu? he answers, What peace so long as the
whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and her witch-crafts are so many! 2 Kings 9.
As long as thou continuest in a course of rebellion, what have thou to do to
talk of peace? why think thou on peace, when thou art the chief rebel? as
long as wickedness continues in thy heart, thou have no peace of God by Jesus
Christ.

Now it may fall out that there may be a kind of quietness in the conscience
of a wicked man; but we must make a great difference between a peace and a
truce; a truce is but a cessation of war, for such a time, and many times
when the truce is over, it ends in greater war, because they have the more
time to gather strength, and increase their Forces: So there may be a peace or
a truce between God and wicked men; but it is the highest judgment that can be
upon a wicked man to be thus let alone; but it is not so with a godly man; God
breaks their peace, and hedges up their way with thorns, and many times
torments their conscience, and breaks their peace; but when God suffers a
sinner to thrive in sin, when he suffers him to on so long, that his own
honor is almost touched; I held my peace says God, then thou thoughtest me to
be such a one as thy self; God holds his peace, then the sinner says God does
not heed. However the preacher amplifies these things, God is not so terrible
as they make him; well, but though God hold his peace long, yet at last he will
speak. Oh consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you^ When the time of the truce is out, then the
conscience is like a fierce Mastiffe; the longer he is tied, the more fierce he
is when he is let loose; so conscience, when it has been long quiet, and tied
up, when God lets loose the cords thereof, it will be more fierce than ever
before, it will then fly like a Mastiffe in thy face, and as it were tear thy
throat; and then there will be in thee the very flashings of hell.

Now there is a great difference between the peace of Gods children, and this
little cessation of war in the consciences of wicked men: When the strong man
armed, keeps the house, the goods that he possesses are in peace: When Satan
is the Master, and thou do his will, and he has thee at command, he does not
trouble thee; when he keeps the house, the goods are in peace; but when a
stronger than he comes, and puts him out of possession, then comes the strife
and debate. Look therefore to thy peace; is it such a peace as thou have never
found any conflict, any stirring, striving betwixt the strong man and the weak?
suspect that peace; that is not the peace of a justified man, but of such a one
who is held by the Prince of darkness.

2. Again, how comes this peace to wicked men? they consider not the wrath of
God, nor the danger of sin; they consider not that Tophet is prepared of old;
if they did but consider this, it would spoil their sport, and break their
peace; but now a justified man, he knows what sin is, and what hell is, and
at that very time when he is thinking of his sins, and of damnation, when he
knows that this is the reward of Gods enemies, he has peace even then. The
other, they shut their eyes that they may not see their danger, and because
they discern it not, therefore they are at peace. A man in a dark night going
over a dangerous Bridge, that if he miss but a step he is drowned, yet he
passes over securely, and is not afraid, because he wants light to discover
the danger; but bring him the next day, and show him what a danger he escaped,
and the thoughts of it will make him quake and tremble, though the danger be
past; So these men, being in darkness see not their danger, and (therefore) do
not fear; but Gods child having his eyes in his head, discerns the danger, and
sees also how he is delivered by Jesus Christ; he is at peace, not because he
sees not the danger of the way, but because he knows that God has made the
way broad by Jesus Christ, and so he is freed from sin and death.

Now to speak something to them that have this true and sound peace, this peace
is with God; I showed you the last time that this peace is not always in their
own conscience, but it is such on Gods part, which is the safe part; many
reasons there are why God does not show it unto them; though all be quiet
betwixt God and them, yet they have not an apprehension of it in their
consciences.

I showed that this is many times their own fault, because they will not be
comforted; all their thoughts are bent upon their sins, and their
provocations of God, and they have not an eye open to look upon the mercies of
Christ, they put it off, and will not be comforted; and if they put it off from
themselves, no marvail if they have not peace in their consciences.

This may come by reason of the great conflict before in the conscience; God
raises a great storm, and when he intends to bring a man to do some great
work, or to a great deal of joy, he first humbles him; the Prince of our
salvation was consecrated by afflictions, and we must be conformable unto
Christ our Head; when the storms are past, the Sea will continue raging for
awhile, and when you have turned the wheel round, if you take away your hand,
it will go round it self for a time; So when you are justified by faith, the
storm is over, yet the roaring of the waves will continue; it will be so with
the children of God; though there be a calm, yet there will be some remainders
of a storm.

Again, they are in travail, and that is a painful thing; My little children
with whom I travail; they have the pangs of the new birth, and it is a good
while before they can find that quietness their heart does long for.

Again, God purposely does, though he be friends with them, take away from them
the sense of peace, because he takes delight to find that strength of faith:
Faith is manifest that way, faith is most strong when there is least sense. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? the less sense, the faster the hold;
and God loves this at life, that when he spurns and frowns, he will not let go,
nor be put off; let him kill me, he shall kill me with Christ in my arms, I
will not let go my hold; God cannot fail, he has given me his Word, and
therefore I will not let go; such astrong faith had Abraham, contrary to
reason; Gods Word is true, he gives me his Word, and I will trust him; So a
child of God will not be put off; though God write bitter things against him,
he will not forgo him; we have an excellent example in the woman of Canaan; the
end of it is, O woman great is thy faith; but how does the greatness of it
appear? Lord, have mercy upon me, my daughter is grievously afflicted, etc. why
not rather, Lord, have mercy on my daughter! the reason is because she was
afflicted in her daughters affliction; by the way we may hereby understand the
meaning of the Commandment, where it is said, he will visit the iniquities of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate him; but why to the third and fourth generation? because I may see
the third and fourth generation, and may see the judgment of God on them, and
may remember my sin for which they are plagued; the case is mine, and not
theirs only; Lord, have mercy upon me, for my daughter is diseased; I see my
own sin is punished by the judgment on her in my sight; poor woman, Christ
will not hear her; she might have been dash't out of countenance, the Disciples
were weary of her clamorous cries, and say, Send her away, for she troubles
us; what says Christ? Is ^t fit to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto
dogs? This was enough to dash her quite; before she was discouraged by silence,
but to be called dog, it were enough quite to discourage her; but see the fruit
of faith, she seeks comfort out of that which would have undone another; what!
am I dog a under the Table! there I shall get a crumme; others of the children
that are better, let them have the loaves: I account my self happy if I may but
get a crumb; Oh woman, great is thy faith; this is great faith when it goes
contrary to all sense: That when God calls me dog, when he spurns at me, and
frowns on me, I will not be put off. Faith is of the nature of the Vine, if it
have but the least hold on the wall, it makes use of it, and climbs higher and
higher; So out of the least thing that drops from her Saviors mouth, she
raises her faith higher: so though we have this peace with God, yet often
ofttimes he withholds the notification of it to us.

3. The last thing is to note the difference between the peace of a carnal and
a spiritual man; carnal peace is mixed with a great deal of presumption and
pride; but the more spiritual peace thou have, the more thou art dejected in
thy self, the more cast down; see it in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, 62, 63. I
will establish with thee an everlasting Covenant; then shall thou remember thy
ways, and be ashamed when thou shall receive thy sisters, thy elder, and thy
younger, and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy Covenant;
and I will establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the
Lord, that thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou
have done, says the Lord; when God is pacified, yet they hold down their
heads, and are ashamed; when a man knows that God has pardoned his sins, he
is ashamed that he has carried himself so wickedly against God, of whose mercy
he has now such experience; When God is pacified, a man remembers his former
sins, and is confounded, as it is Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall you remember your
own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves
in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations in that time
when I am pacified toward you. That which would work in a carnal man security
and pride, (for he never thinks himself better then when there is peace within)
will work in the the child of God the Spirit of humiliation. In the last
Chapter of Job, God had manifested himself wonderfully to Job, and however
before he had very sharp afflictions, his sufferings in soul were next to the
sufferings of Christ. I believe never any man suffered so much as Job did,
insomuch that the arrows of the Almighty stuck in him; thou have eaten up my
flesh, etc. This was the case of Job, and he stood upon terms of
justification; he w^sh't that God would dispute with him, that God would either
be the Opponent or the Answerer. If God would answer, he would oppose; or if
God would oppose, he would answer. God comes as he would have him, and Job is
not at that point that he was before; when God draws nigh unto him, he says, I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees thee, Job
42.5. Well, this may make thee a proud man, and elevate thee; no says he, now
I abhor my self in dust and ashes. The nearer God draws unto us, and the more
merciful he is unto us, by that light we the more discern our own abominations.
That which would make another man proud, brings Job to the knowledge of his
vileness; Therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

3. Now another thing is, Who is this peacemaker? This I shall but touch: We
have peace with God: But how? through our Lord Jesus Christ; he is our
peacemaker, and interposeth between his Fathers wrath and us, Ephesians. 2.14. For
he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down that partition
wall between us; we have not only peace with God through Christ, but Christ is
the very peace; not only the peacemaker, but the peace. There was a middle
wall of partition between the Jews and the Gentiles, and between God and us;
Christ breaks it down; sin shall no longer be a wall of partition. Having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, for to make himself of twain one new man, so making peace, and that
he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross. There was hatred
between God and us. Christ has crucified that hatred with the nails wherewith
he was fastened to the Cross; he has killed it by his crucifixion, and now
enmity being slain, peace must needs be alive; there is peace and
reconciliation made. You are come (says the Apostle) to the blood of
sprinkling; whereas the blood of Abel cried for vengeance against Cain the
murderer: This blood cries for peace, it outcries all our sins; sin has a
voice; its said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah went up into the ears of the
Lord; Every sin thou committest has a voice to cry, but the blood of Christ
has a shriller voice, and outcries the cry of thy sins; it is so preheminent,
it speaks for peace, and does out cry the voice of our sins; the high Priest
was a a type of Christ, Numb. 16. He must have on his frontlet Holiness to the
Lord; as one which bears the holy one of the Lord, standing in the person of
Christ; Moses says (when there was wrath gone out from the Lord) unto Aaron,
ver. 46. Take a censer and put fire therein from off the Altar, and put on
incense, and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an atonement for them,
for there is wrath gone out, the plague is begun; So when the wrath is gone
out, the High Priest comes and offers up himself a sweet incense acceptable
unto God. And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and came into the midst of the
Congregation, and behold the plague was begun among the people, and he put
incense and made an atonement for the people. When wrath is come out from the
Almighty, and his Army is sent out for to destroy the Rebels, now our High
Priest stands between the living and the dead, and offers up himself an
oblation to Almighty God to make peace: Look to the case of Balaam; when the
people had committed fornication, Phineas executed judgment; wherefore the Lord
says, Numb. 25.12. Phineas has turned away my wrath from the people* and if
that one act of Phineas his zeal for the Lord in killing the Fornicators before
the Congregation, if this, I say, appeased Gods wrath for the whole
Congregation; how much more does our Phineas who has fulfilled all
righteousness, whom the zeal of Gods house had eaten up? he is nothing but
zeal it self, and all that he does unto his father, is for our good. How much
more shall Christ pacify Gods wrath, who has received the gash of Gods Sword
upon his own body, and would not have himself spared that he might do it? As
Jonah was three days and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the Son
of man be in the heart of the earth. There is a mighty storm, and Jonah is
cast out into the Sea, presently the storm cease; so Christ having suffered
for us, there is peace, the storm is over.

Now follows in the next place in the Text; By whom we have access by faith
into this grace wherein we stand and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.
These are the two privileges that a justified man has; he has a gracious
access unto God; Suppose he be in a fault, (as who is not?) if any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous: These things
have I written, (says the Apostle) that you sin not; but if any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, etc.

This is the state of a justified man; though he do by his ^elapses provoke
God, yet he is in the state of a subject; though he be a disobedient subject,
yet a subject, not a forreiner as before; but now ye that were not a people,
are become the people of the Lord. A child of God in the midst of rebellion,
is sub misericordia; as soon as he is in the state of grace, he is under Gods
protection; he is no stranger; though he has his blood about his ears, and is
in his rags, yet he may come to God; by Jesus Christ he may come boldly to the
Throne of grace, that he may find help in time of need: The Apostle in Ephesians.
2.18. sets down twice the great privileges Christians have; for thorough him
we both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father; its Christ which makes
the way: To have a friend at the Court is a great matter, especially when a man
has need of him; Christ is gone before us: and he lives for ever to make
intercession for us, and we need no other Mediator; thus he bespeaks his
Father: Father, this is one of mine that I shed my blood for, one of those that
thou gave me, I beseech thee have pity upon him, and I beseech thee give him
audience, Ephesians. 3.12. By him, (i. e.) through Christ, we have access by one
Spirit unto the Father, in whom we have boldness by the faith of him, and
access with confidence. I go not now doubting unto God, I prefer my suit with
boldness. Mark the Apostle St. James, If any man want wisdom, or any other
thing, let him ask it of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not; it is otherwise with men, when one has done a great man wrong, and comes
to desire a favor at his hands, Oh Sir, says he, Do you not remember how you
used me at such a time, or in such a place? That he is presently upbraided
with, 'its cast in his dish; but it is not so with God, he gives liberally and
upbraids no man; so there is a free and a bold access with faith and
confidence, by whom we have boldness and access, let him not doubt or waver;
that is a notable place; here is bold access by faith unto God, and by that we
may be assured of whatever we ask; if it be forgiveness of sins, we may be
sure they are forgiven; if we ask in faith we may be assured. By the way take
notice of the folly of the Papists, who think that a man can have no confidence
or assurance that his sins are forgiven. This is our confidence that if we
ask any thing according to his will he hears us: Now is it not according to
his will to ask forgiveness of our sins? Does not he injoine us to do it?
Therefore what infidelity is it not to be assured of it? And what impudency is
it in them to go about to cut off that which is the whole comfort of a
Christian? The assurance of his salvation. Thus it is indeed with those that
have no feeling nor confidence, as those who are in hell think there is no
heaven; and they who teach such uncomfortable doctrine, can receive no comfort
farther than the Priest gives it them. Its true there is no true assurance but
in the true Church, but there it may be found.

And as I began with sowing in tears, so I would end with reaping in joy; that
is the next thing in the Text, for which I pass over the other part of it; I
begin with humiliation, but end with joy; and not only that joy which we shall
have in the Kingdom of heaven, but on earth while we have these things but in
hope and expectation. A man that would reckon up his estate, does not only
value what he has for the present, but he reckons his reversions also; what he
shall have after such a time, what will come to him or his heirs: Gods
children, they have a brave reversion, glory and honor, and a Kingdom: It is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom; we are all the children of
God, but it does not appear what we shall be: when he appears, we shall be like
him, and appear as he is. He shall change our vile bodies and make them like
his glorious body; we are here sons, but yet, but in a strange Country, no
body knows what he is, and therefore he meets with many affronts. The King
when he was in France, went for an attendant on the Duke, and is he troubled at
it? No, he knew that the world knew it not; they knew not what he was, and
therefore he is not troubled at it. So is it with the children of God, but when
they shall appear, they shall be advanced, and their enemies ashamed. By the
way, let not the people of God be discouraged, by the taunts, jeers and
reproaches of wicked men; they know not what you are, and therefore make light
of you, as they did of Christ himself. Well, besides what we have in reversion,
the very hope we have of it works wonderful joy in the heart of a Christian:
David did not live to see the glory of Solomon's Temple, but he made provision
for it, and cast the model of it, and he took much delight in the contemplation
of what it would be. The consideration of these hopes makes my flesh rest in
hope, and my heart rejoice, Psalm. 16. The consideration of the resurrection
made David's heart rejoice: The consideration of that which is to come, should
bring abundance of joy unto a Christian, these are strange things, not like the
joy of a natural man; for his heart is sad in the midst of laughter; but these
rejoice with a joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Here are some sparks, some
beginnings of the glory of heaven, and of that great joy which we shall have
hereafter; but I cannot speak of these things in an hour.

But forasmuch as the Devil transforms himself into an Angel of light; there is
no work of Gods Spirit in the hearts of his children, but Satan like an Ape
labors to imitate in the hearts of wicked men, to make them secure; we must
know that there are joys in some who are not regenerate. They that received the
Word on the Rock, received it with joy; the Word if it be apprehended, and has
but the least footing, brings joy with it.

But now to know how I may get this joy, how comfortable a thing is it to have
such a comfort on earth, as to know that I have this true joy! and to be able
to distinguish this joy from the joy, from the flashes, those fleeting joys of
the wicked, which are but as the crackling of thorns under a pot; for theirs
is but as a blaze that suddenly goes out. Now if thou would know thy joy
aright, and whether it differ from that counterfeit joy which flesh and blood,
and the Devil suggests; Look to the things that go before, and produce this joy.

1. The first thing that goes before true joy, and produces it, is an opening
unto Christ when he knocks at the door of thy heart. As in that famous place,
in Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock; If any man hear my voice
and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me.
There is if thou open, a sweet and familiar communication between Christ and
thee; he communicates himself at dinner and supper. A man comes not melancholy
to meals; Christ will come and make merry with thee, he will sup with thee
familiarly. But how is it with thee? Has Christ knocked, and thou have given
him a slievelesse answer, and have thou joy? it is a false joy. But when Christ
knocks at the door of thy heart, there must be an opening the door on thy part,
when he knocks by his Word and Spirit: And do thou give such an answer as the
Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 5. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my
Spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honey-combe
with my honey: Now Christ coming to Supper knocks at the door, and would bring
in a great deal of joy: I sleep, says the Spouse, but my heart waketh; it is
the voice of my well-beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me my Sister, my
Love, my Dove, my Undefiled: when God comes and wooes us, and desires to
communicate himself unto us, and desires us to put off our clothes, do thou
look for comfort if thou openest not? At last I opened to my Beloved; ver. 6.
But he had withdrawn himself, and was gone, my soul failed when he spoke; I
sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but he gave me no answer:
When thou give not Christ entertainment when he comes, thou may seek and
not meet with him. It is observed that the Keepers of the Wall are the greatest
strikers: Those whom God has set to be Watchmen, instead of comforting they
smite, ver. 7. The Watchmen that went about the City, they found me, they smote
me, they wounded me, they took away my veil from me; she gets raps from them
who should protect her, because she did not entertain Christ; if thou find
any comfort after Christ has knocked, and thou have opened unto him, then it
is true joy, and thou may make much of it.

2. If it be true joy, there goes faith before it; for being justified by
faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: So that the
exercising of the acts of faith, is a spiritual means to raise comforts in our
souls; John 6. I had need to speak of this, for there is want of the exercises
of faith; is it enough think you to have faith once exercised? He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: It is not enough
to eat once a year. A man will not be in good liking that eats but once a year,
but a man must eat once a day at least. A Christian should feed on Christ every
day, make him his ordinary food, renewing every day the acts of his faith,
receive Christ crucified by faith every day. If a Christian would consider that
God offers Christ unto him every day, and thou renewest thy faith, and claspest
him every day, it would be a special way whereby joy should be raised in the
soul. Its said in Romans 15.13. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God; Now
the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may
abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. Thus when thou have
exercised the acts of faith in believing, and then upon that rejoycest, then
its seasonable and true joy, and not the counterfeit joy of the wicked; when it
arises and springs from believing, when that procures it, it likewise
distinguishes it from all false joys. The Apostle tells us, Phil. 1.24. Having
this confidence I know that I shall abide and continue with you all, for your
furtherance and joy of faith. It is called the joy of faith, because it springs
from that principle of rejoicing, from the mother grace, that your rejoicing
may be the more abundant.

The preaching of the Word whereby faith is wrought, brings abundance of joy;
That place of St. Peter is remarkable, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye
love, in whom though now you see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory; yet believing, that is, yet exercising the acts
of faith, which we too much neglect. If we did exercise these acts every day,
we should have our Charter of joy renewed every day; yet believing, ye rejoice.

3. Pray and be thankful; praise and thanksgiving are those fruits which
fulfill all our joy; when thou prayest, thou conversest with God, thou speak
with him face to face, as Moses did. He who can pray spiritually, and pray hard
unto God, as Moses face shined when he talked with God, so will thy soul
thrive, praying hard, and being thankful; there is no greater means then this
to get this joy, Psalm. 37.1. Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous, for praise is
comely for the upright. Upon this hangs all our comfort; praise always brings
rejoicing; the one begets the other. In Isaiah, The comfort there that Gods
children receive, is the changing of raiment; Christ preaching the acceptable
year of the Lord to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give to them
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness. The ground of praise is joy; one follows the other:
Observe, God will give us the oil of joy; Christ was anointed with this oil
above his fellows; Christ has fullness of joy; this oil does not come on his
Priesthood alone, but it trickles down unto the lowermost hemme of his garment.

I will add in the last place, when a man considers the great things which are
given to him by God, and what an estate we get by Christ. I have forgiveness
of sins; and blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven: Christ's blood is
wine, and my name is written in the book of life. Do not rejoice (says our
Savior) because the Devils are subject unto you; but because your names are
written in the book of life: When I consider that I am not in the black Roll,
and it is my faith which strengthens me, which makes me reckon Christ my
chiefest wealth; this makes me rejoice in mine inheritance* and in hope of the
glory of God: When I consider the great reward in the world to come, this is a
great cause of rejoicing; and therefore Gods children long for the coming of
Christ; it is made, Tit. 2.13. a mark of those that shall be saved: That they
long for the appearance of Jesus Christ, looking for, and hastening unto the
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. And in 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of
the day of God: A longing expectation; not only they, but we also that have the
first fruits of the Spirit, groan and long for the coming of it; and therefore
the last breath of the Scripture is breathed in this, Rev. 22.20. He that
testifyeth these things, says, Surely I come quickly, Amen, even so be it,
come Lord Jesus; there is a sweet Allegory to express this in Cant. ult. 14.
make haste my beloved, and be like the Hind, and like the Roe; Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, and come as the Hind, and as the Roe, and as a Heart upon
the Mountain of spices; Make have and come quickly be swift and do not tarry,
and in a better place I cannot end.

FINIS.
A TABLE.
An Advertisement. That the Printers mis-paging may be no hindrance to the use
of this Table, the Reader is to take notice that it refers to the pages as they
are figured, not as they should be; and that whereas after page 431. the
numbers take their rise back at 361. and from thence are repeated over again,
this Asterisk * placed before any figure, notes the latter order of pages so
figured.
A
Acceptance and Affiance two acts of Faith, page 424 Active Obedience. See
Obedience. Aggravations of sin, p. 90 A temporary Believer desires Christ only
in Affliction, p. * 388, 389 Assurance no part of justifying faith, p. 428. It
is attainable, p. * 457 Why so many Christians want it, p. * 438
B.
Baptism what it obliges to, p. 54. It has not its full effect till the day of
our death, ibid. To believe is a hard matter, p. 53.426 To believe is our duty,
p. 408 Five words (or Scripturewayes) that God uses to persuade sinners to
Believe in Christ, viz. General Proclamation, p. 402. Special invitations, p.
405. Entreaties, p. 406. Commands, p. 408. Threatenings, p. 409 To Believe is to
come to Christ, p. * 350 It is expressed by Hungring and Thirsting, p. * 372 A
Believers case like the Beggars, p. * 376 A true Believer distinguished from a
Temporary (1.) by the ground of his desires, p. * 388. (2.) by his desiring
Grace as well as Mercy, p. * 394 (3.) by his Love to God, p. * 395 A Believers
privilege, p. * 456
C.
GOd Calls sinners to Christ by five words, p. 402 Christ's equality with God
p. 360. It renders his Humiliation the greater and more meritorious, p. 361
Christ's Humiliation; the extent, degrees, and particulars of it, p. 363, 371,
372. Part of his Humiliation to be Gods Servant, p. 365. He was a Serant on
earth in respect of men, p. 367. used and valued at the rate of a bondman, p
368 Christ's sufferings the more meritorious because voluntary, p. 374.
Christ's Active Obedience in the course of his life, p. 375. his Humiliation
and sufferings from his Conception to his death described, p. 379. etc.
Christ's death described in the Accursednesse of it, p. 384. in the shame of
it, p. 385. in the painfulnesse of it, p. 386 Christ suffered not the pains of
Hell, proved, p. 388. yet he suffered in his Soul immediately from God, p. 389
Whether Christ takes away all the sins of the world, p. 395. Christ's being
offered for us, no comfort unless he be offered to us, p. 356 That Christ dyed
sufficiently for all is an improper speech, p. 356 To receive Christ what, p.
399. Christ offered freely, p. 397, 402. He that has a will to receive Christ
has a warrant to receive him, p. 404 Christ the proper and immediate Object of
justifying Faith, p. 418. Christ loved and valued above all by true believers,
p. 427. Christ and the Cross go together in this life, p. 426 Christ very
compassionate, p. * 368 Christ is our Peace, p * 454 To be a Christian indeed
is no easy matter, p. 426 Civil Righteousness. See Morality. Men deceived by
Comparing themselves with others, p. 46. and with themselves, p. 47 The
Conditions of Faith and Obedience required hinder not the freedom of Gospel
grace, p. 389, 416 Confession of sin necessary, and why p.* 376 Carnal
Confidence as to our spiritual estate dangerous, the vain grounds of it
discovered, p. 43, etc. Conscience one of the Tormenters in Hell, p. 153 Peace
of Conscience. See Peace. Conviction necessary to Conversion, p. 39, 80
Conviction a work of Gods Spirit, p * 364 Two hindrances of Conversion, p. 4 A
limited time for it. p. 9, 10 Crucifying a Cursed, Shameful, Painful death, p.
384. etc. The manner of it, p. 386. The Curse follows sin, p. 98 The Curses
attending an unregenerate man in this life, p. 120, etc. The Curses on his
Soul, p. 127 The Curses at his death, p. 130 Custom in sin hardens the heart,
p. 28
D.
DAy of grace limited, p. 9, 10, 34, 35. The folly and danger of neglecting it,
p. 16, 17 Death the wages of sin, p. 110. The comprehensivenesse of the word
Death, p. 119 Death terrible, p. 112. The teriblenesse of Bodily Death set
forth in three particulars, p. 131, etc. What the first and second Death is, p.
141 The Death of Christ described, p. 384, etc. Death-bed-Repentance See
Repentance. Deferring Repentance dangerous, p. 16, 17. The reasons of Carnal
men's Deferring Repentance, p. 21, etc. The vanity of them, ibid. Desires after
Christ may be stronger in Temporaries, then in true Believers, p. * 388 The
Devil takes possession of those whom God leaves, p. 106, 107 The Reason of
Christians Doubting, p. * 438.
E.
WHat use to make of the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, p. 35
Encouragements for sinners to come to Christ, p. 402 Examination of a man's
self. See Self-Examination.
F
FAith why required to the receiving of Christ since he is a free gift, p. 398.
Faith consists not in a man's being persuaded that God is his God, and that his
sins are pardoned p. 402.413. It Is proper and immediate object is not that
forgivness of sins, but Christ, p. 418. Faith must have a ground for it out of
the word p. 414. What Faith justifies p. * 384. etc. Faith jusstifies not as a
virtue, but in respect of its object, p. 419. Faith justifies not as a Habit,
but as an act p. * 417. The Acts of Faith p. 423. By what sins the Acts of
Faith are hindered p. 417. How those obstructions are removed, ibid. Faith an
instrument to receive Justification, not to procure it, p. * 424, * 434 Why
Faith chosen for an instrument of Justification, rather than any other grace p.
* 437. A weak Faith justifies as much as a strong, p. * 435 yet a strong Faith
is to be labored for, and why p *, 436. How Faith alone justifies, p. * 436
Faith may be certainly known, p. * 407. There may be Faith where there is no
feeling, p. 412, 425, * 373 Faith strongest when sense least, p. * 451
Encouragements to Faith p. 402 Carnal Fear, its sinfulness and danger, p. 140,
141 Men apt to Flatter themselves as to their spiritual estate, 41 Five false
glasses that cause this self- Flattery p. 43, etc. Forgivness of sins not a
distinct thing from Imputation of righteousness p. 399, etc. Forgiveness is
properly of sins past only, p.* 403. It is one continued act, p. * 414. and
therefore may be prayed for by a justified person, ibid. Forgivness frees from
guilt and punishment p.* 418, 419 God forsakes none till they forsake him, p.
108 True believers forsake all for Christ, p. 427, 428. Free grace in bringing
sinners to Christ, p. 398 No Freewill to good, p. 404
G
TO be given up to our selves a more fearful thing then to be given up to
satan, p. 108, 109.128. The Gospel not seasonable, nor savory till the Law has
been preached, p. 80. How the Gospel differs from the Law, p. 86 The fullness
and freedom of the Grace of the Gospel not hindered by the conditions of Faith
and Obedience, p. 398.416 Guilt of sin taken away in Justification p. * 420.
H
Hardness of heart a hindrance to Conversion, p. 2, 3 4 Hell for whom
provided, p. 139 Hell described p. 143, etc. That Christ suffered not the pains
of Hell proved p. 388. Christians rejoice in Hope p. * 458. The Humiliation of
Christ see Christ
I
IMputation of Righteousness. See Righteousness: To be given up to
Insensiblenesse a woeful thing p. 129, 130 Joy in the sense of Gods love
surpasses all worldly Joy p. 430. It is attainable. p. ibid. The reason why
many believers are strangers to it. p. 430, 431. Some Joy may be in a Temporary
p. * 393. How to try true Joy p. * 360. Means to get it. p. * 462, 463
Justification what it signifies p. * 396. How the Fathers used the word p. *
732 Justification, one simple act of God, p. * 400 How we are said to be
Justified by Faith, and how by Christ's blood, p. 420. * 422. In what sense we
are Justified by Faith according to Paul and in what sense by works according
to James, p, * 398. Impossible to be Justified but by imputed Righteousness p.
* 402, *410, 411. In the instant of Justification, no sins are remitted but
those that are past, p. * 411, 412. A twofold Justification, p. * 409 Why a
justified person may and must pray for the remission of sins past p. * 413,
414. Justification frees from the punishment and guilt too, p. * 418, 419, 420.
Justification confounded by the Papists with sanctification, p. * 422. The
difference between them, p. * 423. * 429. No Justification before Faith p. *
440 How we are Justified by Faith alone, p. * 439. Judgment in Scripture
sometime taken for Righteousness inherent p. * 433 How men are deceived in
Judging of their spiritual estate, p. 43
K
KNowledge one act of Faith. p. 423
L
THe use of the Law, p. 79.354. * 366. It is necessary to be preached before
the Gospel, p. 80, * 366 Men are under the Law till they come to Christ, p. 84,
how fearful a thing it is to be under the Law, p. 84, 85. the difference
between the Law, and the Gospel in three particulars, p. 86. Love of God
twofold, p 415. No temporary believer loves God p. * 396. To be given up to our
own Lusts a more fearful thing, then to be given up to Satan, p. 108, 109
M
WAnt of Meditation one cause why most believers have so little joy in God p.
430, 431. Mistakes in judging our spiritual estates. See Judging. Morality too
much trusted to p. 49. It Is insufficient to bring men to heaven ibid.
N
NAtural reason not to be trusted to p. 49 Too short to convince of sin
thoroughly, p. 51 Man's condition by Nature described, p. 59. The Natural man dead
in sin p. 67. His best works cannot please God, and why p. 68, 69 The Curses
attending a Natural man in this World p. 120, etc. Two blows that God gives a
Natural man's soul in this life, the one sensible p. 127, the other insensible,
p. 128. The Curses attending him at Death p. 130, etc.
O
Christ's active Obedience mixed with his passive, p. 372. Wherein his active
Obedience consisted, p. 375. etc. Wherein his passive p. 378 Partial Obedience
a false glass to judge our estates by p^ 48 To design only our Old age for
God is dishonorable to him, p. 22, 23. Old age most unfit for Repentance, p.
25, 27 Men apt to have too good Opinion of themselves, p. 41. The causes of it,
p. 43, etc. Men deceived in judging of their estates by the good Opinions of
others, p. 44
P
PArtial Obedience see Obedience. Passive Obedience. see Obedience. Peace a
fruit of faith p. * 441 * 447. Why many Christians want the sense of it, p. *
442, 443. * 450, 451 The differences between a true and a false Peace, p. *
448, etc. The Causes of a Carnal Peace p. * 449. * 452 Christ is our Peace.
p.*454 Spirit of Prayer what p. * 377, 378 1. The Importunity and efficacy of
it, p. * 379, 380 Why a person already justified may and must Pray for the
forgivness of sins past p. * 413, 414
R
NAtural Reason. see Natural. To Receive Christ what p. 399. What Reformation
may be in a natural man, p. * 390, 392 Repentance prevents ruin, p. 7
Repentance not in our own power but in gods gift, p. 13, 14. The sinfulness of
deferring it, p. 11 etc. Deathbed Repentance, the hindrances of it, p. 30 Not
to be trusted to p 31. Hard to prove it sound, p. 32 Superficial Repentance is
vain p. 57 Repentance in what respects necessary to justification, p. * 417
Remission of sin. See Forgiveness. Resting or Relying upon God, a proper Act of
Faith, p. 425 Righteousness two fold, p. * 397. * 409 Imputative
Righteousness what it is, p. * 402 * 410. Impossible to be justified without
it, and why, p. * 410, 411
S.
Sanctification a distinct thing from Justification, p. * 423. p. * 429 Satan.
See Devil. A difficult thing to be Saved, p. 53 Sealing a distinct thing from
Faith, p. * 428 The Causes of Security, p. * 449 Self-Examination, necessary to
Conversion, p. 39.57. a mark of a sound believer, p. * 407 Self-flattery: See
flattery. Self-Love, how it deceives men in judging their estates, p. 43. Sin
continued in, hastens Gods judgments, p. 3, 4, 5. Sin compared to a weight, p.
26. to Cords, p. 27. Sin gets strength by continuance, p. 28. The Sinfulness
of Sin set forth in 6. considerations, p. 90, etc The dreadful fruits and
consequences of Sin. It pollutes the Soul, p. 100. It makes men loathsome to
God, p. 104. It brings the Devil into the heart, p. 106. It calls for wages,
p. 110 The greatness of Sin, should be no bar against believing in Christ, p.
401 406. No Sin overtops the value of Christ's blood, ibid. Encouragemets for
Sinners to come to Christ, page 401, etc. Sin not discovered thoroughly but by
the spirit, p. * 364. Sin may be cast away, and yet no true Conversion, p. *
392 Sin is only a Privation and no positive being p.*399 * 400 Sins not
pardoned before they be committed p. * 403. The guilt and punishment of Sin
taken away in Justification p. * 418, etc. Spirit of Bondage what p. * 365
Spirit of Prayer see Prayer
T
A Temporary Faith how far it may go, p. * 388, etc. How to know it from true
faith, p. ibid Temporary believers desire Christ only in affliction p. * 388,
389 They do but only taste of Christ, p. * 393. They desire mercy but not grace
p. *394. They do nothing out of love to God, p. * 395 The sinfulness of
thoughts p. 102, 103. The end of Gods Threatenings p. 7.
U
UNregenerate Men See Natural Our unworthiness should not keep us from coming
unto Christ, p. 397.
W
THe Will wrought by God, as well as the deed, p. * 371 The Will more then the
Deed 372. How God takes the Will for the Deed p. * 374 He that has a Will to
receive Christ, has a warrant to receive him, p. 404. God alone inclines the
Will to receive Christ ibid. A woeful thing to be suffered by God to have our
own Wills in this world p. 355. Our Wills must be crossed here or for ever
hereafter ibid. The Willingness of Christ's sufferings rendered them the more
meritorious p. 374 The Word presented to our faith under a double respect, viz.
(1) as a true Word p. 403 (2) as a good Word p. 424 Works spiritually good
cannot be performed by an unregenerate man, and why p. 67, 68, 71. In what
sense we are said by James to be justified by Works p. *398 Wrath a Consequence
of sin p. 98
Y
YOuth the fittest time to Repent and break off sin in p, 25, 22, 29.
FINIS.

