THE Rights of Primogeniture: OR, THE EXCELLENCY OF ROYAL AUTHORITY IN A
SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY in the Isle of Wight, upon the Anniversary
of His BIRTHDAY.

By the R. R. Father in God, JAMES, L. Bishop of Armagh, and Primate of IRELAND.

-- Nunquam libertas gratior extat
Quam sub Rege pio --
LONDON, Printed for R. LOWNDES, 1648.

THE RIGHTS OF PRIMOGENITURE, etc.
GENESIS 49. 3. Reuben, thou art my first borne, my might, and the beginning of my
strength.
THis is the beginning of Jacobs blessing his Children, which was an act (and a
principal act) of his Faith, as it is Heb. 11. 20.

And in this we may see a difference betwixt the death of Jacob and his
Fathers. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were famous in their Generations: God is
not ashamed to be called their God. And if we consider their lives and deaths,
we shall find this difference. Abraham in his life was most glorious, his Faith
famous, witness his offering his only son to God with that strength of Faith,
that although he verily believed that in Jacob all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed, yet was his Faith so strong as to be content to offer him
up, being persuaded that God was able to raise him from the dead.

Now although his life was thus glorious, when ye come to his death, This is
all that is said of him: Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old
age, and was gathered unto his Fathers.

Commonly great things are expected from holy men at their death, yet ye see
Abraham was but ordinary in his death.

Concerning Isaac's life, the Scripture says but little, and the self same
words are used of him at his death, as was at the death of Abraham.

Jacob as ordinary in his life as ye shall meet withal; But his death was a
Prophecy of Christ's coming into the World. He begins with Reuben, to whom
(though he had no mind at all to bless him) he gives his due; shows him that
the right of Primogeniture belonged unto him, if he had not forfeited it: Thou
art my first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength. For this reason
God commands, that the first borne should have a double portion. And so Reuben
should have received, but that he forfeited it; Therefore, says he, because
thou art unstable as Water, etc. thy excellency is departed from thee: and so
he gave it to Joseph. In repeating the Genealogy of Jacobs sons, 1 Chronicles. 5.
1, 2. Now (says the Text) the sons of Reuben the first borne of Israel, (for
he was the first borne) but forasmuch, as he defiled his Fathers bed, his
Birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph, the son of Israel, and the
Genealogy is not to be reckoned after the Birthright, etc.

Ye see, though he had forfeited his Birthright, he could not forfeit his
Primogeniture, but there was an escheate thereof to Joseph. All the rest had a
single Tribe, set out to them, but Joseph had two Tribes, and so the right that
should have gone to Reuben fell to Joseph. Besides this, had not Reuben
forfeited his Birthright, he should have had more then this double portion, for
there was a promise made, that Kings should proceed from him. Now as in the
former Joseph succeeded him, so in this of Eminency and Power, it fell to
Judah, for so it follows in 1 Chronicles. 5. before named.

Now to Explicate this.

The Regal power which comes by descent is described by a double Eminency. The
excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power. By Dignity you understand,
all outward glory; by Power, all Dominion, and these are the two branches of
Majesty.

The Greeks do therefore express it in the abstract. In respect of Dignity,
the Supreme Magistrate is called Glory, In respect of Sovereignty, he is
called Lordship.

The King is not only Glorious, but Glory; Not only Powerful, but Power. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers. Both are joined in the Epistle to
Jude, and in the 8. Verse, there is a wicked sort described, that despise
dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. They despise Dominion that make no
conscience to blaspheme the footsteps of the Lords Anointed. These men dare do
what Michael durst not do, Verse 9. He durst not bring against the Devil a
railing accusation, but these dare speak evil of Dignities. And what is their
Censure? Verse 13. To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. We
use to say, that those that have Gods Tokens upon them are past hopes of like.
Here ye may plainly see Gods Tokens upon these men, they are reserved to
Everlasting Damnation.

Well, let us now come to unfold these two parts of Majesty, Dignity, and
Dominion. The excellency of Dignity, and the excellency of Power

By Dignity, is meant, the outward Pomp and Glory annexed to the Scepter. For,
it is Gods ordinance that there should be an extraordinary splendor in Majesty
more then in any other. And therefore the Scripture does often describe the
Courts of Princes, their Splendor at home, and in their Progress abroad, with
dignity and state. Acts 25. 23. When King Agrippa and Bernice went to hear
Paul, the Text says, They removed with great Pomp. It was a thing beseemed
the Regal power so to do. 1 King. 10. 2. The Queen of Sheba came to Jerusalem
to see Solomen with a great Train: but she came to a far greater Court then
her own. And this State in Courts is not Pride, but it is a thing allowed by
Gods ordinance, as Christ says, Those that wear soft raiment are in Kings
Courts. And speaking of the Lillies of the Field, I say to you (says he) that
Solomon in all his Glory was not like one of these.

If you see a man (though in Russet) attended upon by others in rich Clothes,
you will conclude that man (though in Russet) to be some great Personage. The
Queen of Sheba was astonished at what she saw in Solomon's Court; for, when she
beheld the Meat of his Table (he must not be served as other men) the sitting
of his Servants, the attendance of his Ministers, and his Cup Bearer, etc. the
Text says, There was no more spirit in her. She was (as a man may say) besides
her self to see this State. And so stately it was, that Psalm. 45. it is brought
in as an Allegorical description of the Glory of Christ and his Church. I need
not go to foreign Princes to prove this, the Scripture does sufficiently
evidence it. In Ester 1. there is a description of Ahasuerus and his Feast, the
like to which you will not read of in any other Story, it lasted one hundred
and fourscore days, which was a full half year, and with the greatest Glory
that could be, ver. 4. When he showed the riches of his glorious Kingdom, and
the honor of his excellent Majesty, etc.

So then, this is the first part of Majesty, namely, outward Splendor, which
is lawful and requisite to maintain the dignity of a Prince. And as the
Prince ought to have this in his own Person, and his Attendants, so all
Dignity and Glory rests in him as in the Fountain, and all Titles of Dignity
are in him also. Even as ye see in the Firmament, 1 Cor. 15. There is one Glory
of the Sun, another of the Moon, and one Star excels another in Glory.

In the Commonwealth, there are some Knights, some Lords, some Earls, etc.
but all these differences come from one Sun, one Head, the Prince. There is no
light in the Moon but what is derived from the Sun, even here is borrowed,
the Stars light is borrowed also, and when the Son appears, they cease to
shine. The Stars at this time shine as much as at Midnight, but that the
Light of the Sun does darken them. Even so in the presence of Majesty, those
other Excellent Dignities do not shine at all.

2. To come to the Eminency of Power; For a King to have great State and to
have no Power, he were then but a poor King.

A Duke of Venice is served in as Great State as can be, but he has no Power
at all.

There is a Subordination of Power in all Government, which because it cannot
go ad infinitum, it must needs rest somewhere, and that is in the King. Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher powers. And the Apostle in 1 Pet. 2. 13.
distinguishes, Whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by God, for the punishment of evil doers, etc. and he
adds, that by so doing, the Ignorance of foolish men may be put to silence.

If any Professor of Religion do Rebel against the King, this is a scandal
to Religion.

Now the Apostle did foresee that such there would be, and therefore Commands
that they be put in mind to be Subject, etc. But if any that profess Religion
do Rebel (as I said before) it is the fault of the Professor, and not of the
Profession; for the Church of England does teach the Contrary.

But when men shall not only practice, but teach Rebellion, (for by their
fruits ye shall know them) this amounts to a very high Crime indeed.

The King (as Saint Peter says) has the Excellency of Power, as sent by God.

But, what need I say any more? We all swear that the King is the only
Supreme Governor in his Dominions. A man would think, that that word only
might be spared, since nothing can be above a Supreme, but it is put there by
way of Eminency.

There can be no Dominion in the World, unless there be an Eminency of power
in some one or other. If a man be wronged in any Court, he may lawfully appeal
higher, but then, Appeals must not be Infinite, there must be a supremacy of
power somewhere to rest in.

The Philosopher says, it must be either in one, or in all. Where the Eminency
of power is in one, it is called a Monarchy. The King must only have the
Supreme power, for if any be joined with him, then it is no Monarchy.

If the Power be in a certain number, it is called an Aristocracy.

If the Power be in all, a Democracy; and all Power then is derived from the
Body of the People, and where you say so, you destroy the Monarchy, and erect a
Democracy.

The Duke of Venice has (as I said before) a marveilous great State, and yet
the State of Venice is no Monarchy, because the Supremacy of power is not in
him. He cannot receive a Letter, nor make an Edict without the States
allowance; Nay, he may be called to account by them.

I read in Josephus that Herod having offended Cleopatra, she be sought Antony
(who did not use to deny her any thing) to call him to account; but Antony
refused so to do, Then, says he, He will be no King.

Look upon the Commonwealth of Lacedemon, They had Kings lineally descended
from the race of Hercules; but shall we say they had Regal power? nothing
less, because there were Ephori in that State, A certain power in the People
to call their Kings to account: the Supremacy of power there was not in the
Prince.

In Switzerland, there is a Democracy, and the only Democraticall Government I
know of. They have their Magistrates that govern the people. And yet though
there be many Magistrates that govern in those Cantons, this is no
Aristocracy, for at the Magistrates in Switzerland are accomptable to the
people, and all their power is limited by them. The Supremacy of power is in
the people there, and thence it comes to be a Democracy.

Eminency of Power. In the word of a King there is Power, says the Preacher,
Eccles. 8. 4. It was wont to be so, and by the word of God you see it ought to
be so. But I will not enlarge upon this. It may be some Ears will not endure
sound Doctrine.

But the King we see must be acknowledged to be Supreme, and no Superior to
the King.

Far be it from me (being in Gods place) to flatter any man, I thank God I
fear no flesh, but do deliver the truth.

Having now spoken of the two branches of Majesty, Dignity, and Power. We shall
speak of a Birthright that descends to Kings. It should have been Reulien's
right here, if God had not taken it from him for a fault.

This day is the Birthday of our Sovereign Lord. Birth-dayes of Kings have
been usually celebrated with great solemnity in former times. Herod's Birthday
was celebrated many years after his death: and the Herodians (for the many
mighty works that Herod did) bleeeved him to be the Messiah.

It pleases God that this day begins the 49. year of His life, and let me call
it the year of Jubilee to His Majesty.

The Jews had a custom that in the 49. year of any man's life, he should be at
liberty, what ever his sufferings were before. It must be the desire and prayer
of every loyal heart, that the King may have a Jubilee indeed. This is that
which Loyalty bids us do.

I will not stand too much upon this particular. But this I will say, O that we
knew our happiness; To have a King that is the son of Nobles! A King that is
not a Child. A King that is at full age to Govern, by Wisdom, and Prudence.
And truly as God gives us this blessing, so he expects we should acknowledge
it thankefully. Eccles. 10, 16. Woe be to thee O Land (says the Preacher) when
thy King is a Child: And Blessed art thou O Land when thy King is the son of
Nobles: that has his breeding answerable.

To have him, when his experience hoth riverted in him sound judgment, and
ability to govern. The Lord threatened Jerusalem, in Esaias 3. 4. I will give
Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. Those that would
have their own wills, could (I warrant you) be content that the youngest should
Reign.

To have a base man exalted, is one of the things that the Earth cannot bear.
But some body must have the Government, it does not belong to all. You see here
is by Birth, one that has a right unto it.

When Jehosaphat distributed his Estate, 2 Chronicles, 21. he gave gifts to his
other sons, but the Kingdom unto Jehoram, because he was his Firstborn. A
Kingdom is not a thing dividable.

So the King of Edom, 2 King. 3. 27. though he took and offered his Eldest
Son (that should have reigned in his stead) as an offering: yet in the
propheste of Amos, he is called the King of Edom, because he had it in view.

Now to come to Christians, We are Kings in our sort, we are Primogeniti, we
are the Israel of God. When God sent Moses to deliver his People, he bids him
deliver this Message to Pharaoh, Exodus 4. 22. Thou shall say to Pharaoh, Thus
says the Lord, Israel is my Son, even my Firstborn. Here is our
privilege, though God has many Sons, yet being found in Christ, we are all
Firstborn. And so the Children of God are called, Heb. 12. The Congregation
of the Firstborn. Every one that is a Member of Christ has the Privilege of
a Firstborn. They are all Heirs. In the same relation that Christ is, by
nature, we are by Grace and Adoption: And being so, we have the Excellency of
Dignity, and the Excellency of Power.

We do not speak of the Power of this World: Christ said, My Kingdom is not of
this World.

They that preach, The Saints shall reign upon the Earth, did not learn it
from God, For our Kingdom is not of this world.

There is not that Excellency to be found in any of the Sons of men, as is to
be found in one poor Child of God.

Will you see David a King? when he comes with a pious Eye, Psalm. 15. 4. see
who are there the most worshipful persons. In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned, but honors them that fear the Lord. When he sees Gods Image in any
soul, he honors him; and if he be a wicked man, a Child of the Devil, he is
a vile person in his eyes. A Sinner (though otherwise never so Noble) is a very
vile person, Psalm, 16. My goodness, says David, does not extend to thee, but
unto the Saints upon the Earth.

The Apostle Saint John, 1 John 3. Behold (says he) what manner of love the
Father bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God, and
therefore the world does not know us, etc.

But if they be so Excellent, How come they to be so despised in the World? the
Reason is, because the World does not know them to be such. The world does not
know Christ's Children, more then they know Christ himself.

I have often thought, that when His Majesty was in France, where He was not
known, a Neglect put upon Him there, would not have been in any proportion so
bad, as the like must needs be amongst His own Subjects. And so it is with us.
We are Spiritual Kings, a Royal Priesthood: If the world did know us to be
such, they would deal with us otherwise then they do, but our Life is hid
with Christ in God, and one day it shall appear, and then shall the Righteous
shine in the Kingdom of their Father.

Beloved, hereupon it is that the Children of God have their Guard of Angels.

The King has a choice Guard to attend him, but if ye did see what attendance
the Children of God have, you would admire. The Angels of God do pitch their
Tents about them.

In the Cantioles, the State of Solomon's Bed is described with Threescore
valiant men about it for a Guard. What is this but a Type of the Angels of God
guarding his own people, the Militia of Heaven?

But I perceive the time is past, therefore will end here.

The End.

