THE JUDGMENT Of the late ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH, And I Primate of Ireland, 1.
Of the Extent of Christ's death and satisfaction, etc. 2. Of the Sabbath, and
observation of the Lords day. 3. Of the Ordination in other reformed Churches:
With a Vindication of him from a pretended change of opinion in the first;
Some Advertisements upon the latter; And, in prevention of further injuries, A
Declaration of his judgment in several other subjects. By N. Bernard, D. D.
and Preacher to the Honorable society of Grayes-Inne, London.

Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost: Joh. 6. 12. London,
Printed for John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

TO THE READER.
THE first Treatise containing the Judgment of the most eminent Primate of
Ireland, concerning the True Intent and Extent of Christ's death, and
satisfaction upon the Cross, was written by him, at the request of a Friend, a
little before the Synod of Dort: a Copy of which being taken, was (unknown to
him) carried thither by a Member of it: upon the multiplying of them exceptions
were taken by diverse, and by one Pen contracted into a Letter to him; which
the second Treatise is an answer unto: both these I had from him about twenty
eight years agone, and now upon the desire of such, whose judgments I
subscribe unto, and the prevention of other mistaken Copies, which possibly
might be produced, I have been hastened to the printing of them. That which
has given the occasion, is the mistake lately published of the change of his
Judgment in it, a little before his death: But by the view of these, I believe
the Author will receive satisfaction. In the vindication of which two Letters,
being desired from me long agone, (which have been hitherto deferred the
public) I have been importuned to permit them to be annexed.

Unto which I shall here add but this, That not only in the forenamed
subjects, but in the rest relating to the Remonstrants, the Primate concurred
with Bishop Davenant, whose Lectures Demorte Christi, and praedestinatione and
reprobatione, he caused to be published, only that little Treatise added in the
conclusion of it, entitled Sententia Ecclesiae Anglicanae de praedestinatione
and capitibus annexis, etc. taken to be Bishop Davenants, and employed so by the
Printer (ab eodem, uti fertur, Authore, which possibly has occasioned the
apprehension of a change in him also) I have been assured by a Person of
Eminency, (who affirms it out of his own knowledge) that it was Bishop Overals.

And now upon this occasion I have thought fit to publish a Learned Letter of
the Primates wrote many years agone to Doctor Twisse, concerning the Sabbath,
and, Observation of the Lords day; having two Copies, corrected throughout with
his own hand, with parts of two other Letters of the same matter, which I had
together with the former: as also his judgment in diverse other subjects, both
in Doctrine and Discipline, with some Advertisements for the clearing and
preventing of any further misapprehensions.

Unto which is added his Reduction of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical
Government, etc. before published; And at the request of the Printer, a
distinction of those Bo^kes which are owned by the Primate, from such as are
not.

If the Readers Opinion shall dissent in any of the abovenamed, or swell into
an opposition, let him not expect any defensive Arms to be taken up by me, it
being my part to declare his judgment as I find it, Which with the most Pious
and Learned, I doubt not but will be (as it has been) of a Reverend and high
esteem: If it may but moderate the heat, which has lately broken out among us
about some of them, the fruit expected is reaped; And as these shall be of
profit and acceptance, I shall be encouraged to a further gathering up of the
like fragments.

N. B.

The Judgment of the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, of
the true Intent and Extent of Christ's death, and satisfaction upon the Cross.
Written in Answer to the request of a Friend, March 3. 1617.
The true Intent and Extent of Christ's Death, and Satisfaction upon the Cross.
THe all-sufficient satisfaction of Christ, made for the sins of the whole
World. The true intent and extent, is Lubricus locus to be handled, and has,
and does now much trouble the Church: this question has been moved sub iisdem
terminis quibus nunc, and has received contrary resolutions; the reason is,
that in the two extremities of opinions held in this matter, there is somewhat
true, and somewhat false; The one extremity extends the benefit of Christ's
satisfaction too far, as if hereby, God, for his part, were actually
reconciled to all mankind, and did really discharge every man from all his
sins, and that the reason why all men do not reap the fruit of this benefit, is
the want of that faith whereby they ought to have believed, that God in this
sort did love them: Whence it would follow, that God should forgive a man his
sins, and justify him before he believed, whereas the Elect themselves, before
their effectual vocation are said to be without Christ, and without hope, and
to be utter strangers from the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 2.

2. The other extremity contracts the riches of Christ's satisfaction into too
narrow a room; as if none had any kind of interest therein, but such as were
elected before the foundation of the World; howsoever by the Gospel, every one
be charged to receive the same: whereby it would follow, that a man should be
bound in conscience to believe that which is untrue, and charged to take that
wherewith he has nothing to do.

Both extremities then, drawing with them unavoidable absurdities: The Word of
God (by hearing whereof, faith is begotten, Ephesians. 1. 13.) must be sought uuto by
a middle course, to avoid these extremities.

For finding out this middle course, we must, in the matter of our Redemption,
carefully put a distinction betwixt the satisfaction of Christ absolutely
considered, and the application thereof to every one in particular: The former
was once done for all, The other is still in doing: The former brings with it
sufficiency abundant, to discharge the whole debt; the other adds to it
efficacy. The satisfaction of Christ, only makes the sins of mankind fit for
pardon, which without it, could not well be; the injury done to Gods Majesty
being so great, that it could not stand with his honor to put it up without
amends made. The particular application makes the sins of those to whom that
mercy is vouchsafed to be actually pardoned: for, as all sins are mortal, in
regard of the stipend due thereunto by the Law, but all do not actually bring
forth death, because the gracious Promises of the Gospel stays the execution:
even so all the sins of mankind, are become venial, in respect of the price
paid by Christ to his Father (so far, that in showing mercy upon all, if so
it were his pleasure, his justice should be no loser,) but all do not obtain
actual remission, because most offenders do not take out, nor plead their
pardon as they ought to do. If Christ had not assumed our Nature, and therein
made satisfaction for the injury offered to the divine Majesty, God would not
have come unto a Treaty of peace with us, more than with the fallen Angels,
whose nature the Son did not assume: But this way being made, God holds out
unto us the golden Scepter of his Word, and thereby, not only signifies his
pleasure of admitting us unto his presence, and accepting of our submission,
which is a wonderful Grace, but also sends an Embassage unto us, and entreats
us that we would be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Hence, we infer against the first extremity, that by the virtue of this
blessed Oblation, God is made placable unto our nature (which he never will be
unto the Angelical nature offending) but not actually appeased with any, until
he has received his son, and put on the Lord Jesus. As also against the latter
extremity, that all men may be truly said to have interest in the merits of
Christ, as in a Common, though all do not enjoy the benefit thereof; because
they have no will to take it.

The wellspring of life is set open unto all (Apoc. 22. 17.) Whosoeever will,
let him take of the water of life freely, but many have nothing to draw with;
and the Well is deep, Faith is the vessel whereby we draw all virtue from
Christ, and the Apostle tells us, That Faith is not of all, (2 These. 3. 2.) Now
the means of getting this Faith is the hearing of the word of truth, the Gospel
of our salvation (Ephesians. 1. 13.) which ministers this general ground for every
one to build his Faith upon.

Syllogism. What Christ has prepared for thee, and the Gospel offers unto
thee, that ought thou with all thankfulness to accept, and apply to the
comfort of thy own Soul.

But Christ by his death and obedience has provided a sufficient remedy for
the taking away of all thy sins, and the Gospel offers the same unto thee.
Therefore thou ought to accept, and apply the same to the comfort of thine
own Soul.

Now this Gospel of salvation many do not hear at all, being destitute of the
Ministry of the Word; and many hearing do not believe, or lightly regard it;
and many that do believe the truth thereof, are so wedded to their sins, that
they have no desire to be divorced from them, and therefore they refuse to
accept the gracious offer that is made unto them. And yet notwithstanding their
refusal on their part, we may truly say, That good things were provided for
them on Christ's part, and a rich price was put into the hands of a Fool,
howsoever he had no heart to use it (Prove. 17. 16.)

Our blessed Savior, by that which he has performed on his part, has
procured a Jubilee for the Sons of Adam; and his Gospel is his Trumpet, whereby
he does proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and preaches the acceptable year of
the Lord (Luke 4. 18, 19.) If for all this some are so well pleased with their
Captivity that they desire no deliverance, that derogates nothing from the
generality of the freedom annexed to that year. If one say to sin his old
Master, (Levites 25. 24. Exodus 21. 5. Deuteronomy, 15, 26:) I love thee, and will not
go out free, he shall be bored for a slave, and serve for ever. But that
slavish disposition of his, makes the extent of the privilege of that year
not a whit the straiter, because he was included within the general Grant as
well as others; howsoever, he was not disposed to take the benefit of it: The
Kingdom of Heaven is like to a certain King that made a marriage of his Son,
and sent his servants to those that were bidden to the Wedding with this
message; Behold, I have prepared my Dinner; my Oxen, and my fatlings are
killed, and all things are ready, Come to the Marriage, (verse 4.) If we look
to the event. They they that were bidden made light of their entertainment, and
went their ways; one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise. (verse 5.)
but that neglect of theirs does not falsify the word of the King (verse 4.)
viz. That the Dinner was prepared, and these unworthy Guests were invited
thereunto; For what, if some did not believe, shall their unbelief disannull
the Faith, and truth of God? (Romans 3. 3, 4.) God forbid; yea, let God be true,
and every man a liar, as it is written, that thou may be justified in thy
sayings, and overcome when thou judge. Let not the house of Israel say, the
way of the Lord is unequal. For when he comes to judge them, the inequality
will be found on their side, and not on his. O house of Israel, are not my
ways equal, and your ways unequal? says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. 29, 30.) The
Lord is right in all his ways, and holy in all his works. All the ways of our
God are mercy and truth; when we were in our sins it was of his infinite
mercy that any way, or remedy should be prepared for our recovery. And when the
remedy is prepared, we are never the nearer, except he be pleased of his free
mercy to apply the same to us, that so the whole praise of our Redemption, from
the beginning to the end thereof, may entirely be attributed to the riches of
his grace, and nothing left to sinful flesh wherein it may rejoice.

The freeing of the Jews from the Captivity of Babylon, was a Type of that
great deliverance, which the Son of God has wrought for us.

Cyrus, King of Fersia, who was Christus Domini (and herein but a shadow of
Christus Dominus, the Author of our Redemption) published his Proclamation in
this manner; Who is amongst you of all his people, the Lord his God be with
him, and let him go up, (2 Chronicles, 36. 23. and 1 Ezra 2.) Now it is true, they
alone did follow this Calling, whose spirit God had raised to go up, (Ezra 1.
5.) But could they that remained still in Babylon, justly plead, That the Kings
Grant was not large enough, or that they were excluded from going up by any
clause contained therein? The matter of our Redemption purchased by our Savior
Christ lies open to all, all are invited to it, none that has a mind to
accept of it, is excluded from it. The beautiful feet of those that preach the
Gospel of peace, do bring glad tidings of good things to every house where
they tread. The first part of their Message being this, Peace to this house,
(Romans 10. 15. Luke 10. 5. Luke 17.) But, unless God be pleased out of his
abundant mercy to guide our feet into the way of peace, the Rebellion of our
Nature is such, that that we run headlong to the ways of destruction and
misery, (Romans 3. 16.) and the ways of peace do we not know. They have not all
obeyed the Gospel, Romans 10. 16. all are not apt to entertain this Message of
peace, and therefore, though Gods Ambassadors make a true tentender of it to
all unto whom they are sent, yet their peace only rests on the sons of peace,
but if it meet with such as will not listen to the motion of it, their peace
does again return unto themselves, (Luke 10. 6.) The Proclamation of the Gospel
runs thus: Apoc. 22. 17. Let him that is a thirst come, for him this Grace
is specially provided, because none but he will take the pains to come; But
least we should think this should abridge the largeness of the offer, a
Quicunque vult, is immediately added, and whosoever will, let him take of the
water of life freely: yet withal this must be yielded for a certain truth,
that it is God who must work in us to will and to do, of his good pleasure; and
though the call be never so loud and large, yet none can come except the father
draw him, (John 6. 46.) For the universality of the satisfaction derogates
nothing from the necessity of the special Grace in the application: neither
does the speciality of the one any ways abridge the generality of the other.
Indeed Christ our Savior says (Joh. 17. 6.) I pray not for the world, but for
them that thou have given me: but the consequence hereby inferred may well be
excepted against, viz. He prayed not for the world, Therefore, He paid not for
the world; Because the latter is an Act of his satisfaction, the former of his
Intercession: which being diverse parts of his Priesthood are distinguishable
one from another, by sundry differences. This his satisfaction does properly
give contentment to Gods justice, in such sort as formerly has been declared:
His Intercession does solicit Gods mercy. The first contains the preparation
of the remedy necessary for man's salvation; The second brings with it an
application, of the same. And consequently the one may well appertain to the
common nature, which the son assumed, when the other is a special Privilege
vouchsafed to such particular persons only, as the father has given him. And
therefore we may safely conclude out of all these premises, That the Lamb of
God offering himself a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, Intended
by giveing sufficient satisfaction to Gods Justice, to make the nature of man,
which he assumed, a fit subject for mercy, and to prepare a medicine for the
sins of the whole world; which should be denied to none that intended to take
the benefit of it: Howsoever he intended not by applying this all-sufficient
remedy unto every person in particular to make it effectual unto the salvation
of all, or to procure thereby actual Pardon for the sins of the whole world.
So, in one respect he may be said to have died for all, and in another respect
not to have died for all; yet so as in respect of his mercy he may be counted a
kind of universal cause of the restoring of our Nature, as Adam was of the
depraving of it; For as far as I can discern, he rightly hits the nail on the
head that determines the point in this manner.

Thom, Contra Gentiles, lib. 4o. 55. Mors Christi est quasi quaedam uuiversalis
causa salutis; si cut peccatum primi hominis fuit quasi universalis causa
damnationis. Oportet autem universalem causam applicari ad unumquodque
s^ecialiter, ut effectum universalis causae participet. Effectus igitur peccati
primi parentis pervenit ad unumquemque per carnis originem; effectus autem
mortis Christi pertingit ad ad unumquemque per spiritualem regenerationem per
quam Christo homo quodammodo conjungitur and incorporatur. AN Answer of the
said Archbishop of Armagh, to some exceptions taken against his aforesaid
Letter, as follows.
ICannot sufficiently wonder, why such exceptions should be taken at a Letter
of mine, which without my privity came to so many men's hands, as if thereby I
had confirmed Papisme, Arminianisme, and I know not what error of Mr.
Culverwels, which (as you write) is, and has been, opposed by many; yea, all
good men. The Papist (says one) does thus distingnish; A Mediator of
Redemption and Intercession; And Bellarmine (says another) divides the
satisfaction and application of Christ. To which, what other Answer should I
make but this? To hold that Christ is the only Mediator of Redemption, but the
Saints are also Mediators of Intercession, That Christ by his Merits has made
satisfaction to his Father in gross, and the Pope by his indulgence, and his
Priests by their Oblations in the Mass do make a particular application to
particular persons. To join thus partners with Christ in this manner in the
Office of Mediation is Popery indeed; But he who, attributing the entire work
of the Mediation unto Christ alone, does yet distinguish the Act of Redemption
from the act of Intercession, the Satisfaction made by him unto God, from the
Application thereof communicated unto men, is as far from Popery, as he that
thinks otherwise is from the grounds of the Catechism; For that Christ has so
died for all men (as they lay down in the conference of Hague) ut
reconciliationem cum Deo, and peccatorum remissionem singulis impetraverit, I
hold to be untrue, being well assured, That our Savior has obtained at the
hands of his father Reconciliation, and Forgiveness of sins, not for the
Reprobate, but Elect only; and not for them neither, before they be truly
regenerated, and implanted into himself. For, Election being nothing else but
the purpose of God, resting in his own mind, makes no kind of alteration in
the party elected, but only the execution of that Decree and Purpose, which in
such as have the use of reason is done by an effectual calling, in all by
spiritual regeneration, which is the new birth, without which no man can see
the Kingdom of God.

That Impetration, whereof the Arminians speak, I hold to be a fruit, not of
his Satisfaction, but Intercession; and seeing I have learned from Christ's own
mouth, Joh. 17. 9. I pray not for the reprobate World: I must needs esteem it a
great folly to imagine that he has impetrated Reconciliation and Remission of
sins for that world. I agree therefore thus far with Mr. Aims in his
Dispute against Grevinchovius, That application and impetration, in this latter
we have in hand, are of equal extent; and, That forgiveness of sins is not
by our Savior impetrated for any unto whom the merit of his death is not
applied in particular. If in seeking to make straight that which was crooked in
the Arminians opinion, he has bended it too far the contrary way, and
inclined too much unto the other extremity, it is a thing, which, in the heat
of disputation, has befallen many worthy men before him; And if I be not
deceived, gave the first occasion to this present controversy. But I see no
reason why I should be tied to follow him in every step, wherein he treads:
And so much for Mr. Aims.

The main error of the Arminians (vid. Corvin. in Defen. Armini. cap. II.) and
of the patrons of universal grace is this, That God offers unto every man
those means that are necessary unto salvation, both sufficiently and
effectually; and, That it rests in the free will of every one to receive, or
reject the same; For the proof thereof they allege, as their predecessors, the
Semipelagians, did before them, that received Axiom of Christ's dying for all
men, which being rightly understood, makes nothing for their purpose. Some of
their opposites (subject to oversights as well as others) more forward herein
then circumspect, have answered this Objection, not by expounding (as was fit)
but by flat denying that famous Axiom: Affirming peremptorily, that Christ
died only for the Elect, and for others nullo modo: whereby they gave the
adverse party advantage to drive them unto this extreme absurdity, viz. That
seeing Christ in no wise died for any, but for the elect, and all men were
bound to believe that Christ died for themselves, and that upon pain of
damnation for the contrary infidelity; Therefore all men were bound to believe:
that they themselves were elected, although in truth the matter were nothing
so: Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget.


Neither is their hope that the Arminians will be drawn to acknowledge the
error of their position, as long as they are persuaded the contrary opinion
cannot be maintained without admitting that an untruth must be believed, even
by the commandment of him that is God of truth, and by the direction of that
word, which is the word of truth.

Endeavoring therefore to make one truth stand by another, and to ward off the
blow given by the Arminians in such sort that it should neither bring hurt to
the truth, nor give advantage to error, admit I failed of mine intent, I ought
to be accounted rather an oppugner than any wise an abettor of their fancies.
That for the Arminians. Now for Mr. Culverwell, That which I have heard him
charged withal, is the former extremity, which in my Letter I did condemn,
viz. That Christ in such sort did die for all men, that by his death he made an
actual reconcilement between God and man; and, That the special reason why all
men reap not the fruit of this reconciliation; is the want of that faith,
whereby they ought to have believed that God in this sort did love them. How
justly he has been charged with this error, himself can best tell; But if
ever he held it, I do not doubt, but he was driven thereunto by the
absurdities, which he discerned in the other extremity; For what would not a
man fly unto rather then yield, that Christ no manner of way died for any
Reprobate, and none but the elect had any kind of title to him, and yet so many
thousand Reprobates should be bound in conscience to believe that he died for
them, and tied to accept him for their Redeemer and Savior; yea, and should be
condemned to everlasting torments for want of such a faith, (if we may call
that faith, which is not grounded upon the word of truth) whereby they should
have believed that which in it self was most untrue, and laid hold of that in
which they had no kind of interest; If they, who dealt with Mr. Culverwell
labored to drive out one absurdity by bringing in another, or went about to
stop one hole by making two, I should the less wonder at that you write, that
though he has been dealt withal by many brethren, and for many years, yet he
could not be drawn from his error. But those stumbling blocks being removed,
and the plain word of truth laid open, by which faith is to be begotten, I dare
boldly say he does not hold that extremity wherewith he is charged, but
follows that safe, and middle course, which I laid down; for after he had
well weighed what I had written, he heartily thanked the Lord and me, for so
good a resolution of this Question, which for his part he wholly approved, not
seeing how it could be gainesayed. And so much likewise for Mr. Culverwell.

Now for Mr. Stock's public opposition in the Pulpit, I can hardly be induced
to believe that he aimed at me therein; If he did, I must needs say he was
deceived, when he reckoned me amongst those good men, who make the
universality of all the elect, and all men to be one; Indeed I wrote but even
now, that God did execute his Decree of Election in all by spiritual
generation: But if any shall say, that by, all thereby I should understand the
universality of all, and every one in the world, and not the universality of
all the Elect alone, he should greatly wrong my meaning: for I am of no other
mind than Prosper was, lib. 1. De vocat. Gent. Habet populus Dei plenitudinem
suam, and quamvis magna pars hominum salvantis Gratiam aut repellat aut
negligat, in electis tamen and praescitis atque ab omni generalitate discretis,
specialis quaedam censetur universitas, ut de toto mundo, totus mundus
liberatus, and de omnibus hominibus, omnes homines videantur assumpti. That
Christ died for his Apostles (Luke 22. 19.) for his sheep (John 10. 15.) for
his friends (John 15. 13.) for his Church (Ephesians. 5. 25.) may make peradventure
against those, who make all men to have a share alike in the death of our
Savior: but I profess my self to hold fully with him, who said, Etsi
Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, tamen specialiter pro nobis passus est, quia
pro Ecclesia passus est. Yea, and in my former writing I did directly conclude;
That as in one respect Christ might have been said to die for all, so in
another respect truly said not to have died for all: and my belief is, That
the principal end of the Lords death, was, that he might gather together in
one the Children of God scattered abroad; (John 11. 52.) and, That for their
sakes he did specially sanctify himself, that they also might be sanctified
through the truth (John 17. 19.) And therefore it may be well concluded, That
Christ in a special manner died for these; but to infer from hence, that in
no manner of respect he died for any others, is but a very weak collection,
specially the respect by me expressed being so reasonable, that no sober mind
advisedly considering thereof, can justly make question of it, viz. That the
Lamb of God offering himself a sacrifice for the sins of the world, intended
by giving satisfaction to Gods justice to make the nature of man which he
assumed, a fit subject for mercy, and to prepare a Sovereign medicine that
should, not only be a sufficient cure for the sins of the whole world, but
also should be laid open to all, and denied to none, that indeed do take the
benefit thereof: For he is much deceived that thinks a preaching of a bare
sufficiency, is able to yield sufficient ground of comfort to a distressed
Soul, without giving a further way to it, and opening a further passage.

To bring news to a bankrupt that the King of Spain has treasure enough to
pay a thousand times more than he owes, may be true, but yields but cold
comfort to him the miserable Debtor: sufficiency indeed is requisite, but it is
the word of promise that gives comfort.

If here exception be taken, That I make the whole nature of man fit for
mercy, when it is as unfit a subject for grace as may be.

I answer, That here two impediments do occur, which give a stop unto the
peace, which is to be made betwixt God and man. The one respects God the party
offended, whose justice has been in such sort violated by his base Vassals,
that it were unfit for his glorious Majesty to put up such an injury without a
good satisfaction. The other respects man the party offending, whose
blindness, stupidity, and hardness of heart is such, that he is neither
sensible of his own wretchedness, nor Gods goodness, that when God offers to
be reconciled unto him, there must be much entreaty to persuade him to be
reconciled to God, (2 Cor. 5. 20.) In regard of the latter I acknowled with the
Apostle, That the natural man receives not the things of the spirit, for they
are foolishness to him; neither can he, because spiritually discerned, (1 Cor.
2. 14.) And this impediment is not taken away by Christ's satisfaction (which is
a work of his Priestly function) but by the enlightening of the mind, and
softning the heart of the sinner, which are effects issuing from the execution
of the Prophetical, and Kingly Office of our Redeemer. When therefore I say,
That by Christ's satisfaction to his Father he made the Nature of Man a fit
subject for mercy, I mean thereby, that the former impediment arising on Gods
part is taken away, that if it were not for the other (for the having whereof
we can blame none but our selves, and in the not removing, whereof, we cannot
say God has done us any wrong) there were no let, but all men might be saved:
And if it pleased God to extend his mercy unto all, as he keeps his freedom
therein, in having compassion on whom he will have mercy, and leaveing others
in blindness, natural hardness of their own heart, yet the worth of Christ's
satisfaction is so great, that his Justice herein should be no loser.

But if this Justice (you will say) be satisfied, how comes it to pass that
God exacts payment again from any? I Answer, We must take heed we stretch not
our similitudes beyond their just extent, least at last we drive the matter too
far, and be forced to say (as some have done) That we cannot see how
satisfaction and forgiveness can stand together, and so by denying Christ's
satisfaction be injurious to Gods justice, or by denying remission of sins
become injurious to Gods mercy. We are therefore to understand, that the end
of the satisfaction of Gods Justice is to make way for Gods free liberty in
showing mercy, that so mercy and Justice meeting: and embraceing one another,
God may be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus, (Romans 3. 26.)
Now the general satisfaction of Christ, which was the first act of his
Priestly Office, prepares the way for Gods mercy, by making the sins of all
mankind pardonable, the interposition of any bar from Gods Justice
notwithstanding, and so puts the sons of men only in a possibility of being
justified, a thing denied to the nature of fallen Angels, which the son was
not pleased to assume; But the special application of this satisfaction
vouchsafed by Christ unto those persons only whom his Father has given him
out of the world, which is an appendant, or appertains to the second Act of
his Priesthood, viz. his intercession, produces this potentia in Actum, i. e.
procures an actual discharge from Gods anger; And makes justification, which
before was a part of our possibility, to be a part of our presenr possession.

If it be said, It is a great derogation to the dignity of Christ's death, to
make the sins of mankind only pardonable, and brings in a bare possibility
of justification.

I answer, It is a most unchristian imagination to suppose the merit of Christ's
death, being particularly applied to the Soul of a sinner, produces no further
effect than this. Saint Paul teaches us that we be not only justifiable, but
justified by his blood, (Romans 5. 9.) yet not simply as offered on the Cross,
but through faith in his blood, (Romans 3. 25.) that is, through his blood
applied by faith. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, (says Saint John, 1
John 1. 17.) cleanses us from all sins, yet cleanse it does not by being
prepared, but by being applied, prepared it was when he poured it out once
upon the Cross, applied it is when he washes us from our sins therein,
(Rev. 1. 5.) It is one thing therefore to speak of Christ's satisfaction, in the
general absolutely considered; and another thing, as it is applied to every
one in particular; The consideration of things as they are in their causes, is
one thing; and as they have an actual existence, is another thing. Things as
they are in their causes, are no otherwise considerable, but as they have a
possibility to be. The application of the Agent to the patient, with all
circumstances necessarily required, is it that gives to the thing an actual
being. That disease is curable for which a Sovereign medicine may be found,
but cured it is not till the medicine be applied to the patient; and if it so
fall out, that, the medicine being not applied, the party miscarries, We say,
He was lost, not, becanse his sickness was incurable, but, because there
wanted a care to apply that to him that might have helped him.

All Adams sons have taken a mortal sickness from their Father, which, if
it be not remedied, will, without fail, bring them to the second death: no
medicine under heaven can heal this disease, but only a potion confected of
the blood of the Lamb of God, who came to take away the sins of the world;
which, as Prosper truly notes, habet quidem in se ut omnibus prosit; sed si non
bibitur non medetur. The virtue thereof is such, that if all did take it, all
without doubt should be recovered, but without taking it there is no recovery;
In the former respect it may be truly said, That no man's state is so desperate,
but by this means it is recoverable, (and this is the first comfortable news
that the Gospel brings to the distressed Soul) but here it rests not, nor
feeds a man with such a possibility, that he should say in his heart, Who
shall ascend into heaven to bring Christ from above? but it brings the word of
comfort nigh unto him, even to his mouth and heart, and presents him with the
medicine at hand, and desires him to take it; which being done accordingly,
the cure is actually performed.

A VINDICATION of the late ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH, From some mistakes made by
Master Thomas Pierce, both in his Philanthropy, and Post-cript at the
conclusion of his correct Copy of some Notes of Gods Decrees, etc. Affirming a
change of judgment in him a little before his death, of some points
controverted between Mr. Barlee and himself, but especially of Universal Grace
and Redemption, relating to the subject of the former Treatise.

By Dr. Bernard, Preacher to the Honorable society of Grayes-Inne.

The Printer to the READER.
THese two Letters following, expected from the person to whom they were writ,
as an Appendix to another Treatise, being hither to delayed the public, and
now conceived very requisite to be inserted here, as having a relation to the
former Tractates mentioned in one of them; The Doctor has been importuned to
permit them accordingly also, with some alteration and addition.

The first Letter of Doctor Bernards to Mr. Barlee, in Answer to some passage
in Mr. Pierces Philanthropy.
Worthy Sir,
IAm much your debtor for those large expressions of your affection to the
late. Archbishop of Armagh, and the readiness to clear him from some injury
done him by Mr. Thomas Pierce, in his Answer to a Book of yours. Two eminent
men of each University, before I heard from you, had sent unto me for their
private satisfaction. And now upon your Letter and directions I have viewed the
several passages tending that way, Chap. 1. Sect. 3. 5. Chap. 3. Sect. 17. 7.
Chap. 4. Sect. 13. which in sum I find amounts to this, viz. That the late
Primate of Armagh was, though a late, yet a serious Convert: And affirmed, a
little, or not long, before his death to several persons, that he utterly
rejected all those opinions of Calvin. That there were evident marks of a
change in him. That a little before his death he professed an utter dislike to
the whole Doctrine of Geneva, in those affairs, etc. First; it is possible Mr.
Pierces enformers might mistake the Doctrine for the Discipline of Geneva, or
Calvin, which by some in their Sermons has been advanced accordingly: or if it
were of the Doctrine, he has taken a great latitude in saying, All the
opinions, the whole Doctrine. And the Restriction. viz. In those affairs, is
somewhat obscure, being introduced occasionally upon the speech of one or two
of them. It had been better to have named the several points he means, from
which howsoever, as to Calvin, or Geneva, how could he be said to revolt, when
in terminis he did not profess the defense of either. It being the Doctrine of
S. Augustine, which has been confirmed by him.

And for Calvine, though I do not take upon me the defense of him neither, yet
there is one Doctrine of his, and in those affairs (different from some of his
own profession in Geneva) which must be exempted from Mr. Pierces Universality,
and which, will not be found that the Primate rejected, viz. that massa
corrupta was the object of Praedestination, as Bishop Davenant makes it appear,
(in his determinations, q. 26.) where he first cleares him from the Calvinum
criminantur Jesuitae quod defendat Deum, in primo instanti ante omnem
praevis^^nem peccati, quosdam absolute elegisse ad gloriam, alios destinasse ad
interitum. In secundo autem instanti, peccatum Adami eo fine ordinasse, ut
justitiam suam erga Reprobos, and misericordiam erga Electos posset exercere.
(determ. q. 26.)
slanders the Jesuits have raised of him in it, viz. That he should hold that
God in the first Act before any foresight of sin, elected some to glory, and
ordained others to destruction; And in the second place ordained the sin of
Adam to that end, that he might exercise justice toward the Reprobates, and
mercy toward the elect; and then gives you clearly Verissimam Calvini
sententiam, hisce duabus proposicionibus contineri affirmo, etc. Caecus est qui
non videt in hisce locis substerni corruptam massam praedestinationis etc.
subjectum esse tum Electionis tum reprobationis, non causam, etc. Ibid.
the truth of Calvines judgment in two propositions confirmed out of diverse
quotations in his institutions, viz. That the corrupt Mass; or man lapsed, was
the object of Election and Reprobation, though not the cause: And further,
proves, That what the Jesuits put upon Calvine, their own Popish Writers were
the prime Authors of, viz. Scotus, Naclantus, Pighius, Catharinus, Galatinus,
Alphonsus Mendoza, who aver, That the Decretum praedestinationis non solum
deereto lapsus permittendi, sed hominis Creandi prius and antiquius esse, etc.
Ibid.
Decree of Praedestination is not only before the Decree of permitting the
lapse of man, but also before the creating of him. And Hoc tantum cupio ut inde
perspiciatis, ipsos Pontificios Primarios esse hujus sententiae authors, quae
negat hominem lapsum fuisse divinae Praedestinationis subjectum. Ibid.
desires it might be taken notice of, That the Popish Writers were the chief
Authors of that opinion, which denies (...) lapsed to be the subject of Divine
Praedestination; which, if some of ours did consider, they would be the slower
paced in the defense of that which has occasioned this digression. Howsoever,
as to Calvin's opinion, this Reverend and learned Bishop thus far supports it,
that he joins S. Illud sole clarius testimonium est, quod ex Augustino
desumptum affertur and probatur a Calvino Institut 3. c. 23. sect. 11. Ibid.
Augustines suffrage with his own in it; and as it is there declared, I
understand not how it is rejected By this Eminent Primate.

But whatever these points were, if this be Mr. Pierces meaning, That a little
before his death he should Verbally retract what he had published in his works,
I am assured (though it be hard to prove a Negative) there was no such matter:
but that he was constant in them to his end. When he was last in London,
continuing here about seven weeks together, I was perpetually with him, taking
then the opportunity of a further speaking with him of most of the passages of
his life, as of the several Books he had wrote, the Subjects of them, the
occasion of their writing, when some such points (as Mr. Pierce possibly may
mean) came into discourse. And then there was not the least change in him. And
it is to be presumed, in that last Act of winding up his whole life, if there
had been any, he would have then mentioned it, and this was but about five
weeks (which is a little, or not long) before his death. And it has be
confirmed to me by a Minister, who was at Ryegate a fortnight before, as by
some Honorable persons, who spoke with him of these Subjects a few days
before his death; so that I believe Mr. Pierce has not been well adadvised in
publishing this his Information.

And it is no new thing to have books, as well as opinions, laid to his charge
which he knew not: It was presumed in his life, and so the less wonder if it
be practiced after his death. There is a book entitled a Method of Meditation,
which was printed in his name, Anno 1651. And, though by his Commands to me, it
was then publicly declared to be none of his, yet since his death (this 1657.)
it is reprinted, and, notwithstanding the renewing of that Declaration by the
same way wherein I found him abused, it is still sold under his name to the
great dishonor of him.

The passage which Mr. Pierce is most clear in, Chap. 1. Sect. 15. Where,
speaking of Universal grace and redemption, he says, the most Learned
Anti-Arminians have been feign to assert it, as well as Arminius. Among us, the
late Bishop of Armagh, etc.

First, He should have done well to have named where he has asserted it in any
of his works, Next, What, or who compelled him, that he was feign to do it; and
if by that speech as well as Arminius he means (according to common
construction) As full, or in the same terms as Arminius; it will be the hardest
proof of the three; whom he scarce ever names in his works: his aim being
against Pelagius and his Disciples. Unless that passage in his Pelagian
History may be so applied (wrapped up under the Title of Britanniae
Antiquitates, Pelagius being a Britain, which he intended to have taken out,
and printed as a Treatise by it self) where he having given us at large the
bold and rugged language, with which Julian, one of Pelagius his followers, in
defense of his Doctrine, greets the most mild and meek Father S. Augustine, he
adds this, Chap. 11. p. 312.) Cujus idcirco verba hic describenda putavi; ut
in hoc speculo contemplaretur lector, consimiles nostrorum temporum ardeliones;
Thrasoni huic adeo geminos, ut in eos, hujus spiritus quasi per Pythagoricam
quandam (...), immigrasse videatur: I know not how he can call him an
Anti-Arminian, unless he confess them to be Pelagians.

Secondly, In this particular concerning Universal Redemption I have cause to
believe there was not any change in him from what his judgment was many years
agone: and if he were not totally according to Calvin, must it therefore be
argued, he was wholly for Arminius? Might not there be a mean wherein he might
tread more safely according to the ancient Doctrine of the Church? And indeed
to deal clearly with you, his judgment in this point was in a middle way
different, both from yours, and Mr. Pierce, which if it might not expose him to
both your pens and censures, but be a reconciliation between you, (the latter
of which I see little hope of;) I might be moved the more willingly to declare
it. I do the rather mention this; because, As Mr. Pierce says, you call it the
chief head of Arminianisme, So he says, it is that with which other opinions in
debate must stand, or fall: And Chap. 3. p. 15. excuses his prolixity on it,
because if this error be once disclaimed by the adversary, all the rest will
tumble of their own accord, etc.

In a word, I am sorry to find that heat between you, which beng Ministers and
Neighbors, is the more unseemly. I shall advise you in your reply to endeavor
rather to heal up the breach, than make it wider; the fruits of the spirit
appearing much in meekness and Gentleness, etc. and laying aside all verbal
animosities and personal reflections, calmely to fall upon the matter, And so I
commend you and your labors to Gods blessing and direction, and rest

Your very assured Friend N. BERNARD.
Grayes-Inne, March 11. 1656.
A Vindication of the Primate, from a late change of opinion. A second Letter,
of the said Doctor Bernard to Mr. Barlee, in Answer to a part of a Postscript
at the conclusion of a book of Mr. Pierces, viz. a Correct Copy of some Notes
of Gods decrees, etc. Wherein the former erroneus report raised upon the late
Archbishop of Armagh, especially concerning Universal Grace, or Redemption,
being more largely affirmed, is here more fully cleared and vindicated.
SIR.
I Have lately received from you another book of Master Pierces, which I saw
not before, viz. A Correct Copy of Gods decrees, etc. In the Postscript of
which I find a larger confirmation of what had been affirmed by him, in
relation to the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland: which, at
your desire, I cannot refuse to return you my sense of also.

The Author is a Stranger to me, but appears to be a man of very excellent
parts and abilities, and I am sorry he has been moved to employ them in this
particular, in a continued confident declaring the change of opinion in so
Learned and pious a Prelate (as himself worthily styles him,) to whom for
ought I know he was a stranger, and adding, That what he has before affirmed
to be upon a just ground and mature deliberation, and yet I find no other
foundation upon which this is built, than the report of others. The frequent
experimental failing of which, when it comes to the proof, has wrought it out
of reputation, with prudent men, to depend upon.

That which I find in the conclusion of his Postscript, I must begin with,
wherein he does determine, viz. That whosoever shall appear to hold the
Negative, That my Lord Primate of Armagh did not declare his rejection of these
opinions, which I resist, and which himself formerly embraced, will wrong the
memory of the Bishop. As I do not (according to his caveat) take upon me to
prove a Negative, so I do not understand the ground of this definitive
Sentence, upon whomsoever shall adhere to it. I am sure his meaning is not,
because he does resist them; and less show is there, because the Primate had
formerly embraced them; for a changeableness in Doctrine carries in it self a
show of dishonor, that with him there should be yea and nay: surely there must
be somewhat of gross corruption, or dangerous consequence formerly taught and
professed by this good Primate, that should incur this censure; And it is too
early a conclusive, while they are yet in Dispute between you, and the matter
not heard on the Primates side; Which I expected not from a person so
ingenuous, as I read Master Pierce to be. And howsoever the whole implies that
the Primate had wronged himself, if not his hearers and readers, in preaching
and writing of untruths so long; but much more if he had died without
retracting them; and that the injury done to him, is already decreed to lie
upon that person that shall affirm otherwise of him in either: yet this must
not deter or discourage me in this service of his vindication, leaving it to
the judgemnent of others, Which may be thought less injurious, The averring
his constancy, or inconstancy in matters of such weight and moment. I shall be
contented he do enjoy his opinion, if he will not censure me for not forsaking
my own, viz. That I think I should wrong him and my self, at least do neither
right, if I should silently let this belief of him pass without putting it to
a stand, by producing those probabilities which have prevailed with me to the
contrary.

That which Mr. Pierce professes, viz. That he published it to the Immortal
honor of that great Prelate, does not well suit with the expressions in the
next breath, calling it an error which had possessed him, and intimating it to be
a retraction of his aberrations, or a penitency of his sins, which he having no
sense of, or not expressing it till then, he must have contracted a great guilt
all his life, both in preaching and writing to the subversion, possibly, of
many. This if he had found himself guilty of, a verbal retraction would not
have sufficed, but he should have given satisfaction also by his pen: His
judgment having been by that transmitted beyond the Seas, which one Sermon in
a Church in London, or opening his mind to a few in private, could not have
expiated: neither would so good a man as he, have rested in it, but with S.
Augustine humbly have revoked his error in that way also; but I believe none of
those pretended witnesses of his change will say that he gave them that promise
or that they did so much as request it of him, though they had time enough to
have wrote unto him, if omitted in the conference. And certainly Mr. Pierce,
(to use his own expression) had in singleness of affection done him more right
and honor, if he had left him wholly to his works; which do sufficiently
testify of him, rather than thus to bring him upon the Stage after his death,
and give sentence on him only upon hearsay: There being no necessity in this
dispute to have so much as named him. Neither can I think those, any Cordial
friends of the Bishops (as he styles them) who have been the occasion of
putting him upon it. And I do remember that the last time he was in London, he
did express a suspicion of some that came to visit him, that they would by
wresting his words, make some such use of them, as now appears: who proposed
discourses of the like subjects to him, and whereupon he did confirm at full
that which had been his judgment of them formerly.

For that of Mr Pierces offer of proof by some learned and grave Divines, who
had conference with the Bishop, and will (as he says) be glad to attest the
same under their hands: As I know not what cause there should be of gladness,
or forwardness in this Testimony; So when they shall meet with contrary
attestations by the like of their own profession, it makes me sad, to foresee
what a fire this may possibly kindle among us, (to the rejoicing of those of
the Church of Rome) which I have no mind to burn my fingers in, only I stick
firmly to my persuasion in my former Letter confirmed there by several probable
Testimonies, that there was no such change as is pretended in him near his
death. And if this of Mr. Piercies affirmation should prove to be the raising
of a false report, (which he ingenuously confesses to be so great an evil,
and does so hate and condemn, whether through ignorance, or credulity:) this
must be of the first magnitude, when it has for its object so eminent and
pious a person, whose praise being through the Churches, and in special, for
those his labors tending to those Subjects, the whole Reformed Church are
concerned in it.

I find him still puuctually observing his former expression, viz. rejecting
all the Doctrines of Geneva, in which besides the latitude, there is this
ambiguity, whether it be meant according to Calvin, or Beza; for both were of
Geneva; between whom in some of these points there was the like difference as
between Mr. Perkins and Bishop Abbot, with us, viz. In the Supralapsarian
opinion, which Romans 9. 21s Annotat. etc.
Beza was for, but Calvin held it otherwise, as has been showed in the former
Letter. It had been better to have instanced the particulars of those
Doctrines, than thus by clouding them in the Generals to put us upon
conjectures, which they should be.

The only point which he names here, is, That the Primate embraced the
Doctrine of Universal Redemption, and says, in that he does as good as say
all. He does not assert it from his own knowledge, but says he has it from
many most unquestionable persons which had it poured into their ears, by the
Primates own mouth. If it were in a Sermon of his at a Church in London, the
last he preached in that City, and many months before his death; (which I am
informed by others is the sense of it) I was present at it, and with me there
was no new thing observed to have been uttered by him, differing from what his
judgment was many years agone, since I had the happiness to be known unto
him. It may be some of these persons produced for witnesses being strangers to
him and taking him to be of the other extremity might apprehend it as a
retractation, If they heard him affirming, That by the death of Christ all men
receive this benefit that they are salvabiles or put into a capacity of
sulvation; That terms of peace are procured for all mankind, That all men's
sins are become pardonable, mercy attainable, (in which state those of the
Angelical nature which fell, are not.) That there is some distinction to be
made between his satisfaction (rightly understood) and his intercession,
according to that of our Savior, I pray for these, I pray not for the world,
etc. It is possible, for ought I know, some such expressions might be his then.
But that by this Universal Redemption should be understood such an Universal
grace, that the same measure of it, without any distinction, should equally,
and alike, be conferred and aplied to Judas, which was to Peter; and that the
only difference, was, The free will of Peter in accepting, without any further
cause of thanks to God for his grace in inclining him accordingly, etc. This I
suppose will not be attested to have been professed by him, either in this, or
any other Sermon, or private conference with him. And in this present
enlargement, I would not be understood to interpose my self in the
controversy; or to affixe thus much upon Mr. Piercies judgment, but only to
aver, That the Primate at his last in this particular differed not from what
he had declared formerly, which the former tractate, I suppose, will confirm,
now published, but not resolved on, when this was first written.

That which he says, is the sum of what he had said, viz. That the reverend
Primate did conform his judgment to all the fathers of the Church for the
first four Centuries after Christ, This he might aver without any relation to
these points in controversy, it being the term, or thereabouts, which he
accepts of in his answer to the Jesuit Malones Challenge in the justfying, or
condemning those twelve points of controversy, between us and the Church of
Rome, of which one concerning Free will is of this fraternity. What the
Primates judgment was of that, is sufficiently declared there, and he
continued in the same without any change the last time I saw him, by the
discourse I had then with him of it: and S. Augustine (unless we be
over-strict) may be admitted within that compass, being accounted by the
Primate, at the time when he was consecrated a Bishop, to be but in Anno 410.
and Prosper reckons his death, in 433. being then of age, 76. Before whose time
these points were never discussed by the Fathers at large singly, nor
determined by them jointly in any Council; which Pelagius gave the first
occasion of: and it is known that the Doctrine of St. Augustine against him is
inclined unto, and defended by the Primate in his works.

And, to say no more, the Articles of Religion, Agreed upon by the Archbishops
and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of Ireland, in the Convocation holden
at Dublin, Anno 1615. which fully determine and declare all those points
accordingly; he had then the honor to be appointed by the Synod as a
principal person to draw them up; Now the last time I saw him (which was after
that pretended Testimony of the witnesses of his change, either in public or
private) he did fully confirm and commend them to me to be heeded and observed
by me as the summary of his judgment in those and other subjects, of which I
have said somewhat more, elsewheree.

That of Mr. Piercies drawing in more to bear him company, viz. King James, B.
Andrews, Melancthon, in their changes also for the better, as he is pleased to
derermine; does not concern me to take notice of: only if he have found it as
their last Will and Testament in their works, he shall but Charitably err (to
use his own words) if he should be mistaken; but no such matter appears here,
as to the Primate.

In a word, I cannot but profess my respect to Mr. Pierce, both for his own
worth, as the great esteem which in this Postsript (more then in his former
book) he has expressed of this Eminent Primate, and can easily believe he
would account it a reputation to his opinion, that his might patronize it, by
the great esteem had of him in all parts of the reformed Church, both for his
learning and piety; and I have so much Charity as to believe that this error is
more to be imputed to his informers than himself, and if I were known to him I
would advise him not to insist any farther in it, it being by these several
circumstances so improbable; but, according to his own ingenuous offer, to make
an ample satisfaction, and what he has so highly extolled in the Primate to
have been his glory and honor in preferring truth before error, in that his
supposed imaginary retractation, I may without offense return the application
to himself; which, with all prudent men, will be much more, his own
commendation, and though, according to his profession, he be innocent, as to
any voluntary injury; thinking he did God and him good service: yet it being a
wrong in it self, will deserve some Apology.

And, indeed, it will be hard for any prudent impartial man to believe, That
what the Primate upon mature deliberation and long study for so many years had
professed in the Pulpit, and at the Press, he should be so soon shaken in
mind, as, without any convincing force of argument from any other, that is
known, at once renounce all he had formerly said, and draw a cross line over
all he had wrote; and that in a Sermon, not made of purpose for that end,
(which had been very requisite, and which must have been of too narrow a limit
in relation to so many Subjects here intimated) but only as on the bye; I say,
when his works wherein he is clearly seen and largely declared, with a cloud
of ear-witnesses for many years, both in public and private, confirming his
constancy in them, through the diverse changes of the times to his last, shall
be produced and laid in one balance; And a few witnesses of some few passages
at one Sermon, who in a crowd might be mistaken, and the apter to be so, by the
interest of their own opinion; put into the other; will not all unbyassed
persons cast the Errata into the latter? I shall conclude with a course
complement to your self; That I have not thus appeared for your sake, to whom
I am a stranger, nor out of any opposition to Mr. Pierce, who appears to me to
be a person of value: but only out of my duty and high account, I must ever
have of the memory of that judicious, holy, and eminent Primate: and so commit
you to Gods protection and direction, and rest,

Your assured Friend N. BERNARD.
Grayes-Inne, June 10. 1657.
A Learned Letter of the late Archbishop of Armagh to Dr. Twisse, concerning
the Sabbath, and observation of the Lords day.
Worthy Sir,
YOur Letter of the first of February came unto my hands the seventh of April,
but, my journey to Dublin following thereupon, and my long stay in the City,
(where the multiplicity of my public and private employments would scarce
afford me a breathing time) was such; that I was forced to defer my Answer
thereunto, until this short time of my retiring into the Country: Where,
being now absent also from my Library: I can rather signify unto you, how
fully I concur in judgment with those grounds, which you have so judiciously
laid in that question of the Sabbath, than afford any great help unto you in
the building, which you intend to raise thereupon. For when I gave my self
unto the reading of the Fathers, I took no heed unto any thing that concerned
this argument: as little dreaming that any such controversy would have arisen
among us. Yet generally I do remember that the word Sabbatum in their writings
does denote our Saturday: although by Analogy from the manner of speech used by
the Jews, the term be sometimes transferred to denote our Christian
festivities also, as Sirmondus the Jesuit observes, out of Sidonius
Apollinaris, (lib. 1. Epist. 2.) where, describeing the moderation of the Table
of Theodorick, King of the Goths upon the Eves, and the excess on the Holy
day following; he writes of the one, that his convivium diebus profestis
simile privato est, but of the other. De luxu autem illo Sabbatario narrationi
meae supersedendum est, qui nec latentes potest latere personas. And because
the (...) of the fourth Commandment points at the Sabbath, as it was in the
first institution, the seventh day from the Creation: therefore they held that
Christians were not tied to the observance thereof. Whereupon you may observe,
that S. Augustine in his speculum (in operum tomo 3o.) purposely selecting
those things which appertained unto us Christians; does wholly pretermit that
precept, in the recital of the Commandments of the Decalogue; Not because the
substance of the precept was absolutely abolished: but because it was in some
parts held to be Vid. Augustine. Praefat. in speculum.
ceremonial, and the time afterward was changed in the state of the New
Testament, from the seventh to the first day of the week: as appears by the
Author of the 25 Sermon, de Tempore (in 10o tomo Operum Augustini:) and that
place of Athanasius in homil. de semente, where he most plainly says, touching
the Sabbath, (...). Whereupon Caesarius Arelatensis in his twelfth homily,
doubted not to preach unto the people. Vere dico, Fratres, satis durum and
prope nimis impium est, ut Christiani non habeant reverentiam diei Dominico,
quam Judaei observare videntur in Sabbato, etc. Charles the Great in his Laws,
takes it for granted, that our observation of the Lords day is founded upon
the (...) of the fourth Commandment. Statuimus (says he, Edit. Lindebreg.
page 842.
libro 1o. Capitularium, cap. 81.) secundum quod and in lege Dominus praecepit,
ut opera servilia diebus Dominicis non agantur; sicut and bonae memoriae
genitor meus in suis Synodalibus edictis mandavit: And Lotharius likewise, in
legibus Alemannorum, titulo 38. Ibid. page 373.
Die Dominico nemo opera servilia praesumat facere: quia hoc lex prohibuit, and
sacra scriptura in omnibus contradicit. Accommodating the Law of God touching
the Sabbath unto our observation of the Lords day, by the self-same Analogy;
that the Church of England now does in her public Prayer: Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

The Jews commonly hold two things touching their Sabbath; as Menasses
Ben-Israel shows in his eighth Problem, de creatione; which be published at
Amsterdam the last year. First, that the observation thereof was commanded
only unto the Whether the Proselyte, or (...) were tied thereunto, is handled
in the Talmud of Jerusalem, Seder (...), fol. 8. d of my edition.
Israelies, (where he speaks also of the seven precepts of the sons of Noah;
which have need to be taken in a large extent, if we will have all the duties
that the Heathen were tied unto to be comprised therein) Secondly, that it was
observed by the Patriarchs, before the coming out of Egypt. For that then the
observation began, or that the Israelites were brought out of Egypt, or the
Egyptians drowned upon the Sabbath; I suppose our good friend Mr. Mead will not
be able to evince, either out of Compare with Deuteronomy. 16. 12. 7.
Deuteronomy. 5. 15 or out of any other Scripture whatsoever. And the Text, Genes. 2.
3. (as you well note) is so clear for the ancient institution of the Sabbath,
and so fully vindicated by D. Rivet from the exceptions of Gomarus; that I see
no reason in the earth why any man should make doubt thereof: especially
considering withal, that the very Gentiles, both civil and barbarous, both
ancient and of latter days, as it were by an universal kind of tradition,
retained the distinction of the seven days of the week, which if Dr. Heylin
had read, so well proved as it is, by Rivetus and Salmasius, he would not have
made such a conclusion as he does: that because the Heathen (of the four great
Monarchies at least) had no distinction of weeks, therefore Part. 1. cap. 4.
page 83, 84. page 90.
they could observe no Sabbath; whereas he might have found, that the
distinction of the days of the week did reach etiam ad ipsos usque Sauromatas,
for even of the Slavonians themselves (while they yet continued in their
ancient Paganism:) thus writes Helmoldus, Chronic. Slavor. lib. 1. cap. 84.
Illic secunda feria populus terrae, cum flamine and regulo, convenire solebant
propter judicia, the same order of the days of the week being retained by
them, which Theophilus the old Bishop of Antioch notes to have been observed
by all mankind. (...) (says he, lib. 2. ad Antolycum) (...)) confounding as it
seems (...) with (...), as also does Lacta^tius, lib. 7 cap. 14.) (...).
Wherewith we may join that other place of Johannes Philoponus, (...) Lib. 7.
Cap. ult. (...) (...) who, with showing the cause thereof, thus shuts up the
whole work. (...).

We see it The variation of some rude American breaks here no square no more
than it does in the unskilful reckoning of their times. [They being mere
Savages.
almost generally observed in all Nations, though never so far distant, and
strangers one to another, that in their reckoning of Numbers, when they come to
ten, they return to their Addition of 1. 2. and 3. again. If it should be
demanded, how they did all come to agree upon this kind of Arithmetic; and not
some place their period at 8. some at 12. some at 15? I suppose this could not
be better resolved, than by saying they had this by tradition from the first
Fathers that lived before the dispersion; and that this is not an improbable
evidence of that truth propounded by the Apostle unto the Philosophers of
Athens, Acts 17. 26. that God made of one blood all Nations of men to dwell on
all the face of the Earth. How more when we find a far greater agreement
among the Nations, in the computation of the seven days of the week (the
self-same day, which is accounted the first by one, being in like manner
reckoned so by all; Notwithstanding, that great variety of differences: which
is betwixt them in the ordering of their years and months:) how much more
strongly, I say, may we conclude from hence, that the tradition of the seventh
day was not of Moses, but of the Fathers, and did not begin with the
Commonwealth of Israel, but was derived unto all Nations by lineal descent
from the Sons of Noah?

Add hereunto that those Heathens, who were strangers from the Commonwealth
of Israel, though they made not the seventh day as Festival as the Jews did;
yet did they attribute some holiness to it, and gave it a peculiar honor
above the other days of the week; wherein they retained some Relics, and
preserved still some clear footsteps of the first institution. Quinetiam
populi jam This word was not well left out by Gomarus, in Investigat. p. 123.
The Greek, S. (...).
olim, says Josephus, (sub fin. lib. 2. contra Apion.) multum nostram pietatem
aemulantur: neque est civitas Graecorum ulla usquam aut Barbarorum, nec ulla
gens, ad quam septimanae, in qua vacamus, consuetudo minime pervenerit;
Jejuniaque and candelabra accensa, etc. of which Rite of lighting of Candles,
or Lamps rather, mention also is made by Seneca in his 95th. Epistle: Accendere
aliquam lucernam Sabbathis prohibeamus; quoniam nec lumine Dii egent, and ne
homines quidem delectantur fuligine. And by Tertullian lib. 1. ad Nation. cap.
13. where he notes also those to be the Sabbaths observed by the Nations,
saying thus unto them. Qui solemn and diem ejus nobis exprobratis, agnoscite
vicinitatem: Non long a Saturno and Sabbatis VESTRIS sumus, wherein though
their devotion were somewhat like (...) of the Jews, (which is all that those
words of Josephus do import; Multum nostram pietatem aemulantur,) yet that it
was not done by any late imitation of them, or with any relation at all to
their observance; that other place of Tertullian does seem to evince, in the
16th. Chapter of his Apologeticum. Aeque si diem solis laetitiae indulgemus,
alia long ratione quam religione solis; secundo loco ab eis sumus qui diem
Saturni otio and victui decernunt, exorbitantes and ipsi a Judaico more, Upon
these two words I ground the strength of the Argument: which will hold,
notwithstanding the correction of Gottef^edus, out of that in libro, 1. ad
Nationes cap. 13. Quod quidem facitis, exo^bitantes and ipsi a vestris ad
altenas religiones.
quem ignorant. And that they did not celebrate their Satturdayes, with that
solemnity wherewith themselves did their annual festivities, or the Jews
their weekly Sabbaths, may appear by the words of this same Author, in the
14th. Chapter of his book de Idololatria, thus speaking unto the Christian,
(who observed 52 Lords days every year, whereas all the annual festivities of
the Pagans put together, did come short of fifty.) Ethnicis semel annuus dies
quisque festus est; tibi octavo quoque die. Excerpe singulas solemnitates
nationum, and in ordinem texe; Pentecosten implere non potuerunt. And yet, as I
said, that they accounted Satturday more holy, and requiring more respect from
them than the other ordinary days of the week, may be seen by that of
Tibullus. Eleg. 3. lib. 1. Aut ego sum causatus aves, aut omina dira.
Saturni SACRA me tenuisse die.


And that of Lucian, Oper. Lucian. Graec^ lat. page 893. edit. Paris. Ann. 1615.
in his (...), of boys getting leave to play (...), and that of Aelius
Lampridius, touching Alexander Severus, using to go unto the Capitols and other
Temples, upon the seventh day. Whereunto we may add those verses of the
ancient Greek Poets, alleged by Clemens Alexandrinus, (lib. 5. Stromat.) and
Eusebius (lib. 13. Praeparat. Evangelic.) which plainly show that they were not
ignorant, that the works of Creation were finished on the seventh day, for so
much does that verse of Linus intimate.

-- (...)
And that of Homer.

(...)
And that of Callimachus.

(...)
The Israelites, by the Law of Moses, were not only to observe their weekly
Sabbath every seventh day, but also their feast of weeks once in the year:
Which although by the vulgar use of the Jewish nation it may now fall upon any
day of the week, yet do the Samaritans until this day constantly observe it on
the first day of the week; which is our Sunday, For which they produce the
Letter of the Law, Levit. 23. 15, 16. where the feast of the first fruits
(otherwise called Pentecost, or the feast of weeks) is prescribed to be kept
the morrow after the seventh Sabbath; which not they only, but also amongst
our Christian Interpreters, Isychius and Rupertus do interpret to be the first
day of the week. Planius, says Isychius, Isych. lib. 6. in Levit. cap. 23.
Vid. Lidya. De variis annorum formis, cap. 5.
Legislator intentionem suam demonstrate volens, ab altero die Sabbati memor
ari praecepit quinquaginta dies: Dominicum diem proculdubio volens intelligi.
Hic enim est altera dies Sabbati, (in hac enim resurrectio facta est) qua
hebdomadae numerantur septem, usque ad alterum diem expletionis hebdomadae.
Dominica rursus die Pentecostes celebramus festivitatem, in qua Sancti Spiritus
adventum meruimus. i. Consecuti sumus, (juxta usum loquendi veterum.)
Where you may observe by the way, that although this Author made a little
bold to strain the signification of altera dies Sabbati, (which in Moses
denotes no more than the morrow after the Sabbath) yet he makes no scruple to
call the day of Christ's Resurrection another Sabbath day, as in the Council of
Friuli also (If I greatly mistake not the matter) Council. Forojuliens. cap. 13.
you shall find Satturday called by the name of Sabbatum ultimum and the Lords
day of Sabbatum primum, (with some allusion perhaps to that of St. Ambrose, in
Psalm. 47. Ubi Dominica dies caepit praecellere, qua Dominus resurrexit;
Sabbatum, quod primum erat secundum haberi caepit a primo,) not much unlike
unto that, which Dr. Part. 2. cap. 2. page 19. 1.
Heylin himself notes out of Scaliger of the Ethiopian Christians; that they
call both of them by the name of Sabbaths: the one the first, the other the
latter Sabbath; or in their own Language, the one Sanbath Sachristos, (i. e.)
Christ's Sabbath, the other Sanbath Judi, or the Jews Sabbath.

But touching the old Pentecost it is very considerable, that it is no where in
Moses affixed unto any one certain day of the month, as all the rest of the
feasts are: which is a very great presumption, that it was a moveable feast,
and so Against Doctor Heylin, part 2. cap. 1. pug. 14.
varied, that it might always fall upon the day immediately following the
ordinary Sabbath. And if God so order the matter, that in the celebration of
the feast of weeks the seventh should purposely be passed over, and that
solemnity should be kept upon the first: what other thing may we imagine could
be praesignified thereby, but that under the State of the Gospel the solemnity
of the weekly service should be celebrated upon that day? That on that day the
famous Pentecost in the 2. of the Acts was observed, is in a manner generally
acknowledged by all: wherein the truth of all those that went before being
accomplished, we may observe the type and the verity, concurring together in a
wonderful manner. At the time of the Passover Christ our Passover was slain
for us: the whole Sabbath following 1 Cor. 5. 7.
he rested in the grave. The next day after that Sabbath, the (...), or sheaf
of the first fruits of Levit. 23. 10, 11.
the first (or barley) Harvest was offered unto God; and Christ rose from the
dead, and became the first fruits of them that slept; many bodies 1 Cor. 15.
20. Matthew. 27. 52, 53. Levit. 23. 15, 16, 17.
of the Saints that slept, arising likewise after him. From thence was the
count taken of the seven Sabbaths; and upon the more after the seventh Sabbath
(which was our Lords day) was celebrated the feast of weeks, the day of the
first fruits of the second (or wheat) Harvest: Numb. 28. 26. Exodus 34. 22.
upon which day the Apostles having themselves received the first fruits of the
spirit, begat three thousand Souls with the word of truth, and presented them
as the first fruits of the Christian Church Acts 2. 1, 4, 5, 41. Jam. 1. 18.
Revel. 14. 4.
unto God, and unto the Lamb. And from that time forward does Waldensis note
that the Lords day was observed in the Christian Church in the place of the
Sabbath. Quia inter legalia (says he) tunc sublata Sabbati castodia fuit unum,
planum est tunc intrasse Dominicam loco ejus: sicut Baptisma Thom. Waldens.
Doctrinal. Tom. 3. Tit. 16. c. 140.
statim loco Circumcisionis. Adhuc enim superstes erat sanctus Johannes, qui
diceret: Et fui in spiritu die Dominica, Apocal. 1. cum de Dominica die ante
Christi Resurrection nulla prorsus mentio haberetur. Sed statim post missionem
Spiritus sancti, lege nova fulgente, in humano cultu sublatum est Sabbatum; and
dies Dominicae Resurrectionis clarescebat Dominica.

The Revelation exhibited unto Revel. 7. 10.
St. John upon the Lords day; is by Irenaeus (in his fifth book) referred unto
the Empire of Domitian, or, as S. Hierome in his Catalogue more particularly
does express it, to the fourth year of his Reign: Which answers partly to
the forty ninth, and partly to the ninty fifth year of our Lord, according to
our vulgar computation; and was but eleven or twelve years before the time,
when Ignatius did write his Epistles. Of whom then should we more certainly
learn, what the Apostle meant by the Lords day, then from Ignatius? who was by
the Apostles Acts 11. 26.
themselves ordained Bishop of that Church, wherein the Disciples were first
called Christians; and in his Epistle to the Magnesians clearly makes the
Lords day to be a weekly holy day, observed by Christians, in the room of the
abrogated Sabbath of the Jews: than which, can we desire more? But here you are
to know, beside the common edition, wherein the genuine Epistles of Ignatius
are foully depraved by a number of beggarly patches added unto his purple by
later hands; there is an ancient Latin translation to be found in the Library
of Caies College in Cambridge; which, although it be very rude, and corrupt
both in many other, and in this very same place also of the Epistle to the
Magnesians; yet is it free from these additaments, and in many respects to be
preferred before the common Greek Copy, as well because it agrees with the
Citations of Eusebius, Athanasius, and Theodoret, and has the sentences
vouched by them out of Ignatius (and particularly that of the Eucharist, in the
Epistle to the Smyrnians) which are not at all to be found in our Greek; and
has in a manner none of all those places in the true Epistles of Ignatius,
against which exception has been taken by our Divines: which adds great
strength to those exceptions of theirs, and shows that they were not made
without good cause. Now in this Translation there is nothing to be found
touching the Sabbath, and the Lords day in the Epistle to the Magnesians, but
these words only. Non amplius sabbatizantes, sed secundum Dominicam viventes,
in qua, and vita nostra orta est; whereunto these of our common Greek may be
made answerable. (...) It may be the three first syll ables of this word were
wanting in the Greek Copy, which the Translator used; and thence came his
viventes.
(...). all those other words alleged by Dr. Heylin, (part. 2. page 43.) to
prove that Ignatius would have both the Sabbath and the Lords day observed,
being afterward added by some later Grecian; who was afraid that the custom
of keeping both days observed in his time should appear otherwise to be
directly opposite to the sentence of Ignatius, whereas his main intention was
to oppose the Ebionites of his own time: who, as Eusebius witnesses in the
third book of his Ecclesiastical History, did both keep the Sabbath with the
Jews, and also (...). By whose imitation of the Church herein, the antiquity
of the observation of the Lords day may be further confirmed: Ebion being known
to have been St. Paul's Antagonist; and to have given out of himself, that he
was one of those that brought the prices of their goods, and laid them down at
the Apostles feet: as the universality of the observance may be gathered by the
argument drawn from thence by Eusebius toward the end of his Oration of the
praises of Constantine) to prove the preeminency of our Savior Christ, above
all the gods of the Heathen: because this prescript of his touching the
celebration of this day was admitted and submitted unto, not within the
Dominions of Constantine only, but also throughout the compass of the whole
world. (...).
Quis n. (says he) cunctis totius orbis terrarum incobis, seu terra seu mari
illi sint, praescripserit ut singulis septimanis in unum convenientes diem
Dominicum festum celebrarent; instituentque ut sicut corpora pascerent
cibariis, sic animos Divinis Disciplinis refi^erent?

We see then that the Doctrine, which the true Ignatius received immediately
from the hands of the Apostles, was the very same with that was delivered by
the Fathers of the Council of Laodicea, about 250 years after, (for the profs
produced by the Authors, to whom my D. White.
Lord of Eli, page 73. refereth us, for having it to be held before the first
Nicene, are nothing worth.) Non oportet Christianos Judaizare and in Sabbatho
otiari; sed ipsos eo die operari, diem autem dominicum praeferentes otiari (si
modo possint) ut Christianos: the contrary whereunto Pope Gregory the first (in
Registr. lib. 11. Epist. 3. esteems to be the Doctrine of the Preachers of
Antichrist: qui veniens, diem Dominicum and Sabbatum ab omni opere faciet
custodiri: which my Lord of Eli, page 219.) renders; upon the old Sabbath Day,
or upon the Sunday: by a strange kind of mistake turning the copulative into a
disjunctive.

A Letter of Doctor Twisse to the Lord Primate, thanking him for the former
Letter, and his Book de primordiis, Brit. Eccles. The History of Goteschalcus,
etc. where the honor and respect he gives him is exemplary, unto others.
Most Reverend Father in God,
I was very glad to hear of your Grace his coming over into England; and now I
have a fair opportunity to express my thankful acknowledgement of that great
favor wherewith you were pleased to honor me, in bestowing one of your books
upon me, de origin Britannicarum Ecclesiarum; which I received from Sir
Benjamin Rudierd in your Grace his name, about the end of Summer last, wherein
I do observe not only your great learning and various reading manifested at
full, but your singular wisdom also in reference to the necessitous condition
of these times; taking so fair an occasion to insert therein, the History of
the Pelagian Heresy, so opportunely coming in your way. Your History of
Goteschalcus was a piece of the like nature, which came forth most seasonably;
we know what meetings there were in London thereupon by some; and to what end,
to relieve the reputation of Vossius, who labored not a little when he was
discovered to have alleged the confession of Pelagius, for the confession of
Austin: As also in fathering upon the Adrametine Monks, the Original of the
Praedestinarian Heresy: I was at that time upon answering Corvinus his defense
of Arminius, and had dispatched one digression upon the same argument, and in
the issue concluded that it was but a trick of the Pelagians to cast the
Nickname of the Praedestinarian Heresy, upon the Orthodox Doctrine of St.
Austine: But upon the coming forth of your Goteschalcus, I was not only
confirmed therein, but upon better, and more evident grounds, enabled in a
second digression to meet with the Dictates of -- who endeavored to justify
the conceit of Vossius, but upon very weak grounds. Thus I have observed with
comfort the hand of God to have gone along with your Grace, for the honoring
of the cause of his truth, in so precious a point as is the glory of his Grace.
And I nothing doubt, but the same hand of our good God will be with you still,
and his wisdom will appear in all things you undertake, whether of your own
choice, or upon the motion of others: There being never more need of hearkening
unto, and putting in practice our Saviors rule, Be ye wise as Serpents, and
innocent as Doves. And have I not as great cause to return your Grace most
hearty thanks, for the kind Letters I received in answer to the motions I was
emboldned to make; had it been but only to signify the great satisfaction I
received thereby in diverse particulars, but especially in two principal ones;
the one, the mystery of the feasts of first fruits opened to the singular
advantage of the honor of the Lords day in the time of the Gospel, the other,
in correcting Ignatius by a Latin Manuscript of Caies College; which since I
have gotten into my hands, and taken a Copy thereof, and have caused it to be
compared with two other Copies, Manuscripts in Oxford, the one in Magdalene,
the other in Baliol College Library; I take no small comfort in the hope I
conceive of seeing your Grace before your departure into Ireland, I hear of a
purpose your Grace has to see Oxford, and abide some time there, the Lord
bless you, and keep you, and make his face to shine upon you.

Newberry May 29. 1640. Yours in all observance, desiring to sit at your Grace
his feet. WILLIAM TWISSE.
Mr. Chambers of Clouford by Bath, has long ago answered Dr. Heylines History
of the Sabbath, but knows not how to have it printed.



A Clause in a Letter of the Primates, to Mr. Ley, of the Sabbath.
FOr mine own part, I never yet doubted but took it for granted; that as the
setting of some whole day apart for Gods solemn Worship was Juris Divini
naturalis, so that this solemn day should be one in seven, was juris Divini
positivi, recorded in the fourth Commandment. And such a jus divinum
positivum, here I mean, as Baptism and the Lords Supper are established, both
which lie not in the power of any man, or Angel to change, or alter, wherein me
thinks, your second position is a little too waterish, viz. That this Doctrine
rather then the contrary is to be held the Doctrine of the Church of England;
And may well be gathered out of her public liturgy, and the first part of the
Homily concerning the place, and time of prayer. Whereas, you should have said
that this is to be held undoubtedly the Doctrine of the Church of England. For
if there could be any reasonable doubt made of the meaning of the Church of
England in her Liturgy, who should better declare her meaning, than self in her
Homily? where she peremptorily declares her mind. That in the fourth
Commandment God has given express charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath
day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and work-day
labor, to the intent, that like as God himself wrought six days, and rested
the seventh, blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it to rest, and
quietness from labor, even so Gods obedient people should use the Sunday
holily, and rest from their common, and daily business, and also give
themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and service; Than
which, what could you devise to say more your self? For the further maintenance
of which Doctrine, I send you herewith a Treatise, written by Mr. Hely of Perry.
a learned man (now with God) against Theophilus Brabourn; who gave occasion to
the raising up of these unhappy broiles; which, if it may any way conduce to
the furtherance of your more exact Treatice, etc. I shall be very glad, and be
ready to, etc.

Part of a Letter of the Primates, to an Honorable person, not long after the
coming forth of Doctor Heylins book* of the History of the Sabbath, which I
found wrote in the same Paper with the former.
AS for Dr. Heylins Hist. of the Sabbath. part. 2. cap. 8.
relation, concerning our Articles of Ireland, it is much mistaken. For first
where he says, they did pass when his Majesty's Commissioners were employed
about the settling of the Church, Anno 1615. and charge them with this strict
austerity (as he terms it) in the prescript observation of the Lords day, he
shows himself very credulous, there having been no such Commissioners here at
that time, and our Articles having been published in Print diverse years before
the Commissioners (whom he means) came hither, as Sir Nathaniel Rich (who
was one of them himself) can sufficiently inform you. Secondly, where he says,
he is sure, that till that time the Lords day had never attained such credit as
to be thought an Article of the faith, he speaks very inconsiderately. He that
would confound the ten Commandments (whereof this must be accounted for one,
unless he will leave us but nine) with the Articles of the faith, he had need
be put to learn his Catechism again: And he that would have every thing, which
is put into the Articles of Religion (agreed upon in the Synod for the avoiding
of diversity of opinions, and for the maintenance of peace, and uniformity in
the Church) to be held for an Article of the faith, should do well to tell us
whether he has as yet admitted These two here instanced were not by way of
diminution, for he did highly approve of both, as being excellent composures,
but because they are either for the most part to be reckoned among the Agenda,
rather then the Credenda, or that in both there are some circumstantials
observed, and exhorted unto, only for decency and order, according to the
wisdom of the Church, which come not within the compass of the Creed, as upon
the view of them, without descending to particulars, may easily appear.
the Book of the ordination of Bishops, and the two volumes of Homilies into
his Creed, for sure I am he shall find these received in the Articles of
Religion, agreed upon in the Synod held at London, 1562. To which Doctor Heylen
himself having subscribed, I wonder how he can oppose the conclusion, which he
finds directly laid down in the Homily of the time and place of prayer in the
fourth Commandment, viz. God has given express charge to all men that upon
the Sabbath Day which is now our Sunday (for these are the plain words of the
Homily, which the Doctor with all his Sophistry will never be able to elude)
they shall cease from all weekly, and weekday labor, to the intent thot like
as God himself wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and blessed, and
consecrated it to quietness, and rest from labor, even so Gods obedient
people should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their common and daily
business, and also give themselves wholly to the heavenly exercises of Gods
true Religion and service. By the verdict of the Church of England, I am sure
the Lords day had obtained such a pitch of credit, as nothing more could be
left to the Church of Ireland in their Articles, afterward to add unto it.
Thirdly, he shameth not to affirm, That the whole Book of the Articles of
Ireland is now called, in (which is a notorious untruth.) And lastly, that the
Articles of the Church of England, were confirmed by Parliament in this
Kingdom, Anno 1634. where it is well known that they were not so much as once
propounded to either House of Parliament, or ever intended to be propounded.
The truth is, that the House of Convocation in the beginning of their Canons,
for the manifestation of their agreement with the Church of England, in the
confession of the same Christian faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments (as
they themselves profess) and for no other end in the world, did receive and
approve of the Articles of England; but that either the Articles of Ireland
were ever called in, or any Articles, or Canons at all, were ever here
confirmed by Act of Parliament, may well be reckoned among Doctor Heylins
fancies. Which shows what little credit he deserves in his Geography, when he
brings us news of the remote parts of the world, that tells us so many
untruths of things so lately, and so publicly acted in his Neigbour Nation.

A Confirmation of the latter clause in this Letter of the Primates, viz. That
the Articles of Ireland (determining the observation of the Lords day) were not
called in Anno 1634. as Doctor Heylin has affirmed.
DOctor Heylin, under the mask of an Observator has been already offended with
me, for joining in a Certificate against what he has related concerning the
abrogating of the Articles of Ireland, which was done by the command of this
most Reverend Primate in his life time, and since that, he has been much more;
for my saying in his Funeral Sermon, Some had rashly affirmed it, and that some
such presumptious affections have been lately published, and stiling that
person a presumptuous (I may say also uncharitable) observator, that should
presume to enter into the Lord Primates breast, and aver that the abrogating of
them (to use his own term) was the cause of his carrying a sharp tooth, bearing
a grudge (and that a mortal one) toward the L. Lieutenant Strafford. The
Language with which throughout he pleases himself, might have been easily
returned, but in regard such pen-combats are unseasonable, and unfitting
between those of the same profession (only grateful to the adversary of
both) I have left it to the prudence of a third person, who has a convenient
opportunity in his History to clear the whole, in the examination and
moderation of all the passages between Mr. L. Strange and him.

Only thus much upon this occasion, the observator is pleased to give me a
share in his Title Page, calling it a rescue from the backblowes of Dr.
Bernard; Indeed as to the person smitten, if they were any, they could be no
other, for he then turned the back, and not the face, being an Anonymus, and so
appearing in that disguise, I might be excused as he was that smote a Clergy
man, riding without his Priestly habit, A man that walks in the dark, may meet
with a knock by such as mean him no harm. And indeed the apprehension of the
Authors disaffection so much expressed to this Eminent, and pious Primate in
the endeavors thus to blemish him, (whom the whole reformed Church has an
high esteem of,) gave it suspected, both to my self, and others to have been
some Jesuit, or Agent of the Sea of Rome, though as yet, not any one (as I hear
of) has moved his tongue against that true Israelite at his Exit hence, and I
am sorry to see his sole enemies to be those of his own house, and profession.

But for the confirmation of what is here affirmed by the Primate, that the
Articles of Ireland were not called in, though his abovementioned Letter is
sufficient to all uninteressed persons, yet for the Readers more full
satisfaction, I shall give you a brief Narrative of the whole matter, being
then a Member of that Convocation.

First in the House of the Clergy, which was then in the Cathedral of St.
Patricks Dublin, there was a motion made for the reception anew of the Articles
of Ireland, and all unanimous were for the affirmative, excepting two, who went
out. Another time the whole house of the Clergy being called into the Quire,
where the Bishops sat, and the same thing again propounded to them, they all
stuck to their former vote, excepting seven. The intent of the whole Clergy
being by this sufficiently understood, and it appearing, there was no need of
any such confirmation, having been An. 1615. fully and formally established,
(viz. signed by Archbishop Jones, Chancelour of Ireland, and then Speaker of
the House of the Bishops in Convocation, by the Prolocutor of the House of the
Clergy in their names, and signed by the then Lord Deputy Chichester, (by order
from King James in his name) that motion was no more repeated, only the
Primate was consulted with, concerning the approving and receiving of the
Articles of England also, to which he readily consented, there being no
substantial difference between them, to which he had subscribed himself
voluntarily, long before in England, and conceiving it to be without any
prejudice to the other.

Hereupon the first Canon (being all that was done in relation to them) was
drawn up, the Primate approved it, and proposed it self (as President of the
Synod) in the House of the Bishops, commended it to the House of the Clergy,
where by his motion many assented the more readily, they all gave their Votes,
man by man, excepting one person, who suspended his, out of the suspicion that
some might make that construction, which is the observators conclusion.

Now the chief argument, which the observator (if I may not call him Dr.
Heylin) spends himself upon, is from what he has picked out of the words of
the Canon, where they do not only approve, but receive the Articles of
England, from thence he inferres a superinducing of those, and so an abrogating
of these of Ireland.

But I answer, there was not a reception of the one instead of the other, but
the one with the other, and there being no difference in substance, but only
in method number of subjects determined, and other circumstantials, it argues
no more an abrogation than that does of the Apostles Creed, by our reception of
the Nicene Creed and Athanasius's, wherein some points are more enlarged, or
that the reception into our use the form of the Lords Prayer, according to
Saint Matthew, abrogates that of Saint Luke, being the shorter; Neither do I
see, but if for the manifestation of our Union with other reformed Churches; We
should approve and receive their Articles of Religion, and they receive ours,
it were no abrogating of either. And the difference in them being only in
circumstantials, and not in substance, all might be called one confession, That
as of many Seas one Ocean, of many National Churches one Catholic Church, so
of many forms of Canfessions, but one faith amongst them.

That Argument from the Apostles speech of making void the old Covenant by
speaking of a new, or taking in the first day of the week to be the Sabbath,
instead of the last, when but one of the seven was to be kept, does not fit the
case: for in these there was a superinduction, and reception of the one for the
other: but in the Canon, the Articles of England are received not instead, but
with those of Ireland. And that it was the sense then apprehended, not only by
the Primate, but by the other Bishops (at least diverse of them) appears in
this, That afterward at an Ordination they took the subscription of the party
ordained to both Articles. And for further confirmation of this I shall give
you the sense of a most eminent, learned, and judicious person, upon the view
of what the observator rescued had written of it, I have received (says he)
the book you sent me, and have perused it; I see he will have the allowance of
our Articles of England, by the Synod in Ireland, to be a virtual disanulling
of the Irish Confession; which (I conceive) says no more, but, That both
Confessions were consistent; And the Act of that Synod not a revocation of the
Irish Articles, but an approbation of ours, as agreeing with them; He has his
flings at your Sermon, Preached at the Lord Primates Funeral, but in truth, he
wrongs himself and our Church in those detractions from him.

A Letter of the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, to Doctor
Bernard of Grayes Inn, containing his judgment of the ordination of the
Ministry in France and Holland.
I Received this following Letter from the late Archbishop of Armagh, not long
before his death, which (at the desire of some prudent men, and of different
opinion in the subject of it) I have been moved to publish, which indced was
committed to me by him for that end, and I do it the rather now, in regard
somewhat has been mistaken in the discourse of it, to his prejudice on both
sides: So that without breach of trust I could no longer detain it. The
occasion of it was this, there was given me by an Honorable person a writing,
containg a report raised of the said Archbishop concerning his judgment of
the ordination beyond the Sea, which he prayed me to send unto him, which is as
follows: Mr. -- asked the Archbishop of Armagh, upon occasion of an
ordination, what he thought of them that were ordained by Presbyters? he said
he judged their ordination to be null, and looked on them as Laymen. He asked
him, what he conceived of the Churches beyond the Sea. The Bishop answered, he
had charitable thoughts of them in France. But as for Holland, he questioned if
there was a Church amongst them, or not: or words fully to that purpose. This
Dr. -- confidently reports. This paper according to the earnest desire of the
said person, I sent enclosed to the Lord Primate, being then out of Town, from
whom immediately I received this answer, containing his judgment of the
ordination of the Ministry of the reformed Churches in France, and Holland, as
follows.

Touching Mr. -- I cannot call to mind that he ever proposed unto me the
Questions in your Letter enclosed, neither do I know the Doctor -- who has
spread that report; But for the matter it self, I have ever declared my opinion
to be, That Episcopus and Presbyter, gradu tantum differunt, non ordine; and
consequently, that in places where Bishops cannot be had, the ordination by
Presbyters stands valid, yet on the other side holding as I do, that a Bishop
has superiority in degree above a Presbyter, you may easily judge that the
ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from those
Bishops, unto whom they had sworn Canonical obedience, cannot possibly by me
be excused from being Schismatical; And howsoever, I must needs think that the
Churches, which have no Bishops, are thereby become very much defective in
their Government, and that the Churches in France, who, living under a Popish
power, cannot do what they would, are more excusable in this defect than the
Low Countries that live under a free State: yet for the testifying my Communion
with these Churches (which I do love and honor as true Members of the Church
Universal.) I do profess that with like affection, I should receive the
blessed Sacrament at the hands of the Dutch Ministers, if I were in Holland, as
I should do at the hands of the French Ministers, if I were in Charentone.

Some Animadvertisements upon the aforesaid Letter, in prevention of any
misinterpretations of it.
1. WHereas in the former part of it, he says, he has ever declared his
opinion to be, etc. I can witness it from the time I have had the happiness
to be known to him, it being not (as some possibly might suggest) a change of
judgment upon the occurrences of latter years.

2. For that superiority only in degree; which, he says, a Bishop has above
a Presbyter, it is not to be understood as an arbitrary matter at the pleasure
of men, but that he held it to be of Apostolical institution, and no more a
diminution of the preheminencie and authority of Episcopacy, than the
denomination of lights given in common by Moses, to all of them in the
firmament (Genes. 1.) detracts from the Sun and Moon, whom he calls the
greater, and were assigned of God to have the rule of the rest; though the
difference between them be only graduall, yet there is a derivative
subordination, as the pre-eminence of the firstborn, was but graduall, they
were all brethren, but to him was given of God the excellency, or supremacy of
Dignity and power, to him they must bow, or be subject, and he must have the
rule over them: And that this gradus is both derived from the pattern
prescribed by God in the Old Testament (where that distinction is found in the
Title of the Chief Priest, who had the rule of the rest, called by the LXX
(...)) and from the imitation thereof brought in by the Apostles, and confirmed
by Christ in the time of the New; The Primate has so fully confirmed in that
learned Tractate of his, of the Original of Bishops, which he has deduced
from the Apostolical times; that I know not what can be added; And even for
that higher gradus of a Metropolitan, or Archbishop, to have been also
Apostolical, he has, from the superscription of John, to the seven Churches,
(each of which Cities being Metropolitical, and the rest of the Cities of Asia
daughters under them) given very strong probabilities, hard to be gainsaid;
unto which (as an excellent comment upon this Letter) I shall refer the Reader.

3. That in this judgment of his he was not singular; Doctor Davenant, that
pious, and Learned Bishop of Salisbury, consents with him in it. (in his
determinations, q. 42. produces the principal pf the Schoolmen, Gulielmus
Parisiensis, Gerson, Durand, etc. Episcopatus non est ordo praecise distinctus
a sacerdotio simplici, etc. non est alia potestas ordinis in Episcopis quam
Presbyteris, sed inest modo perfectiori. And declares it to be the general
opinion of the Schoolmen. Episcopatum ut distinguitur a simplici sacerdotio non
non esse alium ordinem; sed eminentiorem quandam potestatem and dignitatem in
eodem ordine sacerdotali, etc. And as he grants the Bishop to have dignitatem
altiorem, potestatem majorem, etc. so does the Primate in that he says he has
a superiority in degree above a Presbyter, and that the Churches which have no
Bishops, are thereby become very much defective in their Government; Both of
them being far from a parity.

And whereas the Primate says, That in cases of necessity, where Bishops
cannot be had, the Ordination by Presbyters stands valid, Bishop Davenaut
concurres with him also: That where Bishops were Heretical, or idolatrous, and
refuse to ordain Orthodox Ministers, that in such and the like cases he says:
Si Orthodoxi Presbyteri (ne pereat Ecclesia) alios Presbyteros cogantur
ordinare, ego non ausim hujusmodi ordinationes pronuntiare irritas, and
innanes, etc. Necessitas non inscite lex temporis appellatur, and in tali casu
defendat id ad quod coegit, and produces the opinion of Richardus Armachanus
(one of this Primates Predecessors, and one of the most Learned men in his
time) to be accordingly. Armachani opinio est, quod si omues Episcopi essent
defuncti, sacerdotes minores possunt ordinare, and applies it to the like
Protestant Churches, which the Primate mentions. Hac freti necessitate si
Ecclesiae quaedam protestantium quae ordinationes ab Episcopis Papistis
expectare non poterant consensu Presbyterorum suorum Presbyteros ordinarunt,
non inde Episcopali dignitati praejudicasse, sed necessitati Ecclesiae
obtemperasse judicandi sint, Thus much for Bishop Davenants concurrence, to
which diverse others might be added, as in special, Doctor Richard Field
sometimes Dean of Gloucester, in his Learned Book of the Church, lib. 3. cap.
39. and lib. 5. cap. 27. where this judgment of the Primates, and this
concurrence of Bishop Davenants is largely confirmed, without the least
derogation from the preheminencie of Episcopacy.

But that book entitled, The defense of the Ordination of the Ministers of the
reformed Churches beyond the Seas maintained by Mr Archdeacon Mason, against
the Romanists (who wrote also a defense of Episcopacy, and of the Ministry of
the Church of England) is sufficiently known, and I have been assured, it was
not only the Judgment of Bishop Overal, but that he had a principal hand in
it; He produces many Testimonies. The Master of the Sentences, and most of the
Schoolmen, Bonaventure, Tho. Aquinas, Durand. Dominicus, Soto, Richardus
Armachanus, Tostatus, Alphonsus a Castro, Gerson, Petrus, Canisius, to have
affirmed the same, and at last quoteth Medina, a principal Bishop of the
Council of Trent, who affirmed, That Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, were of the same judgment
also. And I suppose there is none doubts, but that the Primate joined with
Archdeacon Mason in that conclusive wish of his, viz. That wherein the
Discipline of France, or Holland is defective, they would by all possible means
redress, and reform it, and conform themselves to the ancient custom of the
Discipline of Christ, which has continued from the Apostles time, that so they
may remove all opinion of singularity, and stop the mouth of malice it self,

In a word, If the ordination of Presbyters in such places where Bishops cannot
be had, were not valid, the late Bishops of Scotland had a hard task to
maintain themselves to be Bishops, who were not Priests, for their Ordination
was no other, And for this, a passage in the History of Scotland, wrote by the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews is observable, viz. That when tke Scots Bishops
were to be consecrated by the Bishops of London, Ely, and Bath, here at London
house, An. 1609. he says, A question was moved by Doctor Andrews, Bishop of
Ely, touching the consecration of the Scottish Bishops, who, as he said, must
first be ordained Presbyters, as having received no ordination from a Bishop.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor Bancroft, who was by; maintained, That
thereof there was no necessity, seeing where Bishops could not be had, the
ordination given by the Presbyters must be esteemed lawful, otherwise that it
might be doubted if there were any lawful vocation in most of the reformed
Churches, This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely acquiesced, and at the
day, and in the place appointed, the three Scottish Bishops were consecrated by
the abovesaid three English Bishops, the Archbishop of Canterbury forbearing
for another cause there mentioned.

Now though the ordination of Presbyters in this case of necessity be granted
to be valid, yet I have heard this learned Primate wonder at the neglect found
in the late Presbyterian way of ordation, viz. That at imposition of hands,
they neither used the ancient form of words, with which the first framers of it
were themselves ordained, nor used any other to that sense in their room, at
least there is no order, or direction for it. For suppose the words of our
Savior to the Apostles, (John 10. 21, 21.) at their ordination were scrupled
at, viz. Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive are forgiven: and
whose sins thou do retain are retained, (which rightly understood, gave no
just cause) yet why might not the next words have been continued? viz. and be
thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: or the other
words upon the solemn delivery of the Bible, into the hands of the person
ordained; Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the
holy Sacraments in the Congregation where thou shall be so appointed. I can
imagine no cause against the use of one of these, unless it be because they
had been used there, as if in this sense, old things must be done away; and all
must be new. To impose hands (according to the injunction of the Apostle, and
to have it accompanied with prayer and thanksgiving for the person, is well
done (which in the former constitution was solemnly observed before, and after
it) but why should the formal transmitting of Authority also in the name of
Christ for the power of officiating be left undone, if the scruple in the
instrumental cause be satisfied, why might it not have been prevented in the
formal, who might have freely given what they had received. Now to give the
seal of ordination (as some please to call imposition of hands) without any
express commission annexed, or grant of Authority to the person, the Primate
was wont to say, seemed to him to be like the putting of a seal to a blanck,
which being so weighty a business, I wish prudent men would consider of, least
in the future it arm the adversary with objections; and fill our own with
further scruples; And so much (far larger then I intended) for the prevention
of any offense, which might be taken at the one part of the Letter.

Now for the other clause of his judgment, which he leaves unto me to judge,
what in reason I might apprehend to be his, I leave it accordingly to the
judgment of others: All that can give any offense, is that term of Schism.
But in regard it is not directly determined, but only that he could not be an
Advocate to excuse it; and being delivered in that Latitude, that it is dubious
whether foreign (to which the question chiefly relates) or domestic, former
times, or latter, may take the application. I shall not offend the Reader with
any larger Apology, only wherein any shall find themselves concerned, I wish
such humble and meek spirits, that the admonition of so pious, and eminent a
Bishop, (whose fame is throughout the Churches) might prevail to the amendmeut
of what has been amiss among us. If I have abounded beyond my measure, to the
hazard of the offense of both parties in these advertisements, let it be
excused by the impartiality of it, and the unbyassed intention for the settling
of truth and peace so shaken of later days.

The Primates judgment of several Subjects.
THe mifinterpretations, which have been already made of this most Reverend and
Learned mate, of a change of judgment in him toward his latter end, (which I
have been moved here to vindicate) giving it suspected to be the forerunner of
more of the like, which may be raised hereafter, I have been advised upon this
occasion, both in answer to, and prevention of any other false rumors for the
future to declare more fully what I did of him briefly in his Funeral Sermon,
as to some particulars then whispering of him (omitted at the press, but not
with my will,) And I do it the rather in regard, as I was desired then by some
of different judgment, to make an impartial relation of his there (there each
like Israel and Judah, for David, claiming an interest in him) so finding that
omission to be diversely interpreted to my censure, and conceived by some to be
the occasion of those several mistakes raised of him since, (whereby, as
(praef. to disp. of Sacram.) Mr. Baxter complains, The good Bishop must now be
what every one will say of him, one feigning him to be of one extreme, and the
other of the other extreme) which the publishing might have prevented, I have
thought fit to discharge that trust reposed in me, both in relation to his
Doctrine and practice, and I know no person of more general reputation, and
more like to be an exemplary pattern in this his moderation, which I conceived
fit to be known unto all men.

The late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, his judgment in
matter of Doctrine, Discipline, and other subjects; of which there have been
some different opinions among others, and some misinterpretations of him.
IN Doctrine he did fully approve the Articles of Religion of the Church of
England, as the same more enlarged in the Articles of Ireland: The discipline
and constitutious of both, he did also approve.

For the Liturgy in the public prayers, as while he lived at Drogheda in
Ireland, they were constantly observed in his family, so he had them in
estimation to his last; And the last time he was in London upon the occasion of
some rash groundless rumors raised of him to the contrary, (to his no small
grief) he gave his judgment accordingly to an Honorable person, wrote with
his own hand, which he showed unto me; He had constantly prayers in his family
four times a day; At six in the morning, and eight at night, they were such,
wherein the gifts of those, who were his Chaplains were exercised, but before
Dinner and Supper in the Chapel, was the forenamed also observed; Indeed he
was not so rigid, as to tie all men in the private, to an absolute necessary
use of it, or in the public, that a Sermon was not to be heard, unless that
did precede; And for the healing or preventing of those distractions and
divisions, which have been among Ministers as others, and the moderating of
each extremity in relation to the use of it whereby there might be a return of
that wished-for peace and unity, which of late years we have been strangers to,
He conceived some prudent moderate accommodation might have been thought of
(and yet may) by wise men, in order to the present continuance of the
substantial part of it, (each side yielding somewhat, after the example of
Saint Paul in circumstantials) which might have better borne the name of a
reformation, than thus to have a total suppression of it, whereby with the
intention of gathering up the Tares, the Wheat has been rooted up also.

As for some arbitrary innovations, not within the compass of the rule, and
order of the book, he did not affect, and often wished they had not been
introduced, as foreseeing the issue of it, what was commanded he readily
observed, but did not take upon him to introduce any Rite, or Ceremony upon his
own opinion of decency, till the Church had judged it so; and thought they most
owned the book, who neither added, or diminished from the rule of it.

And for bowing at the Name of Jesus, though he censured not those that did,
either in our, or other Reformed Churches, according to the custom of each,
yet he did not conceive the injunction of it could be founded upon that of the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 10. and wondered at some learned men's assertions, that it was
the Exposition of all the Fathers upon it, And as the wise composers of the
Liturgy gave no direct injunction for it there, so in Ireland he withstood the
putting of it into the Canon, Anno 1634.

That a form of prayer, not only by way of direction, but punctually composed
were fit to be had in the public he was ever for, as much conducing to the
benefit of the vulgar people, which are the major part of the Nation, and
especially in the administration of Baptism, and the Communion, as well for
the shunning and preventing the disorder, and scandalous confusion found in
some men's performances of them, as the testifying of an unity and unanimity
among us, which Saint Paul prefers as the more excellent way, before the
variety of all Spiritual gifts whatsoever.

He often wished The judgment of Calvine concerning it (who was a wise and
learned man) in his letter to the L. Protector of England, in Edward the
sixth's time, were more known than it is, in regard of his esteem with such,
who have oppsed it, who does o Quod ad formulam precum and rituum
Ecclesiasticorum valde probo, ut certa illa extet a qua pastoribus discedere in
functione sua non liceat, tam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and
imperitiae, quam ut certius it a constat omnium inter se Ecclesiaerum
consensus; ^ostreme etiam ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundam levitati, qui
Novationes quasdam affectant; sic igitur statum esse Catechismum oportet statam
Sacramentorum administrationem, publicam item precum formulam; vid. Ep. Anno
1546. Protectori Angliae.
much approve that there should be a certain set form of prayer, from which it
should not be lawful for the Pastors to depart in their function, both that
some care might be had of the more simple, and ignorant sort, as also that the
consent of all the Churches within themselves might the more evidently appear.
And lastly, for the prevention of the inconstant levity of some, who are
affecters of novelty, and so advises to have a set Catechism, a set form of
public prayers, and administration of Sacraments.

He was for the Ministers improving of their gifts, and abilties in prayer,
before Sermon and after, according to his own practice: but if that were done,
he saw no reason why the other should be left undone; The Church of God being
like a great family, whereein some being Infants and Children, as well as of
full age, a provision must be had of Milk, as stronger meat, and all ought to
be equally taken care of, even the ignorant, and simpler sort, as well as those
of greater education.

For Ordination, or an ordained Ministry, such was his judgment of the
necessity of it, That he took it to be a fundamental, and one of those
principles of Christian Doctrine, (Hebr. 6. 2.) called, laying on of hands; the
great neglect of which he much lamented, as fearing it would prove to be the
undermining the foundation of our Church, which Mr. Cartwright, in his Answer
to the Rhem. ^est
Commentary upon the place, confirms to the full, and in a higher expression,
as if it were the overthrow of Christianity. And yet, as you have heard, he was
not so severe as to condemn, and disown the Ministry of other reformed
Churches, or refuse Communion with them, because in every particular, as to
some persons usually ordaining, they were defective.

For Episcopacy, he was not wanting with Saint Paul to magnify his own office,
by two several Tractates he has published, (none being more able to defend the
ancient right of it) for which he was by Letters importuned, by some of the
most eminent persons of his own profession, yet how humbly without any
partiality to himself, and the eminent degree he had obtained in it, did he
declare his judgment, is evident by the abovesaid Tractates, and the Letter
before mentioned, And his prudence in the present accommodation of things in
that Treatise of his, viz. The reduction of it to the form of Synodical
Government, for the prevention of that disturbance, which did afterward arise
about it, is as apparent also; if others concerned in these transactions had
been of that moderation, humility, and meekness, the wound given, might have
been healed before it grew incurable.

That the Annual Commemorations of the Articles of the faith, such as the
Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, of our Savior, etc. were fit to be observed
(which Saint Augustine says, in his time were in use through the whole
Catholic Church of Christ) and is now in some Reformed Churches, as a means to
keep them in the memory of the vulgar, (according to the pattern of Gods
injunction to the Israelites in the Old Testament, for the Types of them)
appeared sufficiently to be his judgment, by his then constant preaching upon
those subjects.

The Friday before Easter (i e. the Resurrection, East in old Saxon, signifying
rising) appointed for the remembrance of the Passion of our Savior, he did
duly at Drogheda, in Ireland, observe as a solemn fast, (inclining the rather
to that choice out of Prudence, and the security from censure, by the then
custom of having Sermons beyond their ordinary limit in England;) when (after
the public prayers of the Church) he first preached upon that subject,
extending himself in prayer and Sermon beyond his ordinary time, which we
imitated, who succeeded in the duties of the day, and which being known to be
his constant custom, some from Dublin, as other parts, came to partake of it;
which most excellent Sermons of his upon that occasion, he was by many Godly
Religious persons importuned much for the publishing of them, and his strict
observation of this fast was such, that neither before, or after that
extraordinary pains would he take the least refreshment, till about six a
Clock, and which did not excuse him from Preaching again on Easter day, when we
constantly had a Communion.

That Tractate of his, entitled, The Incarnation of the Son of God, was the
sum of two, or three Sermons, which I heard him preach at Drogheda, at that
Festival, when we celebrate the birth of our Savior.

That he was for the often public reading of the ten Commandments, and the
Creed, before the Congregation, according to the custom of other reformed
Churches, I suppose none can doubt of, and not only that, which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, but the Nicene and Athanasius, his book of the three
Creeds sufficiently persuade it.

What his judgment was of the use of the Lords Prayer, his practice showed it
in the constant concluding of his prayer before Sermon with it. And his
approbation of that gesture of kneeling at the Communion was often apparent
before many witnesses.

For confirmation of Children (which Calvine, Beza, Piscator, and others do
much commend, and wish it were restored among them) he was not wanting in his
observation, as an ancient laudable custom, by which was occasioned the more
frequent having in memory the principles of religion, with the younger sort. At
his first public giving notice of the time of that his intention, (it having
been long disused in Ireland) he made a large speech unto the people of the
antiquity of it, the prudence of the first reformers in purging it from Popish
superstitions, with the end of it, and then such youths presented to him, who
could repeat the public Catechism were confirmed, and so often afterward,
and indeed the apprehension of his piety and holiness moved the Parents much,
to desire that their Children might by him receive that Benediction, which was
seconded with good, and spiritual instruction, that stuck to them when they
came to further years.

The public Catechism, containing the sum of the Creed, the 10.
Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and Doctrine of the Sacraments, despised by
some for its plainness, he thought therefore to be the more profitable for the
vulgar; And at Drogheda in Ireland, gave me orders every Lords day in the
afternoon, (beside the Sermon which was not omitted) to explain it.

He was very exemplary in the careful observation of the Lords day in his
family; The Sermon preached by him in the forenoon, being constantly repeated
in the Chapel by his Chaplain, about five of the Clock in the afternoon, unto
which many of the Town resorted.

For Habits, he observed such, which were accustomed by those of his
profession; for the Organ, and the Quire, he continued them as he found them in
use before him. And as in all things, so in his ordinary wearing Garments, he
was a Pattern of gravity, approving much of a distinctive Apparel in the
Ministry that way.

Lastly, for the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of Ireland, as he was in An.
1634. (being then the Primate) the chief guide in their establishment, so
before he was a Bishop, An. 614. being then a Member of the Convocation, he was
employed as a principal person for the Collecting, and drawing up such Canons
as concerned the Discipline, and Government of the Church, and were to be
treated upon by the Archbishops and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of
Ireland, (diverse taken out of the Statutes, Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, and
the Canons of England, 1571.) which I have lately found, written then with his
own hand. The two first of which being in these words.

1. That no other form of Liturgy, or Divine service, shall be used in any
Church of this Realm; but that, which is established by Law, and comprised in
the book of Common Prayer, and Administrations of Sacraments, etc. 2. That no
other form of Ordination shall be used in this Nation, but which is contained
in the book of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, allowed by Authority,
and hitherto practiced in the Churches of England, and Ireland, make it
apparent that his judgment concerning many of the abovementioned subjects,
was the same in his younger, as Elder years.

And yet notwithstanding all this, there were always some, and still are too
many, who are apt to blurre him with the title of a Puritan, (which is is one
occasion of this enlargement) though in none the sense of it is more uncertain
then in his application, and from none a greater luster would be given unto it
than by his reflection. In whom, with his conformity to the Discipline, Liturgy,
and Articles of the Church of England, labor in writing, constancy in
preaching against the errors of Popery, and such as border upon it, so much
humility, holiness, and charity, and other fruits of the spirit did so
eminently shine. Indeed I have seen diverse Letters, wrote unto him from those,
who heretofore were so aspersed, full of respect, and large expressions of
their love to him, and many receiving satisfaction, have concurred with him in
the abovesaid particulars, his humility and meekness prevailing more then
others strict austerity, but how that said Title could be fixed on him, I am
yet to seek, unless it bear a better sense than the Authors of it will own.

Nay, some of the simpler sort, hearing of a conjunction of Popery and Prelacy,
have thought they could not be parted in him, though most of his Sermons, as
well as his writings, sufficiently clear him that way. I remember many years
agone, the late Archbishop of Canterbury wrote unto him into Ireland, of a
strong rumor then raised of him here at Court, That he was turned a Papist
(presumed to be by a Letter of some Popish Priest from thence.) But it fell out
to be at the same time, or immediately after he had in two Learned Sermons
given his judgment at large, that the Papacy was meant by Babylon, in the 17,
and 18, of the Revelation, which in the return of his answer to that report he
did affirm, and was his judgment to his last, though the reply made to him did
not consent in that.

I am not a stranger to such a design of some of the Romish party, a little
before his death, for the raising of the like rumor, by some Letters wrote
unto him from some of eminency among them, which I disdain any further to
mention.

And thus upon this occasion I have endeavored to prevent for the future, any
more injurious mistakes of him, by an impartial declaring, according to my
knowledge, his judgment, and practice in these particulars, wherein he may
well be esteemed of us (as Erasmus says of Saint Augstine) Vividum quoddam
exemplar Episcopi, omnibus virtutum numeris absolutum. And I wish in these
divided times, wherein each party has a great, and a reverend opinion of him,
they would show it in this, by taking his spirit of moderation for their Copy
to write after, and for my own part, I would to God not only they, but also all
that read, or hear this of him, were both almost, and altogether such as he was.

THE REDUCTION OF EPISCOPACY Unto the Form of Synodical Government, Received in
the ANCIENT CHURCH: By the most Reverend and learned Father of our Church Dr.
JAMES USHER, late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland. Proposed
in the year 1641. as an Expedient for the prevention of those Troubles, which
afterward did arise about the matter of Church Government.

Published by NICHOLAS BERNARD. D. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of
Grayes-Inne, London.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini. 1658.

TO THE READER.
THE Original of this was given me by the most Reverend Primate, some few
years before his death, wrote throughout with his own hand, and of late I have
found it subscribed by himself, and Doctor Holseworth, and with a Marginal Note
at the first Proposition, which I have also added. If it may now answer the
expectation of many pious, and prudent Persons, who have desired the publishing
of it, as a seasonable preparative to some moderation in the midst of those
extremes, which this Age abounds with, it will attain the end intended by the
Author: And it is likely to be more operative, by the great reputation he had,
and has in the hearts of all good men, being far from the least suspicion to
be biased by any privivate ends, but only aiming at the reducing of Order,
Peace, and Unity, which God is the Author of, and not of confusion. For the
recovery of which, it were to be wished, that such as do consent in
Substantials, for matter of Doctrine, would consider of some conjunction in
point of Discipline, that private interest and circumstantials, might not keep
them thus far asunder.

Grayes-Inne, October. 13. 1657. N. BERNARD.

The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government, received in
the ancient Church; proposed in the year 1641, as an Expedidient for the
prevention of those troubles, which afterward did arise about the matter of
Church Government.
Episcopal and Presbyterial Government conjoined.
BY Order of the Church of England, all Presbyters are charged The book of
Ordination.
to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same; And that
they might the better understand what the Lord had commanded therein, Ibid. ex
Act. 20, 27, 28.
the exhortation of Saint Paul, to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus is
appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination; Take heed unto
your selves, and to all the flock among whom the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers to (...). So taken in Mat. 2. 6. and Rev. 12. 5. and 19. 15.
Rule the Congregation of God, which he has purchased with his blood.

Of the many Elders, who in common thus ruled the Church of Ephesus, there was
one President, whom our Savior in his Epistle unto this Church in a peculiar
manner styles Rev. 2. 1.
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: and Ignatius in another Epistle written
about twelve years after unto the same Church, calls the Bishop thereof.
Betwixt the Bishop and the Presbytery of that Church, what an harmonius consent
there was in the ordering of the Church Government, the same Ignatius does
fully there declare, by the Presbytery, with 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Saint Paul, understanding the Community of the rest of the Presbyters, or
Elders, who then had a hand not only in the delivery of the Doctrine and
Sacraments, but also in the Administration of the Discipline of Christ: for
further proof of which, we have that known testimony of Tertullian in his
general Apology for Christians. Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes and
censura divina; nam and judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud cert^s de Dei
conspectu, summunque futuri judicii praejudicium est, si qui^ ita deliquerit,
ut a communicatione orationis. and conventuss, and omnis sancti commecii
relegetur* praesident probati quique seniores, honorem istum non pretio, sed
Testimonio adepti. Tertul. Apologet. cap. 39.
In the Church are used exhortations, chastisements, and divine censure; for
judgment is given with great advice as among those, who are certain they are
in the sight of God, and in it is the chiefest foreshewing of the judgment
which is to come, if any man have so offended, that he be banished from the
Communion of prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all holy fellowship. The
Presidents that bear rule therein are certain approved Elders, who have
obtained this honor not by reward, but by good report, who were no other (as
he himself intimates) elsewhere but (...) de a^io ^um manibus quam
praesidentium ^^mimus, Id de corona ^ilitis, cap. 3.
those from whose hands they used to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

For with the Bishop, who was the chief President (and therefore styled by the
same Tertullian in another place, Dandi quidem Raptis^i habet jus summus
sacerdos; qui (...) Episcopus: ^^hinc Presbytari and Diaco^i. Id. de Bapt. cap.
17.
Summus Sacerdos for distinction sake) the rest of the dispensers of the Word
and Sacraments joined in the common Government of the Church; and therefore,
where in matters of Ecclesiastical Judicature, Cornetius Bishop of Rome used
the received form of Omni actu ad ^e perlato placuit contrahi Presbyterium,
Cornel apud Cyp. epist. 46.
gathering together the Presbytery; of what persons that did consist, Cyprian
sufficiently declares, when he wishes him to read his Letters Florentissimo
alio cle^^^cum praesidenti Cyprian epist. 55. ad Cornel.
to the flourishing clergy: which there did preside, or rule with him: The
presence of the Clergy being thought to be so requisite in matters of
Episcopal audience, that in the fourth Council of Cartbage it was concluded,
Ut Episcopus nullius causam audiet absque praesentia Clericorum suorum,
alioquin irrita erit sententia Episcopi nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur,
Council. Carthag. IV. cap. 23.
That the Bishop might hear no man's cause without the presence of (...) ^lergy:
and that otherwise the (...) sentence should be void, u^^^sse it were confirmed
by the presence of the Clergy: which we find also to be inserted into the
Canons of Excerption. Egberti, c. 43.
Egbert, who was Archbishop of York in the Saxon times, and afterward into
the body of the 15. q. 7. cap. Nullus.
Cannon Law it self.

True it is, that in our Church this kind of Presbyterial Government has been
long disused, yet seeing it still professes that every Pastor has a right to
rule the Church (from whence the mame of Rector also was given at first unto
him) and to administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the restraint of the exercise of that right
proceeds only from the custom now received in this Realm; no man can doubt,
but by another Law of the Land, this hinderance may be well removed. And how
easily this ancient form of Government by the united suffrages of the Clergy
might be (...) again, and with what (...) of alteration the Synodical
conventions of the Pastors of every Parish might be accorded with the
Presidency of the Bishops of each Diocese and Province, the indifferent Reader
may quickly perceive by the perusal of the ensuing Propositions.

I.
In every Parish the Rector, or Incumbent Pastor, together with the How the
Church might Synodically be Governed, Archbishops and Bishops being still
retained,
Churchwardens and Sides-men, may every week take notice of such as live
scandalously in that Cougregation, who are to receive such several admonitions
and reproofs, as the quality of their offense shall deserve; And if by this
means they cannot be reclaimed, they may be presented to the next monthly
Synod; and in the mean time debarred by the Pastor from access unto the Lords
Table.

II.
Whereas by a Statute in the six and twentieth year of King Henry the eighth
(revived in the first year of Queen Elizabeth) Suffragans are appointed to be
erected in 26 several places of this Kingdom; the number of them might very
well be conformed unto the number of the several Rural Deanries, into which
every Diocese is subdivided; which being done, the Suffragan supplying the
place of those, who in the ancient Church were called Chorepiscopi, might every
month assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or Incumbent Pastors within the
Precinct, and according to the major part of their voices, conclude all matters
that shall be brought into debate before them.

To this Synod the Rector and Churchwardens might present such impenitent
persons, as by admonitions and suspension from the Sacrament would not be
reformed; who if they should still remain contumacious and incorrigible, the
sentence of Excommunication might be decreed against them by the Synod, and
accordingly be executed in the Parish where they lived. Hitherto also all
things that concerned the Parochial Ministers might be referred, whether they
did touch their Doctrine, or their conversation 'as also the censure of all new
Opinions, Heresies, and Schisms, which did arise within that Circuit; with
liberty of Appeal, if need so require, unto the Diocesan Synod.

III.
The Diocesan Synod might be held, once, or twice in the year, as it should be
thought most convenient: Therein all the Suffragans, and the rest of the
Rectors, or Incumbent Pasters (or a certain select number of of every Deanery)
within the Diocese might meet, with whose consent, or the major part of them,
all things might be concluded by the Bishop, or (...), id est,
superintendentes; unde and nomen Episcopi trastum est, Hieron, epist. 86. ad
Evagrium.
Saperintendent (call him whether you will) or in his absence, by one of the
Suffragans; whom he shall depute in his stead to be Moderator of that Assembly.

Here all matters of greater moment might be taken into consideration, and the
Orders of the monthly Synodes revised, and (if need be) reformed: and if here
also any matter of difficulty could not receive a full determination: it might
be referred to the next Provincial, or National Synod.

IV.
The Provincial Synod might consist of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such
other of the Clergy as should be elected out of every Diocese within the
Province, the Archbishop of either Province, might be the Moderator of this
meeting, (or in his room some one of the Bishops appointed by him) and all
matters be ordered therein by common consent as in the former Assemblies.

This Synod might be held every third year, and if the Parliament do then sit
(according to the Act of a Triennial Parliament) both the Archbishops and
Provincial Synods of the Land might join together, and make up a National
Council: wherein all Appeals from infer^^ur Synods might be received, all their
Acts examined, and all Ecclesiastical Constitutions which concern the state of
the Church of the whole Nation established.

WE are of the judgment That the form of Government here proposed is not in
any point repugnant to the Scripture; and that the Suffragans mentioned in the
second Proposition, may lawfully use the power both of Jurisdiction and
Ordination, according to the Word of God, and the practice of the ancient
Church.

Ja. Armachanus. Rich. Holdsworth.


AFter the proposal of this, An. 1641. Many Quaeries were made, and doubts in
point of conscience resolved by the Primate, diverse passages of which he heth
left under his own hand, showing his pious endeavors to peace and unity, which
how far it then prevailed, is out of season now to relate, only I wish it might
yet be thought of to the repairing of the breach, which this division has
made, and that those, who are by their Office Messengers of Peace, and whose
first word to cach house should be peace, would earnestly promote it, within
the walls of their Mother Church, wherein they were educated, and not thus by
contending about circumstantials lose the substance, and make our selves a prey
to the adversary of both, who rejoice in their hearts, saying, So would we have
it.

Which are the Primates works, and which not.
A Catalogue of the Works already printed of Doctor James Usher, late
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland, which are owned by him.
In Latin.
DE Ecclesiarum Christianarum successione and Statu. Quarto, Londini, 1613.
Epistolarum Hibernicarum Sylloge, 4o. Dublinii 1630. Historia Goteschalci, 4o.
Dublinii 1631. De Primordiis Ecclesiarum Britanicarum, 4o. Dublinii 1639.
Ignatii Epistolae cum annotationibus, 4o. Oxoniae 1645. De Anno Solari
Macedonum, 8o. Londini 1648. Annals Veteris Testamenti, Fol. Londini 1650.
Annals Novi Testamenti usque ad extremum Templi and Reipublicae Judaicae
excidium, etc. Fol. Londini 2654. Epistola ad Capellum de Variantibus textus
Hebraici Lectionibus, 4o. Londinii 1652. De Graeca Septuaginta Interpretum
versione Syntagma 4o. Londini 1655.
These four last are sold by John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.

In English.
AN Answer to a challenge made by the Jesuit Malone in Ireland, Anno 1631. A
Sermon preached before the House of Commons, Febr. 18. 1618. A Declaration of
the visibility of the Church, preached in a Sermon before King James, June 20.
1624. A Speech delivered in the Castle-Chamber in Dublin, the 22. of November,
1622. The Religion professed by the ancient Irish and Britains, 4o. 1631.
These five are bound together in Quarto. Immanuel, or the Incarnation of the
Son of God, 4o. Dublin. 1639. A Geographical Description of the Lesser Asia,
4o. Oxford, 1644. The judgment of Doctor Reynolds, touching the Original of
Episcopacy more largely confirmed out of Antiquity, An. 1641. His Discourse of
the Original of Bishops and Metropolitanes, in 4o. Oxford, 1644. His small
Catechism re-viewed, 12o. London, 1654. His aforesaid Annals of the Old and
New Testament; with the Synchronismus of Heathen Story to the destruction of
Jerusalem, translated out of Latin into English now at the Press, Fol. to be
sold by John Crook, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
In regard there have been, and are diverse books printed, which go under the
name of the late Archbishop of Armagh, but are not his, and more may be
obtruded to the injury of him, I have thought fit, at the request of the
Printer, to give the Reader this advertisement following.

IN Anno^ 1640. There was a book printed, entitled the Bishop of Armaghs
direction to the house of Parliament, concerning the Liturgy and Episcopal
Government, and Anno 1641. Another book entitled Vox Hiberniae, being some
pretended notes of his, at a public fast. Both these at his Petition were
suppressed by order from the House of Lords and Commons, 11. Feb. 1641. and I
hope will not be revived.

In Anno 1651. A book called (A Method for Meditation, or a manual of Divine
duties, which most injuriously is printed in his name, but is none of his,
which he directed me then to declare publicly as from him, yet in 1657. It is
again reprinted to his great dishonor.

For his small Catechism the Reader is to take notice, that there was a false
one Printed without his knowledge, and is still sold for his. The injury he
received by it compelled him to review it, with an Epistle of his own before
it, which is the mark to know the right Edition, though being framed for his
private use in his younger years, (about 23.) he had no intention of it for
the public.

If any Sermon-Notes taken from him have been Printed in his lifetime under his
name, or shall be hereafter) which diverse have of late attempted) The Reader is
to take notice that it was against his mind, and that they are disowned, by
him, which as he endeavored to his utmost to suppress, while he was living,
so it was his fear to be injured in it after his death.

For a further confirmation of which, I shall give you part of a Letter of his,
while he was Bishop of Mead, (upon the like intention of a Printer, who had
gotten into his hands some Notes of his Sermons, said to be preached by him in
London, and was about to publish them) which he wrote to Doctor Featly,
Chaplain to the then Archbishop of Canterbury for the stopping of them, in
these words.

I beseech you to use all your power to save me from that disgrace, which
undiscreet and covetous men go about to fasten upon me, or else I must be
driven to protest against their injurious dealings with me, and say as Donatus
once did, Mala illis sit, qui mea festinant edere ante me.

But I repose cenfidence in you, that you will take order that so great a wrong
as this may not be done unto me. Remember me to worthy Doctor Goad, and forget
not in your prayers.

Dublin, Sept. 16. 1622. Your most assured loving friend, and fellow labourer
J. A. MEDENSIS.


THat book entitled the sum and substance of Christian religion, some of the
materials with the Method are his, collected by him in his younger years, for
his own private use: but, being so unpolished, defective, and full of mistakes,
he was much displeased at the publishing of it in his name. And though it be
much commended at home, and by Ludovicus Crocius abroad, yet that he did disown
it as it is now set forth, this Letter following, wrote to Mr. John Downham,
(who caused it to be printed) does sufficiently confirm, as follows.

SIR,
YOu may be pleased to take notice, that the Catechism you write of is none of
mine, but transcribed out of Mr, Cartwrights Catechism, and Mr. Crooks, and
some other English Divines, but drawn together in one Method, as a kind of
Common-place-book, where other men's judgments and reasons are simply laid
down, though not approved in all points by the Collector; besides that the
Collection (such as it is) being lent abroad to diverse in scattered sheets,
has for a great part of it miscarried, the one half of it as I suppose (well
nigh) being no way to be recovered, so that so imperfect a thing Copied
verbatim out of others, and in diverse places dissonant from mine own judgment,
may not by any means be owned by me; But if it shall seem good to any
industrious person to cut off what is weak and superfluous therein, and supply
the wants thereof, and cast it into a new mould of his own framing, I shall be
very well content that he make what use he pleases of any the materials
therein, and set out the whole in his own name: and this is the resolution of

May 13. 1645. Your most assured loving friend JA. ARMACHANUS.


A Book entitled Confessions and Proofs of Protestant Divines of Reformed
Churches for Episcopacy, etc. though it be a very Learned one, yet it is not
his; Only that of the Original of Bishops and Metropolitans (Frequently bound
up with the former) is owned by him. unto which he was earnestly moved by a
Letter from Doctor Hall, the late Reverend and Learned Bishop of Norwich, then
Bishop of Exeter; which, showing the great esteem he had of him, is annexed as
follows.

To the most Reverend Father in God, and my most Honored Lord, the Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland.
Most Reverend, and my most worthily Honored, Lord.
THat which fell from me yesterday, suddenly and transcursively, has since
taken up my after-midnight thoughts, and I must crave leave, what I then moved,
to importune, that your Grace would be pleased to bestow one sheet of paper
upon these distracted times, in the subject of Episcopacy, showing the
Apostolical Original of it, and the grounds of it from Scripture, and the
immediately succeeding antiquity; Every line of it coming from your Graces
hand, would be super rotas suas: as Solomon's expression is, very Apples of
Gold, with Pictures of Silver, and more worth than volumes from us: Think, that
I stand before you like the Man of Macedon, and that you hear me say, Come and
help us: And as your Grace is wholly given up to the common good of the Church,
say, whether you can deny it? and if please your Grace to take your rise from
my humble motion to express your self in this question, wherein I am publicly
interested, or otherwise, to profess your voluntary resolutions for the
settling of many, either misled, or doubting Souls, it will be the most
acceptable, and (I hope) the most successful work that your Grace has ever
undertaken; It was my earnest motion long ago to ((...)) to entreat this labor
from your Grace; which now comes from my meannesse; your Gracious humility will
not even from so low hands disregard it; with my zealous suit, and hopeful
expectation of a yiedling answer, I humbly take leave, and am

Your Graces humbly, and heartily devoted JOS. EXON.


FINIS.

