VOX HIBERNAE OR Rather the voice of the Lord from IRELAND: A Sermon Preached
in Saint Peter's Church at Westminster, before diverse of the Right Honorable,
the Lords of the upper House in the High Court of PARLIAMENT, on the last
public Fast day, being Wednesday the 22th. of December. 1641.

Wherein the miserable estate of the Kingdom of Ireland at this present is
laid open, and the people and Kingdom of England, earnestly exhorted to turn
to Almighty God by true repentance least the same Judgments or worse fall upon
us.

By the laborious and reverend Doctor JAMES USHER Bishop of Armagh and Primate
of Ireland.

Luke 13. 4, 5. Think you that those 18. upon whom the Tower in Siloe fell,
and slew them, were sinners above all men in Jerusalem.

5. I tell you nay, but except you amend your lives you shall likewise perish.

Printed at London for John Nicolson, under Saint Martins Church within
Ludgate. 1642.

VOX HJBERNIAE.
LUKE. 13. 5. Except ye repent you shall all likewise perish.
A Harsh Text you will say, and yet notwithstanding uttered by him that was the
Merchant of men, he that was the good Physician that came to cure us. Who as
he testifies of himself in the 12. os Saint John, that he came not to judge
the world, but to condemn the world. And yet he that was the Savior of the
World means to save none without faith and repentance, and therefore he tells
us; That except we repent, we shall all likewise perish.

The occasion of the words was from a matter that was told unto him, a story
that men told as a thing that no way appertained unto them. Pilate he had
mingled the blood of the Galileans with their sacrifices: now ths Pharisees
they heard of it, and this they tell as news to our Savior Christ, as if it
had no way touched them, and so our Savior seeing they took not the matter as
to themselves for examples unto them tells them that whatsoever Judgments they
did see executed upon others, the very self same thing would be to them, if
they did not repent.

To apply it unto our selvee:
It is the case of our neighbor nation, what are they greater sinners then we,
I tell you nay, the very same Judgments that fall upon them shall fall upon
you unless you prevent it by timely repentance. These judgments are sent as
examples and instructions unto us. Those that fell with their carcasses in the
wilderness are examples unto us that we might not run unto the same excess
of riot. The Lord might have made you examples unto Ireland, as well as he has
made Ireland an example unto you. As the Lord says in the Prophecy of Hosea
4. 11. I have overthrown some of you as God did overthrow Sodom and Gomorah,
and ye are as a firebrand snatched out of the burning, and yet you returned not.
God has overthrown that land especially the best of the land, according as he
did to Germany; And now he is come nearer to us; The miseries and calamities
which they endure were too tedious to relate.

Et animus reminiscere horret luctusque refugit.
And as if God did intend yet to show us his judgments more near to us: the
fire breaks out in that corner of the nation that we least feared, which
should cause us to repent in Sackcloath and ashes; We know it is the case of
our Sovereign that we should take this to heart: We know that David when the
judgments of God was upon him in his child, then he fasted and humbled his
soul with fasting; yea and is he did when affections were upon others of his
Brethren, that were no great friends unto him. We see it also in Nehemiah,
that he hearing such news as we now hear from Ireland, Nehemiah 1. 3.
Nehemiah asked how his brethren the children of Israel were, as he was told
that they were in great afflicton.

This was the news, how does he take it. And it came to pass when I heard
these words I sat down and wept and mourned, and fasted, and prayed before
the God of heaven. This is the sense that all the members of the body should
have one of another. They should call upon God one for another. God makes this
an example unto us, that if we do not repent, the same judgment or a greater
shall fall upon us.

The thing which we are to do is to repent; The Physician he tells us the
danger that we are in, if we do not repent, and he gives us a proviso that if
will take this course notwithstanding the evil that is against us, he will
forgive us if we do repent.

And here we will see first, the danger we are in.

The danger is perishing, either repent or there is no possibility of
salvation, noe prevention of Gods judgments in this world, nor in the world to
come without repentance; think not that these words are in vain, think not
that these words are spoken in vain, It Is not a bare and cold profession of
Religion that shall save you, if you do not repent you shall perish, and be
destroyed.

Beloved, we must Consider with our selves, that God is merciful when he will
pardon a sinner. But when he intends to leave them, he is not merciful if they
do not repent: And thou deceivest thy self, and make an Idol of thy God, if
thou think that he is so made up of mercy, that he has forgotten to be just.
The Lord will break the hairie scalpe of them that commit iniquity.

Say not I shall be delivered, notwithstanding I go on in these courses, the
Lord will not have mercy upon that man. A man that goes on in iniquity, the
Lord will not have mercy upon such an one, his mercy appears to them that are
weary of their sins, and come unto him, what is it that makes the sin of the
Holy Ghost so terrible as it is there described. Heb. 6. 6. It is impossible.

If they shall fall away to renew them again unto repentance; That Is the
deadly sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost. But what what is it I ask
thee, that makes this sin so deadly? why because he that commits this sin
is not renewed by repentance; If he were renewed by repentance, this sin
against the Holy Ghost should be forgiven him, do not think that the sin of
man is above the mercy of God, do not think that any sin that mortal man can
commit, shall outvie the blood of Christ, the sin against the Holy Ghost
should not be deadly, except the point lie in this, he cannot be renewed by
repentance, so that if thou be not renewed by repentance, thou art in the state
of him that is guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost, of one miserable and
irrecoverable, many things I have to speak, but I see that my time is but
short, and therefore I must be brief.

You see the first thing, the danger is inevitable, no way to escape it but if
we repent, the Lord will repent of the judgment against us, but if we repent
not, there is no hope to escape either in this world, or in the world to come;
But I come to the duty of the day.

For the work of this day fasting is nothing but the outward way, yet it is
the only way to repentance, do not think that you come to hear an ordinary
Sermon God expects it at thy hands, that thou should examine what thou have
heard, whatsoever thou have heard this day, out of this place of thy duty, the
Lord looks thou should do it speedily, Now is the Axe laid to the root of
the tree, and therefore every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be
hewn down and cast into the fire. Now, why not before? now that is now the
preaching of the Gospel comes to you, now the Lord exhorts you by the danger,
now he shows you the way how to repent, and to escape the wrath that is to
come. Now if you do not repent, Gods sword is drawn, the Axe is laid to the
root of the tree, and God will cut you down. Now the Lord he threatens you,
these things only that you might repent. Therefore as God says in Hosea; I
will do thus. How? I will do to you, as I have done to them in Ireland. I will
do to you, as I have done to Sodom and Gomorrah. And because I will do thus
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God oh Israel, I am ready to strike, and that
I may not strike thee, Prepare to meet thy God. Those men that are our enemies
they strike before they give us warning, but says God, therefore I will do
thus unto thee, and because I will do thus, do thou meet me with repentance,
Psalm. 103. ver. 12. Except you return the Lord is preparing of his arrows.
Psalm. 103. ver. 12. Why does he not shoot, presently he must bend his bow, and
draw out his arrows, and tell you of it that you may remember.

Remember this now, now that God calls you all to repentance, now if you neglect
the practice of it, the Axe is laid to the root of the tree.

But now to come to the point of the act of repentance, I will not stand much
to show you what repentance is, but to show you what you are to do. As you must
not come before the Lord and say, Lord we repent us of our sins, and mock God,
never intending it, never do it upon the peril of his indignation, of his
wrath that shall burn against you in the world to come. Know that these are
not vain words, for Repentance; there are two parts of it, and the Lord does
expect that both should be performed by us.

We read in the Scripture of repentance for sin, and we read of repentance
from sin.

So the Apostle to the Corinthians, says thus; least my God should humble me
before you; for there are many that repent not of their abomination. and Acts.
8. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness.

Repentance has two looks like Ianus with two faces it looks backward, and
it looks forward, when it looks backwards it looks upon the thing that is
done, and because that is done, cannot be undone, therefore it weeps, and
wailes, and greives, that thing is done to Gods dishonor, which cannot be
undone, that is repentance when a man looks upon sin, rending himself, and is
sorrowful for what is past, that's but the first part of repentance.

The second is that, that looks upon sin with distaste, it is abominable
unto him: It is not hereafter I will not swear, I will not be light and
wanton, I will not be evil, but there must be an hatred of all sin, you that
love the Lord hate evil; there must not be only a ceasing from the Act of
sin, but there must be a reformation of the will, and of the heart, to the
utter obhorring to the utter hating of sin.

Concerning the former of these, Repentance when it looks upon sin that is
past, the sins that I have committed that many have not regarded for the
fornications that you have committed, you must understand that here the work
of Repenting is humiliation. But (mark it) not an humiliation wherein a man is
mere passive, or is humbled by some great affliction that is fallen upon him.
The judgment of God may come to a man, the stoutest man and humble him, but
that is not an humiliation of Repentance.

The humiliation which Repentance brings it is an ^ctive passion: the stoutest
man that is, when Gods hand that has touched him, he will cry, and groan, and
lament, and yet he is no penitent for all this, but repentance it is an Act I
do my self, I Act it my self. Rend your hearts and not your garments they did
rend them with their own hands: so to have a rent heart, it must be an Act of
my self upon my self, I will not stay till Gods cross fall upon me and crush
me, but I will labor to take up the Cross; I will do it by God grace also,
for as you heard well in the morning, nothing but the Holy Ghost can work In a
Sermon preached by D. Williams Archbishop of York.
this in your hearts, yet God does not work with us as we do with a spade.
The Spirit of God makes use of nature, not as Agent but as a sujbect wherein
grace is; and if there were not this the spirit could work without it.

It is said of our Savior Christ in the case of Lazarus, when he groaned he
was troubled, if you do observe the reading in the Margent, it is, And Jesus
troubled himself, Luke 15. And so in in his other sufferings, Phil. 3. 20. He
offered himself; so that this humiliation must be in obedience. Humble
yourselves under the mighty hand of God, and he will raise you up so that the
Humilitation, it must be a voluntary work, having its original from Gods
spirit, That seeing there is no other remedy in the world, to show thy hating of
it; thou will take an holy revenge, thou will break that stony heart of thine,
and thou will not suffer it to be obdurate against the Lord, but howsoever God
never does this against a man's will. Heeris the point, the humilitation which
the sinner has, it is an act of his will; He does not only suffer as those
that are struck by the hand of God, so Judas might have repented, but that
comes out of a kind heart to Almighty God, that it breaks the heart. Objection


But beloved, e^e I go further, we will examine wherein this humilitation does
stand. Answer.


Humilitation stands in a general process, which we make against our selves.
If we will judge our selves, we shall not be judged by him, so that this
Humiliation is a Judicial process against our selves, we will make our
hearts throb, we will make our eyes flow forth into tears, when We look
back upon our sins committed. This is the Humilitation of a penitent sinner;
so in this case a man comes to sum up all the powers and faculties of his
soul, the will, the understandng, the conscience, the sense, it will require
all thy power, and all thy strength to do it. Thy memory that must draw up the
Indenture, thou must consider that God will open all when he comes to judge
thee; Thou swearest, thou have forgotten it presently, but God has written it
in a book; thy conscience shall remember every oath that thou have sworn,
every idle word that thou have spoke, you see God. Psalm. 50. Says; He will set
all our sins in order before us, he will rub up this dull memory of ours, we
must draw unto our remembrance the multitude of the sins that we have
committed against God. It is the speech of the Prophet Esah, call to your
remembrance the sins that you have committed; and if you would rub up your
remembrances, and do as stewards that have a bad memory, make it their
business to cast and account every night, what they lay out the day before:
and so if we would every day before we go to bed call our selves to an
account, how we have spent that day, our memories should not be so short, we
must know how to set sin before the sight of Almighty God, Briefly thus.

Look first in thy own debt, a debt that thou did commit before thou wast
born, begin at the highest, what was that? Do not you know that many men have
been arrested, and undone for debts, for which as we say they did never
drink; a debt may be owing by the son for his Father, after that his father
is dead, thou art in the loins of Adam, if Adam had stood, thou should have
stood, bring he is fallen, thou fallest with him: we all hang upon Adam as the
stringe that the Prophet speaks of; that as a bunch of keys hung upon a
string, when that the string is broken, then all the keys fall down, with him
we all hang, and with him we all fall; the sin acted by Adams justice imputed
unto thee as thou art in his loins.

Again in the second place, by reason of this imputation of Adams sin unto
thee, thou art deprived of that image in which Thou and He were created;
as soon as ever Adam acted the sin, presently Adam was spoiled; His
understanding was darkened, his will was rebellious, his conscience was
disordered, only here was the difference, Adam was despoyled of it, after he
had continued long in the world, thou as soon as ever soul and body were
conjoined together, God considers thee in Adam to have reached forth thy hand
to the forbidden fruit, and therefore the same thing that befell Adam, that he
was spoiled of his original righteousness, the same befalls thee, the Prophet
David in the 51. Psalm. He was guilty of murder, and adultery yet for all this
he says, he was borne in sin, and do you not think he did it to extenuate
his sin and iniquity, that he was borne in sin, and concelved in it, as if a
man should do me harm, because it was natural unto him, he could not abide
me, should not I think him the more wicked, so the sins against God are very
heinous; the root from whence this adultery proceeded, and this murder came,
it came from the corruption of his ill nature.

As we deal with Toades and Foxes and Vermin, we kill and destroy them, when
they do no hurt, we think they may do ill, because the nature of them is to
do harm; so God he finds us such Toades, such things, even before we are
out of the shell, and therefore God may justly deal with us so: so that God
may take a young Child and cast it into Hell as soon as it is borne. If God
will do this for the first sin, Death went over them that did not sin
after the similitude of the transgression of Adam. Death went over those that
committed no natural sin, as Adam did. Consider this, that when we were
first borne by reason of the seed o^ Rebellion that is in us, if God had
marked us as soon as we came out of the womb, he might justly have committed
us to Hell, begin with the vanity of your childhood. Consider with yourselves
how soon that evil seeds spring forth into fruit. Consider how in its rife
in a child before you think it has understanding. Consider that which comes
from Pride, frowardness, wrangling, and wantonness. Look afterward when
thou come to thy riper age, when thou wast married, when thou wast without
government. Divide thy life into several parts, all these things may serve to
set before us, those sins that we have committed, not hiding them, not
concealing them with Adam. To play the part of the Kings Attorney not only to
bring an evidence of the fact, but to show how heinous and grievous it is. And
beloved, when this has been done both in sins of commission and (which will
break any ones heart to think) of the sins of omission; the innumerable
good things which God has commanded me to do, yet I have neglected them, nay
rather there proceeds words that arc so far from tending to edification,
that they are corrupt words, as the Apostle speaks; this I told unto you, Thus
you must do, the more of those sins you put before you, the more incited you
should show your selves: My sins are more then the hairs of my head, and in
another place, my sins are a burrhen too heavy for me to bear: so that this
is the part of a penitent sinner, to set his sins before him, and then to
desire God to forgive his secret sins, so draw them before thy heart, before
Almighty God, and condemn them, and then God will not condemn thee; when we
have done thus, this appertains to the first part wherein I indite my self,
these and these things I have done, these and these things God has committed
to me, I have received much grace of God in vain; I have abused my Talent and
hid it in a napkin; these be for the Indictment.

But then we must come to the trial, when my memory has brought them to me,
and when my understanding has considered them and weighed them in the balance
of the sanctuary, and I consider that they are sins to be aggraated not only
by the Law but by the Gospel, then my confience presently like a piece
overcharged recoyles me backward, and I consider the weight of them that they
are a burden to heavy for me to bear. Then the soul strikes the heart, this
is my case; considering what the law has said, considering what the Gospel
has said: Alas if I had not committed these sins while I was under grace,
under the Minister of the Gospel, when Christ invited me to come unto him; when
he bids me cast this burden upon his shoulders, and he would ease me, I will
not do it, and though that he comes with peace and with safety we will not
receive him; as you heard in the morning; set before you the representation of
the true Crucifix. The lamb of God that was slain in the law* He that offered
him was to lay his hand upon the head of the Lamb and confess his sins over
him, and then the Lamb was slain. Now consider this, my swearing and my lying
and my vanity, my pride in apparel, and all my sins, ^ll are laid upon the
Lambs head that was never guilty of these vanities, the Lamb of God, he was
slain though thou can not groan for thy sins, thou can not weep for
thy sins Look, then look upon Christ, he sought God with strange cries and
tears, not in regard of the punishment, though thou did not cry for thy
sins, he had strong cries and tears. Phil 5. And observe the highest cry.
My God, my God why have thou forsaken me.

You that think sin to be so small a matter, consider your sin as it lay
upon Christ, strong cries you see it cost him. Consider him lying graveling
upon the ground, as it were panting for life, sweating blood before his Father;
crying, Father if it be possible take this cup from me: As if he should say,
if hou wilt show only mercy pass by thy judgment all this time; with cries
and with strong tears, and the third time cries upon the Cross, My God, my
God why have thou forsaken me. When all the earth had a black Mantle cast over
it, and darkness over him that was the light of the World, and as great a
darkness in him, his soul was darkened within him. To consider these things
is able to break the heart of any man that has the lest spark of grace in
him.

But then consider with thy self thus; What has sin done to me? First, it
has defiled thee, 1 Cor. 5. 1. He wishes us that we would keep our selves
from all defilement of body and spirit. That which goes into the mouth of a man
defiles not a man, but that which goes out, for, from within, even out o the
heart of man proceeds evil thoughts. Luke 7. 21. 22. Adultery,
Fornications, Murders, Theft, Covetuousnesse, Wickedness, Deceit,
Uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbiting, pride, foolishness.

There is no sin that thou committest but it bespots thy soul. Did you but
see the soul of a sinner what dishonor and slain brings to it, it is like a
filthy spot in pure white Lawne; your sins they have made a separation
between you and your God. They are now in a state of enmity, (says God) my
soul does loathe them, and their soul does loath me. There is an utter
s^paration between God and us by sin: And after all this comes God and
inlarges thee from Satan that possessed thee, but the Prince of this world is
cast out; who is the Prince of the world, the Prince that rules in the children
of Disobedience. And this is the Judgment which our Savior brings the Prince
of this world, but unt^ll we be renewed by repentance, still where God comes
out the Devil comes in. A man is so possessed that for his life he has not the
power to resist the least temptation of the Devil, but as fast as he tempts he
committs sin, and then comes Gods Judgment: you have it in Deuteronomy. 28. your
sins are a breach of covenant with Almighty God, and do you think that Covenant
breakers, breakers of Covenant shall escape. They are put amongst the black
guard in the first of the Romans, Adulterers, swearers, truce breakers, I will
send among you plagues, the judgments that are not written in this book: Why
says Turtullian, Scipturae plenitudinem habent, The Scriptures have a
fullness, I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandments are
exceeding large. And yet there are unwritten judgments. The Scripture which is
perfect, it does not contain all the judgments which God will send upon
sinners.

And hence, from the consideration of this comes loathing of a man's self, and
a godly sorrow, these are the affections we should have, when we have produced
our faults, and the law has shown the misery we are liable to by the
committing of them, then a man come to abhor himself as Job says. Therefore
I repent and obhorre my self in dust and ashes: you see this abhorring a man's
self it is a concomitant of true repentance. Those that be in the dark,
though they be naked, they are not ashamed: why? because they see no light, but
when the light of Gods Spirit has discovered to a man his foulenes and his
shame, then they do repent and abhor themselves, Ezekiel. 26. God exhorts them
that they should loath themselves as a sign of repentance. Shame you know it
is a part of the judgment against sin, for Daniel the last chapter and the
second verse, Some shall rise to shame and to everlasting contempt. Now when we
come to judge ourselves that we be not judged of God, we must bring ourselves
to this shame. And as Ezra when he came by fasting and repentance to God, he
says, I am ashamed to come before thee, not for his own sins, but for those
among whom he was: The best fruit that thou can reap of sin, though it be
repented is shame. The Prophet Zephaniah says, the wicked know no shame. Ier.
6. 15. were they ashamed when they had done these things, they were not
ashamed, neither could they blush, when thou have done these things and
considerest them, art thou ashamed of them. When thou considerest of them
between God and thy own conscience do thou blush? You that were not ashamed
to commit the sin, now that God has opened your eyes, see whether you can
blush, and be ashamed before Almighty God for committing these sins.

But then there is sorrow which is the last thing, which sorrow must be true,
and from the heart; the inward sorrow it is contrition, it is the rending and
breaking of the heart, when a man is ready to tear himself in pieces, because
that he has offended so gracious a God, that has done so much for us. This is
that which the Apostles calls that same sorrow which is according to God, 1.
Iam.

All Israel wept before the Lord, suppose there were no Hell, no damnation, no
outward judgment, yet as long as there is a God in Heaven, I cannot but be
sorrow for my sin and when thou can do thus, it is an argument thou art a
penitent sinner, and this is done by fasting and weeping, fasting and weeping
they are things that are joined together. 1. Sam. 7. 6. It is said that when
the Philistims came against them, they fasted and powered down water by the
Lord, that is they made or wept such abundance of tears, as if water had been
powered down, and so Judge. 2. 4. When the Angel came to Bochim and told the
people of their sins, the people lift up their voice and wept.

Beloved, Beloved do not our dry eyes this day testify that we have little
sorrow, remember that place in Zachary, they shall look upon him whom they
have pierced. Zach. 12. 10. And they shall lament for him, as one mourns for
his only Son, and be sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first borne.

Doft thou weep for thy son, and not for crucifying of thy Savior; It is not
set down that sorrow shall be in them, but they shall be sorrow, to show the
greatness of it, as though they were steeped and soaked in it, and such a
sorrow as was in the valley of Megiddo, when Josiah died, in memory or which
Jeremiah wrote his book of Lamentations. And they shall sorrow apart, to show
that it is a part; that sorrow which is a part, it is particularly every man,
it was not the Jews spears or sins that did crucify Christ but thy sins.

Beloved, I must speak now concerning the matter of Fasting, and (beloved) it
must be fasting, not such a superficial fasting, as we commonly use, but
fasting of another nature; we do not understand the name of it, if you
compare, Luke 5. 33. and Mat. 9. 14. Together; why do the Disciples of John
and the Pharisees fast often; but thy Diciples fast not as Saint Mat. has it;
but Saint Luke thus: why do the Diciples of John fast often and pray, and the
Diciples of the Pharisees also, but thine eat and drink; he that eats or
drinks any thing his fast is done, and the least drop of water thou have
taken it breaks (...) shell of thy fasting. And it was the Doctrine of the
ancient ^^thers that he that had tasted but a drope of water, he had do^^ with
his fast for that day. And this outward fasting, must (...) only be from
anything that is to be earen; but also from all delight, let the bridegroom
come forth of his chamber; that which we know to be lawful and good, yet
because it has a solace in it, that ordinance of God it must be forborne, any
outward kind of solace that gives content, it must be avoided our apparel,
the wearing of our best apparel, any thing that may be contrary to the
fasting, see Ahab when he fasted he humbled himself and wept, and put on
sackcloth, and went fastly, that is he went barefoot, now those that go
barefoot cannot but tread very softly. Esah. 58. 13. Thou shall not think thy
own thoughts, speak thine on words, nor do thy own Actions. The Prophet
does there speak of the Sabbath which was on the tenth day of the seventh
Month, not of the Hebdomate weekly Sabbath, the saturday, but of the
universary Sabbath; and the beginning of the Chapter runs that way. We have
fasted, and thou have not looked upon us, that fasting day wherein (as some
report) Adam fell they should not do any thing,: This was but the shall of
fasting, all outward things that can give content to the outward man must be
avoided; so far as necessity will brook it; But I see the time is past, thus
much therefore shall serve for this time.

FINIS.
Page 1. lin. 8. for but to condemn the world, rea. but to save the world.


