IMMANVEL, OR THE MYSTERY OF THE INCARNATION OF THE SON OF GOD; Unfolded by
JAMES, ARCHBISHOP of ARMAGH.

JOHN, 1. 14. The Word was made flesh. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD,
Printer to the University, 1643.

THE MYSTERY OF THE INCARNATION of the SON of GOD.
THe holy Prophet, in the Book of the Pro. 30. 3, 4.
Proverbs, poseth all such as have not learned wisdom, nor known the
knowledge of the holy, with this question? Who has ascended up into heaven, or
descended? who has gathered the wind in his fists? who has bound the waters
in a garment? who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his Name,
and what is his SONS name, if thou can tell? To help us herein, the SON
Himself did tell us, when he was here upon earth, that Ioh. 3. 13.
None has ascended up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, even the
Son of man which is in heaven. And that we might not be ignorant of his name,
the prophet Esaias did not long before foretell, that Esai, 9. 6.
Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a Son is given; whose name should be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The
Prince of peace.

Where if it be demanded, how these things can stand together? that the Son of
man speaking upon earth, should yet at the same instant be in heaven? that the
Father of Eternity should be born in time? and that the mighty God should
become a Child; which is the weakest state of Man himself? we must call to
mind, that the first letter of this great Name, is WONDERFUL. When he appeared
of old to Manoah, his name was Wonderful, and he did wonderously, Judge 13.
18, 19. But that, and all the wonders that ever were, must give place to the
great mystery of his Jncarnation, and in respect thereof cease to be
wonderful. For of this work, that may be verified, which is spoken of those
wonderful judgments, that God brought upon Egypt; when he would Exodus 9. 16.
show his power, and have his name declared throughout all the earth. Ibid.
chap. 10 14. and 11. 6.
Before them were no such; neither after them shall be the like.

Neither the creation of all things out of nothing, which was the beginning of
the works of God (those six working days putting as it were an end to that
long Sabbath that never had beginning; wherein the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
did infinitely John 17. 5.
glorify themselves and Prove. 8. 30.
rejoice in the fruition one of another, without communicating the notice
thereof unto any creature) nor the resurrection from the dead, and the
restoration of all things, the last works that shall go before that
everlasting Sabbath (which shall have a beginning, but never shall have end:)
neither that first, I say, nor these last, though most admirable pieces of
work, may be compared with this; wherein the Lord was pleased to show the
highest pitch (if any thing may be said to be highest in that which is
infinite and exempt from all measure and dimensions) of his Wisdom,
Goodness, Power and glory.

The Heathen Chaldeans, to a question propounded by the King of Babel, make
answer; Dan. 2. 11.
that it was a rare thing which he required and that none other could show it,
except the Gods; whose dwelling is not with flesh. But the raritie of this
lies in the contrary to that which they imagined to be so plain: that he
Romans 9. 5.
who is over all, God blessed for ever, should take our flesh and dwell, or
(...). John 1. 14.
pitch his Tabernacle, with us. That as Exodus 40. 34, 35.
the glory of God filled the Tabernacle (which was Heb. 9. 9. 11.
a figure of the humane nature of the Lord) with such a kind of fulness,
that Moses himself was not able to aproach unto it; (therein coming short,
Heb. 3. 3. 6.
as in all things, of the Lord of the house) and filled the Temple of Solomon
(a Type likewise Ioh. 2. 19. 21.
of the body of our Prince of Peace) in 2 Chronicles. 9. 1, 2.
such sort that the Priests could not enter therein: so Colos. 2. 9.
in him all the fullness of the Godhead should dwell bodily.

And therefore if of that temple, built with hands, Solomon could say with
admiration; 2 Chro. 6. 18.
But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? Behold heaven and the
heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house, which I have
built? of the true temple, that is not of this building, we may with greater
wonderment say with the Apostle, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
Without controversy, great is the mystery of Religion: God was manifested in
the flesh. Yea, was made of a Woman, and borne of a Virgin. A thing so Esai.
7. 11. 4.
wonderful, that it was given for a sign unto unbeleevers 740. years before
it was accomplished; even a sign of God's own choosing, among all the wonders
in the depth, or in the height above. Therefore the Lord himself shall give
you a sign: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his
name Immanuel. Esai. 7. 14.

A notable wonder indeed, and great beyond all comparison, That the Son of God
should be Gal. 4. 4.
made of a Woman: even made of that Woman which was Ioh. 1. 3. Coloss. 1. 16.
made by himself. That her Womb then, and the Act. 3. 11.
heavens now, should contain him, whom 1. King. 8. 27.
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain. Than he who had both Father and Mother,
whose pedigree is upon record, even up unto Adam, who in the fullness of time
was brought forth in Bethlehem, and when he had finished his course, was cut
off out of the land of the living at Jerusalem; should yet notwithstanding be
in truth, that which his shadow Melchisedek was only in the conceit of the men
of his time; Heb. 7. 3. with Esai 53. 8. and Mica. 5. 2.
without Father, without Mother, without Pedigree, having neither beginning of
days, nor end of life. That his Father should be John 14. 28.
greater than he, and yet he his Fathers Ioh. 5. 18. Phil. 1. 6.
equal. That he Ioh. 8. 58.
is, before Abraham was; and yet Abraham's birth preceded his, well nigh the
space of two thousand years. And finally, that he who was David's Son, should
yet be David's Lord: Matthew 22. 42, 43, etc.
a case which plunged the greatest Rabbis among the Pharesies; who had not yet
learned this Wisdom, nor known this knowledge of the holy.

The untying of this knot depends upon the right understanding of the
wonderful conjunction of the Divine and humane Nature in the unity of the
Person of our Redeemer. For by reason of the strictness of this Personal
union, whatsoever may be verified of either of those Natures, the same may be
truly spoken of the Whole Person; from whether soever of the Natures it be
denominated. For the clearer conceiving whereof, we may call to mind that
which the Apostle has taught us touching our Savior: Col. 2. 9.
In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that is to say, by
such a personal and real union, as does unseparably and everlastingly conjoyn
that infinite Godhead with his finite Manhood in the unity of the selfsame
individual Person.

He in whom that fullness dwells, is the PERSON: that fullness which so does
dwell in him, is the NATURE. Now there dwells in him not only the fullness
of the Godhead, but the fullness of the Manhood also* for we believe him to be
both perfect God, begotten of the substance of his Father before all worlds;
and perfect Man, made of the substance of his Mother in the fulness of time.
And therefore we must hold, that there are two distinct Natures in him: and two
so distinct, that they do not make one compounded nature; but still remain
uncompounded and unconfounded together. But He in whom the fullness of the
Manhood dwells, is not one, and he in whom the fullness of the Godhead
another: but he in whom the fullness of both those natures dwells, is one and
the same Immauel, and consequently it must be believed as firmly, that he is
but one Person.

And here we must consider, that the Divine Nature did not assume an humane
Person, but the divine Person did assume an humane Nature: and that of the
three Divine Persons, it was neither the first nor the third that did assume
this Nature; but it was the middle Person, who was to be the middle one, that
must undertake this mediation betwixt God and us. which was otherwise also most
requisite, as well for the better preservation of the integrity of the blessed
Trinity in the Godhead, as for the higher advancement of Mand-kinde by means
of that relation which the second Person the Mediator did bear unto his
Father. For if the fullness of the Godhead should have thus dwelt in any humane
person, there should then a fourth Person necessarily have been added unto the
Godhead. And if any of the three Persons, beside the second, had been borne of
a Woman; there should have been two Sons in the Trinity: whereas now the
Son of God and the Son of the blessed Virgin, being but one Person, is
consequently but one Son; and so no alteration at all made in the relations
of the Persons of the Trinity.

Again, in respect of us, the Apostle shows, that for this very end Gal. 4.
4, 5, 7.
God sent his own SON made of a woman; that WE might receive the Adoption of
SONS: and thereupon makes this inference. Wherefore thou art no more a
servant, but a SON; and if a SON, then an HEIR of God through Christ:
intimating thereby, that what relation Christ has unto God by Nature, we being
found in him have the same by Grace. By Nature he is Ioh. 1. 14. and 3. 16.
The only begotten Son of the Father: but this is the high Grace he has
purchased for us; that Ioh. 1. 12.
as many as received him, to them he gave power or privilege, to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. For although he reserve
to himself the preeminence, which is due unto him in a Propter quod
unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale.
peculiar manner, of being Romans 8. 29.
the first borne among many brethren: yet in him, and for him, the rest
likewise by the grace of adoption are all of them accounted as first-bornes.

So God bids Moses to say unto Pharaoh; Exodus 4. 22, 23. See Ierem. 31. 9.
Israel is my Son, even my firstborn. And I say unto thee; Let my son
go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go; behold I will
slay thy son, even thy first borne. And the whole Israel of God, consisting
of Jew and Gentile, is in the same sort described by the Apostle to be Heb. 12.
23.
the general assembly and Church of the first borne enrolled in Heaven. For
the same reason that makes them to be Sons, to wit, their incorporation into
Christ, the selfsame also makes them to be first-bornes: so as (how ever it
fall out by the grounds of our common Law) by the rule of the Gospel this
consequence will still hold true; Romans 8. 17. Gal. 4. 7.
If children, then heirs, heirs of God and joynt-heires with Christ. And so
much for the SON, the Person assuming.

The Nature assumed, is the seed of Abraham, Hebr. 2. 16. The seed of David,
Romans 1. 3. The seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. 15. The WORD, 1. John 5. 7.
the second Person of the Trinity, being John 1. 14.
made FLESH, that is to say, Gal. 4. 4.
Gods own Son being made of a Woman, and so becoming truly and really Luke
1. 42.
The fruit of her womb. Neither did he take the substance of our nature only,
but all the properties also and the qualities thereof: so as it might be said
of him, as it was of (...). Iam. 5. 17.
Elias and the (...). Act. 14 15
Apostles; that he was a man subject to like passions as we are. Yea, he
subjected himself Heb. 5 7.
in the days of his flesh to the same 2 Cor. 13. 4. Heb. 2. 17, 18. and 4. 15.
weakness which we find in our own frail nature, and was compassed with like
infirmities; and in a word, in all things was made like unto his brethren,
sin only excepted. Wherein yet we must consider, that as he took upon him not
an humane Person, but an humane Nature: so it was not requisite he should take
upon him any Personal infirmities, such as are, madness, blindness,
lamenesse, and particular kinds of diseases which are incident to some only,
and not to all men in general; but those alone which do accompany the whole
Nature of mankind, such as are hungring, thirsting, weariness, grief, pain
and mortality.

We are further here also to observe in this our Heb. 7. 3.
Melchisedeck, that as he had no Mother, in regard of one of his natures, so he
was to have no Father in regard of the other; but must be borne of a pure and
immaculate Virgin, without the help of any man. And this also was most
requisite, as for other respects, so for the exemption of the assumed nature
from the imputation and pollution of Adams sin. For Romans 5. 12.
sin having by that one man entered into the world; every Father becomes an
Adam unto his child, and conveyeth the corruption of his Nature unto all those
whom he does beget. Therefore our Savior assuming the substance of our
Nature, but not by the ordinary way of natural generation, is thereby freed
from all the touch and taint of the corruption of our flesh; which by that
means only is prop^gated from the first man unto his posterity. Whereupon, he
being made of man, but not by man, and so becoming the immediate fruit of the
wbome and not of the Loins; must of necessity be acknowledged to be Luke 1. 35.
that HOLY THING, which so was borne of so blessed a Mother. who although she
were but the passive and material principle of which that precious flesh was
made, and the holy Ghost the agent and efficient; yet cannot the man Christ
Jesus thereby be made the Son of his Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 9.
own Spirit. Because Fathers do beget their children out of their own
substance: the holy Ghost did not so, but framed the flesh of him, from whom
himself proceeded, out of the creature of them both, Luke 1. 38, 48.
the handmaid of the Lord; whom from thence all generations shall call blessed.

That blessed womb of hers was the bride-chamber, wherein the Holy Ghost did
knit that indissoluble knot betwixt our humane nature and his Deity: the Son of
God assuming into the unity of his Person that which before he was not; and yet
without change (for so must God still be) remaining that which he was. Whereby
it came to pass, that Luke 1. 35.
this holy thing which was borne of her was indeed and in truth to be called
the SON of GOD. Which wonderful connection of two so infinitely differing
natures in the unity of one person, how it was there effected; is an
inquisition fitter for an Angelical inteliigence, than for our shallow capacity
to look after. To which purpose also we may observe, that in the fabric of the
Arc of the Covenant, Exodus 37. (...).
the posture of the faces of the Cherubims toward the Mercy-seat (the type of
our Savior) was such, as would point unto us, that these are the things which
the Angels desire to (...) 1. Pet. 1. 12.
stoop and look into.

And therefore let that satisfaction, which the Angel gave unto the Mother
Virgin (whom it did more specially concern to move the question, Luke 1. 34.
How may this be?) content us, Ibid. ver. 35.
The power of the highest shall over-shadow thee. For as the former part of
that speech may inform us, that Ibid. ver. 37.
with God nothing is unpossible: so the latter may put us in mind, that the
same God having over-shadowed this mystery with his own veil, we should not
presume with the men of 1. Sam. 6. 19.
Bethshemesh to look into this Arc of his; least for our curiosity we be
smitten, as they were. Only this we may safely say, and must firmly hold: that
as the distinction of the Persons in the holy Trinity hinders not the Unity of
the Nature of the Godhead, although every person entirely holds his own
incommunicable property; so neither does the distinction of the two Natures in
our Mediator any way cross the unity of his Person, although each nature
remains entire in it self, and retains the properties agreeing thereunto,
(...).
without any conversion, composition, commixtion or confusion.

When Exodus 3. 2, 3, 5, 6. Act. 7. 31, 32.
Moses beheld the bush burning with fire, and yet no whit consumed, he wondered
at the sight, and said; I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why
the bush is not burnt. But when God thereupon called unto him out of the midst
of the bush, and said, Draw not nigh hither, and told him who he was; Moses
trembled, hid his face, and durst not behold God. Yet, although being thus
warned, we dare not draw so nigh; what does hinder but we may stand aloof off,
and wonder at this great sight? Heb. 12. 19.
Our God is a consuming fire; says the Apostle: and a question we find
propounded in the prophet, Esaias 33. 14.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell
with the everlasting burnings? Moses was not like other Prophets, but Number. 12.
6, 7, 8. Exodus 33. 12.
God spoke unto him face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend: and yet
for all that, when he besought the Lord that he would show him his glory; he
received this answer; Exodus 33. 18, 20.
Thou can not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live. Abraham
before him, though a special Esaias 41. 8. 2 Chro. 20. 7. James 2. 23.
friend of God, and the Romans 4. 15, 16. Gal. 3. 7.
Father of the faithful, the Children of God; yet held it a great matter that
he should take upon him so much as to Genesis 18. 27.
speak unto God, being but dust and ashes. Yea the very Angels themselves ( 2.
Pet. 2. 11.
which are greater in power and might) are fain to Esaias 6. 2.
cover their faces, when they stand before him; as not being able to behold the
brightness of his glory.

With what astonishment then may we behold our dust and ashes assumed into the
undivided unity of Gods own person; and admitted to dwell here, as an inmate,
under the same roof? and yet in the midst of those everlasting burnings, the
bush to remain unconsumed, and to continue fresh and green for evermore. Yea,
how should not we with Abraham rejoice to see this day, wherein not only our
nature in the person of our Lord Jesus is found to dwell for ever in those
everlasting burnings; but, in and by him, our own persons also are brought so
nigh thereunto, that Levit. 26. 11, 1^. Ezech. 37. 26, 27. Revel. 21. 3.
God does set his Sanctuary and Tabernacle among us, and dwell with us, and
(which is much more) makes us our selves to be the Heb 3. 6.
house and the Ephesians. 2. 2(...).
habitation, wherein he is pleased to dwell by his Spirit. according to that of
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said; I will dwell in them
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. and
that most admirable Prayer, which our Savior himself made unto his father in
our behalf. John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their Word: that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that thou
have sent me. I in them, and thou in me: that they may be made perfect in one;
and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me.

To compass this conjunction betwixt God and us, he that was to be our Matthew.
1. 21. 23.
Jesus or Savior, must of necessity also be Immanuel, which being interpreted
is, GOD with us; See Anselms Cur Deus Homo.
and therefore in his Person to be Immanuel, that is, God dwelling with our
flesh; because he was by his Office to be Immanuel, that is, he who must make
God to be at one with us. For this being his proper office, to be 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Mediator between God and Men, he must partake with both: and being before all
eternity consubstantiall with his Father, he must at the appointed time become
likewise consubstantiall with his children. Heb. 2 14.
For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood; he also
himself likewise took part of the same: says the Apostle. We read in the
Roman history, that the Sabines and the Romans joining battle together, upon
such an occasion as is mentioned in the last Chapter of the book of Judges; of
the children of Benjamin, catching every man a wife of the daughters of Shilo:
the women, being daughters to the one side and Wives to the other, interposed
themselves and took up the quarrel. so that by the mediation of these, who
had a peculiar interest in either side, and by whose means this new alliance
was contracted betwixt the two adverse parties; they who before stood upon
highest terms of hostility, Sic pax facta, foedusque percussum: secutaque res
mira dectu, ut relictis sedibus suis novam in Vrbem hosts demigrorent, and cum
generis suis avitas opes pro dote sociarent. L. Flor. histor. Romans lib. 1. cap.
1.
did not only entertain Peace, but also joined themselves together into one
body and one state.

God and we were Romans 5. 10.
enemies; before we were reconciled to him by his Son. He that is to be
Ephesians. 2. 14, 16.
our Peace, and to reconcile us unto God, and to slay this enmity, must have an
interest in both the parties that are at variance, and have such a reference
unto either of them; that he may be able to send this comfortable message unto
the sons of men. Ioh. 20. 17.
Go to my brethren; and say unto them: I ascend unto my Father, and your
Father; and to my God, and your God. For as long as Heb. 2, 11.
he is not ashamed to call us brethren; Heb. 11. 16.
GOD is not ashamed to be called our GOD. And his entering of our appearance, in
his own name and ours, after this manner, Heb. 2. 13.
Behold, I, and the children which God has given me; is a motive strong
enough to appease his Father, and to turn his favorable countenance toward
us. as on the other side, when we become unruly, and prove Rebellious children,
no reproof can be more forcible, nor inducement so prevalent (if there remain
any spark of grace in in us) to make us cast down our weapons and yield, than
this; Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy
Father that has bought thee? and bought thee, 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19.
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood
of his own Son.

How dangerous a matter it is to be at ods with God, old Ely shows by this
maine argument: 1 Samuel 2, 25.
If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him: but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall plead or entreat for him? and Job, before him; Job
9. 32, 33.
He is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together
in judgment: neither is there any Dayes-man, or Vmpire betwixt us, that might
lay his hand upon us both. If this general should admit no manner of
exception, then were we in a woeful case, and had cause to weep much more than
Saint John did in the Revelation; when Revel. 5. 3, 4.
none was found in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, that was able to
open the book which he saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne,
neither to look thereon. But as S. John was wished there, to refrain his
weeping; because Ibid. verse. 5.
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, had prevailed to open the
book, and to loose the seven seals thereof: so he himself else where gives
the like comfort unto all of us in this particular. Ioh. 2, 1, 2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: and he is a propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world.

For as 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
there is one God, so is there one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all; and in discharge of this his
office of Mediation, as the only fit Umpire to take up this controversy, was
to lay his hand as well upon GOD, the party so highly offended, as upon Man,
the party so basely offending. In things concerning God, the Priesthood of our
Mediator is exercised. Heb. 5. 1. and 2. 17.
For every high Priest is taken from among men, and ordained for men in things
pertaining to God. The parts of his Priestly Function are two; Satisfaction and
Intercession: the former whereof gives contentment to Gods Justice; the latter
solliciteth his Mercy, for the application of this benefit to the children of
God in particular. Whereby it comes to pass, that God in Romans 9. 15, 16.
showing mercy upon whom he will show mercy, is yet for his justice no looser:
being both Romans 3. 26.
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

By virtue of his Intercession, our Mediator Heb. 9. 24.
appears in the presence of God for us, and Romans 8. 34. Hebr. 7. 25.
makes request for us. To this purpose, the Apostle notes in the fourth to
the Hebrews, 1. That we have a great high Priest, that is passed into the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God. (verse. 14.) 2. that we have not an high Priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
things tempted as we are; yet without sin. (verse. 15.) Betwixt the having of
such, and the not having of such an Intercessor, betwixt the height of him in
regard of the one, and the lowliness in regard of his other nature, stands
the comfort of the poor sinner. He must be such a suitour as takes our cause
to heart: and therefore Heb. 2. 17.
in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren; that he might
be a merciful and faithful high Priest. In which respect as it was needful
he should partake with our flesh and blood, that he might be tenderly affected
unto his brethren: so likewise for the obtaining of so great a suit, it behoved
he should be most dear to God the Father, and have so great an interest in
him, as he might always be sure to be John 11. 42.
heard in his requests* who therefore could be no other, but he of whom the
Father testified from heaven, Matthew. 3. 17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. It was fit our
intercessor should be man, like unto our selves; that we might Heb. 4. 16.
boldly come to him, and find grace to help in time of need: it was fit he
should be God, that he might boldly go to the Father, without any way
disparaging him; as being his Zach. 13. 7.
fellow, and Phil. 2. 6.
equal.

But such was Gods love to justice, and hatred to sin; that he would not have
his justice swallowed up with mercy, nor sin pardoned without the making of
fit reparation. And therefore our Mediator must not look to procure for us a
simple pardon without more ado; but must be a (...). Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2.
and 4. 10.
propitiation for our sins, and redeem us by fine and (...). Matt. 20. 28.
(...). 1 Timothy 2. 6. See Job 33. 24
ransom: and so not only be the master of our requests, to entreat the Lord
for us; but also take upon him the part of an 1 John 2. 1.
Advocate, to plead full satisfaction made by himself, as our Heb. 7. 12.
surety, unto all the debt wherewith we any way stood chargeable. Now the
Satisfaction which our surety bound himself to perform in our behalf, was of
a double debt: the principal, and the accessory. The principal debt is
obedience to Gods most holy Law: which man was bound to pay as a perpetual
tribute to his Creator, although he had never sinned; but, being now by his
own default become bankrupt, is not able to discharge in the least measure.
His surety therefore being to satisfy in his stead; none will be found fit to
undertake such a payment, but he who is both God and Man.

Man it is fit he should be: because Man was the party that by the Articles of
the first Covenant was tied to this obedience; and it was requisite that, Romans
5. 19.
As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
Man likewise, many should be made righteous. Again, if our Mediator were only
God, he could have performed no obedience (the Godhead being free from all
manner of subjection:) and if he were a bare Man, although he had been as
perfect as Adam, in his integrity, or the Angels themselves; yet being left
unto himself amidst all the temptations of Satan and this wicked world, he
should be subject to fall, as they were; or if he should hold out, as 1 Timothy 5.
21.
the elect Angels did; that must have been ascribed to the grace and favor of
another: whereas the giving of strict satisfaction to Gods justice was the
thing required in this behalf. But now being God, as well as Man, he by his
own Heb. 9. 14.
eternal Spirit preserved himself without spot: presenting a far more
satisfactory obedience unto God, than could have possibly been performed by
Adam in his integrity.

For beside the infinite difference that was betwixt both their Persons, which
makes the actions of the one beyond all comparison to exceed the worth and
value of the other: we know that Adam was not able to make himself holy; but
what holiness he had, he received from him who created him according to his
own Image: so that whatsoever obedience Adam had performed, God should have 1
Cor. 9. 7.
eaten but of the fruit of the Vineyard which himself had planted; and 1 Chronicles. 29. 14, 16. (...).
of his own would all that have been, which could be given unto him. But
Christ did himself sanctify that humane nature which he assumed, according to
his own saying, John 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self: and so out
of his own peculiar store did he bring forth those precious treasures of holy
obedience, which for the satisfaction of our debt he was pleased to tender unto
his Father. Again, if Adam had Luke 17. 10.
done all things which were commanded him, he must for all that have said: I am
an unprofitable servant; I have done that which was my duty to do. Whereas in
the voluntary obedience, which Christ subjected himself unto, the case stood
far otherwise.

True it is that if we respect him in his humane nature, Ioh. 14. 28.
his Father is greater than he; and he is his Fathers Esaias 53. 11. Mar. 12. 18.
servant: yet in that he said, and most truly said, that God was his Father,
John 5. 18.
the Jews did rightly infer from thence, that he thereby made himself
equal with God; and Zach. 13. 7.
the Lord of hosts himself has proclaimed him to be the man that is his
fellow. Being such a man therefore, and so highly borne; by the privilege of
his birthright, he might have claimed an exemption from the ordinary service
whereunto all other men are tied: and by being Matthew. 17. 25, 26.
the Kings Son, have freed himself from the payment of that tribute which
was to be exacted at the hands of Strangers. When Heb. 1. 6.
the Father brought this his first-begotten into the world, he said; Let all
the Angels of God worship him: and at the very instant wherein the Son
advanced our nature into the highest pitch of dignity, by admitting it into the
unity of his sacred person, that nature so assumed was worthy to be crowned
with all glory and honor: and he in that nature might then have set himself
down Heb. 12. 2.
at the right hand of the throne of God; tied to no other subjection than now
he is, or hereafter shall be, when after the end of this world he shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God the Father. For then also, in regard of his
assumed nature, he 1 Cor. 15. 27.
shall be subject unto him that put all other things under him.

Thus the Son of God, if he had minded only his own things, might at the
very first have attained unto the joy that was set before him: but Philip. 2.
v. 4, 5, 7, 8.
looking on the things of others, he chose rather to come by a tedious way, and
wearisome journey unto it; not challenging the privilege of a Son, but
taking upon him the form of a mean servant. Whereupon in the days of his
flesh, he did not serve as an honorable Commander in the Lords host, but as an
ordinary soldier: he made himself of no reputation, for the time as it were
(...) Phil. 2. 7.
emptying himself of his high state and dignity; he humbled himself, and
became obedient until his death* being content all his life long to be Gal. 4.
4.
made under the Law: yea so far, that as he was sent Romans 8. 3.
in the likeness of sinful flesh, so he disdained not to subject himself
unto that Law, which properly did concern sinful flesh. And therefore
howsoever Circumcision was by right appliable only unto such as were Coloss. 2.
11, 13.
dead in their sins, and the uncircumcision of their flesh; yet he, in whom
there was no body of the sins of the flesh to be put off, submitted himself
notwithstanding thereunto: not only to testify his communion with the Fathers
of the old Testament; but also by this means to tender unto his Father a bond,
signed with his own blood, whereby he made himself in our behalf a debtour
unto the whole Law. For I testify (says Gal. 5. 3.
the Apostle) to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtour to the
whole Law.

In like manner Baptism appertained properly unto such as were defiled, and
had need to have their Act. 22. 16.
sins washed away: and therefore when all the land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem went out unto John, they Matthew. 3. 6. Mark 1. 5.
were all baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins. Among
the rest came our Savior also: but the Baptist considering that he had need to
be baptized by Christ, and Christ no need at all to be baptized by him, refused
to give way unto that action; as altogether unbefitting the state of that
immaculat Lamb of God, who was to take away the sin of the World. Yet did our
Mediator submit himself to that ordinance of God also: not only to testify
his communion with the Christians of the new Testament; but especially (which
is the reason yielded by himself) because Matthew. 3. 15.
it became him thus to fulfill all righteousness. And so having fulfilled all
righteousness, whereunto the meanest man was tied, in the days of his
pilgrimage (which was more than he needed to have undergone, if he had
respected only himself:) the works which he performed were truly works of
supererogation, which might be put upon the account of them whose debt he
undertook to discharge; and being performed by the person of the Son of God,
must in that respect not only be equivalent, but infinitely overvalue the
obedience of Adam and all his posterity, although they had remained in their
integrity, and continued until this hour instantly serving God day and night.
And thus for our maine and principal debt of Obedience, has our Mediator
given satisfaction unto the Justice of his Father; with Luke 6. 38.
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over.

But beside this, we were liable unto another debt; which we have incurred by
our default, and drawn upon our selves by way of forfeiture, and nomine poenae.
For as Luke 17. 10. Romans 8. 12. Gal. 5. 3.
Obedience is a due debt; and Gods servants in regard thereof are truly
debtors: so likewise is sin a Matthew. 6. 12. compared with Luke 11. 4.
debt, and sinners (...). Luke 14. 4. Matthew. 13. 16.
debtors, in regard of the penalty due for the default. And as the payment of
the debt which comes nomine poenae, discharges not the tenant afterward
from paying his yearly rent; which of it self would have been due, although no
default had been committed: so the due payment of the yearly rent, after the
default has been made, is no sufficient satisfaction for the penalty already
incurred. Therefore our surety, who stands chargeable with all our debts, as
he makes payment for the one by his Active, so must he make amends for the
other by his Passive obedience: he must first Luke 24. 26.
suffer, and the^ enter into his glory. Heb. 2. 10.
For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect
(that is, a perfect accomplisher of the work which he had under taken) through
sufferings.

The Godhead is of that infinite perfection, that it cannot possibly be subject
to any passion. He therefore that had no other nature but the Godhead, could
not pay such a debt as this; the discharge whereof consisted in suffering and
dying. It was also fit, that Gods justice should have bin satisfied in that
nature which had transgressed; and that the same nature should suffer the
punishment, that had committed the offense. Heb. 2. 14, 15.
For as much then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same: that through death he might destroy
him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them who
through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage: Such and so
great was the love of God the Father toward us, that Romans 8. 12.
He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: and so
transcendent was the love of the Son of God, toward the sons of men, that
he desired not to be spared; but rather than they should lie under the power of
death, was of himself most willing to suffer death for them. which seeing in
that infinite nature, which by eternal generation he received from his Father,
he could not do; he resolved in the appointed time to take unto himself a
Mother, and out of her substance to have a body framed unto himself, wherein
he might Phil. 2. 8.
become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, for our redemption.
And therefore Heb, 10. 5, 7
when he comes into the world, he says unto his Father, A body have thou
fitted me; Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. By the which will (says the
Ibid. verse. 9, 10.
Apostle) we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all.

Thus we see it was necessary for the satisfaction of this debt, that our
Mediator should be Man: but he that had no more in him than a Man, could never
be able to go through with so great a work. For if there should be found a Man
as righteous as Adam was at his first creation, who would be content to suffer
for the offense of others: his suffering possibly might serve for the
redemption of one soul; it could be no sufficient ransom for those Revel. 7.
9.
innumerable multitudes that were to be Revel. 5. 9.
redeemed to GOD out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.
Neither could any Man or Angel be able to hold out, if a punishment equivalent
to the endless sufferings of all the sinners in the world should at once be
laid upon him. Yea the very powers of Christ himself, upon whom Esaias 11. 2*
the Spirit of might did rest, were so shaken in this sharp encounter; that he,
who was the most accomplished pattern of all fortitude, stood Mark 14. 33. Luke
22. 44.
sore amazed and Heb. 5. 7.
with strong crying and tears prayed that, Mar. 14. 35, 36.
if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.

Heb. 10. 12.
This man therefore being to offer one sacrifice for sins for ever; to the
burning of that sacrifice he must not only bring the Cantic. 8. 6.
coals of his love as strong as death, and as ardent as the fire which has a
most vehement flame, but he must add thereunto those everlasting burnings
also, Esaias 33. 14.
even the flames of his most glorious Deity: and therefore Heb. 9. 14.
through the eternal Spirit must he offer himself without spot unto God; that
hereby he might Ibid ver. 12.
obtain for us an eternal redemption. The blood whereby the Church is
purchased, must be Act. 20. 28.
Gods own blood: and to that end must 1 Cor. 2. 8.
the Lord of glory be crucified; Act. 3. 15.
the Prince and author of life be killed; he Esaias 53. 8.
whose eternal generation no man can declare, be cut off out of the land of
the living; and the man that is Gods own fellow be thus smitten; according to
that which God himself foretold by his Prophet. Zach. 13. 7. with Matthew. 26.
31.
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.
The people of Israel, we read, did so value the life of David their King,
that they counted him to be worth 2 Samuel 18. 3.
ten thousand of themselves: how shall we then value the life of Matthew. 22. 43,
44.
David's Lord; 1 Timothy 6. 15. Revel. 19. 16.
who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords?
It was indeed our nature that suffered; but he that suffered in that nature,
Romans 9 5.
is over all, God blessed for ever: and for such a person to have suffered but
one hour, was more than if all other persons had suffered ten thousand
millions of years.

But put case also, that the life of any other singular man might be equivalent
to all the lives of whole mankind: yet the laying down of that life would not
be sufficient to do the deed, unless he that had power to lay it down, had
power likewise to take it up again. For to be detained always in that prison,
Matthew. 5. 26.
from whence there is no coming out, before the payment of the uttermost
farthing; is to lie always under execution, and so to disanull quite the plea
of that full payment of the debt wherein our surety stood engaged for us. And
therefore the Apostle upon that ground does rightly conclude; that 1 Cor. 13.
17.
if Christ be not raised, our faith is vain, we are yet in our sins; and
consequently, that as he must be Romans 4. 25.
delivered to death for our offenses, so he must be raised again for our
justification.

Yea, our Savior himself, knowing full well what he was to undergo for our
sakes, told us before hand, that the Comforter whom he would send unto us,
should Ioh. 16. 10.
convince the world, that is, fully satisfy the consciences of the sons of
men, concerning that Dan. 9. 24.
everlasting righteousness which was to be brought in by him, upon this very
ground: Because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more. For if he had broken
prison, and made an escape, the payment of the debt, which as our surety he
took upon himself, being not yet satisfied, he should have been seen here
again: Heaven would not have held him, more then Paradise did Adam, after he
had fallen into Gods debt and danger. But our Savior raising himself from the
dead, presenting himself in Heaven before him unto whom the debt was owing,
and maintaining his standing there, has hereby given good proof, that he is
now a freeman, and has fully discharged that debt of ours for which he stood
committed. And this is the evidence we have to show of that righteousness,
whereby we stand justified in Gods sight: according to that of the Apostle.
Romans 8. 33, 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies: who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again; who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.

Now although an ordinary man may easily part with his life; yet does it not
lie in his power to resume it again at his own will and pleasure. But he that
must do the turn for us, must be able to say as our JESUS did. Ioh. 10. 17,
18.
I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again. and in another place: Ioh. 2. 19, 21.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up; says he unto the
Jews, speaking of the Temple of his body. An humane nature then he must have
had, which might be subject to dissolution: but being once dissolved, he could
not by his own strength (which was the thing here necessarily required) raise
it up again; unless he had Romans 1. 4.
declared himself to be the Son of God with power, by the resurrection from
the dead. The Manhood could suffer, but not overcome the sharpness of death:
the Godhead could suffer nothing, but overcome any thing. He therefore that was
both to suffer and to overcome death for us, must be partaker of both natures:
that Pet. 3. 18.
being put to death in the flesh, he might be able also to quicken himself by
his own Spirit.

And now are we come to that part of Christ's mediation, which concerns the
conveiance of Ephesians. 1. 14.
the redemption of this purchased possession unto the sons of men. A dear
purchase indeed, which was to be redeemed with no less price then the blood of
the Son of God* but what should the purchase of a stranger have been to us?
or what should we have been the better for all this; if we could not derive
our descent from the purchaser, or raise some good title whereby we might
estate our selves in his purchase? Now this was the manner in former time in
Israel, concerning redemptions* that unto him who was the next of kin
belonged the right of being Ruth 3. 12. and 4. verse. 1, 3, 4, 7.
Goel, or the Redeemer. And Job had before that left this glorious profession
of his faith unto the perpetual memory of all posterity. Job. 19. 25, 26, 27.
I know that my Goel or Redeemer lives, and at the last shall arise upon the
dust (or, stand upon the earth:) And after this my skin is spent; yet in my
flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another for me. Whereby we may easily understand, that his and
our Redeemer was to be the invisible God, and yet in his assumed flesh made
visible even to the bodily eyes of those whom he redeemed. For if he had not
thus assumed our flesh, how should we have been of his blood, or claimed any
kindred to him? and unless the Godhead had by a personal union been
unseparably conjoined unto that flesh; how could he therein have been
accounted our next of kin?

For the better clearing of which last reason; we may call to mind that
sentence of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15. 47.
The first man is of the earth earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.
Where, notwithstanding there were many millions of men in the world betwixt
these two; yet we see our Redeemer reckoned the second man. and why? but
because these two were the only men who could be accounted the prime fountains,
from whence all the rest of mankind did derive their existence and being. For
as all men in the world by mean descents do draw their first original from
the first man: so in respect of a more immediate influence of efficiencie and
operation do they owe their being unto the second man, as he is the Lord from
heaven. This is Gods own language unto Jeremy. Jerem. 1. 5.
Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee: and this is David's
acknowledgement, for his part. Psalm. 119. 73.
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; Psa. 139. 13.
thou have covered me in my mothers womb: Psalm. 71. 6.
thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels. and Jobs, for his also.
Job. 10. 8, 11.
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me together round about: thou have
clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones and sinews. and
the Act. 17. 27, 28, 29.
Apostles, for us all: In him we live, and move, and have our being. who
infers also thereupon, both that we are the offspring or generation of God;
and that he is not far from every one of us. this being to be admitted for a
most certain truth (notwithstanding the opposition of all gainsayers*) that
See Bradwardin de causa Dei, lib. 1. cap. 3, and 4.
God does more immediately concur to the generation and all other motions of
the creature, then any natural agent does or can do. And therefore, if Romans
5. 17.
by one man's offedce, death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one,
Jesus Christ, considering that this second man is not only as universal a
principle of all our beings, as was that first, and so may sustain the common
person of us all, as well as he* but is a far more immediate agent in the
production thereof: not, as the first, so many generations removed from us, but
more near unto us then our very next progenitors; and in that regard justly to
be accounted our next of kin, even before them also.

Yet is not this sufficient neither: but there is another kind of generation
required, for which we must be beholding unto the second man, the Lord from
heaven; before we can have interest in this purchased Redemption. For as the
guilt of the first man's transgression is derived unto us by the means of
carnal generation* so must the benefit of the second man's obedience be
conveyed unto us by spiritual regeneration. And this must be laid down as a
most undoubted verity: that, John 3. 3.
except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; and that every
such must be John 1. 13.
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but
of God. Now, as our Mediator in respect of the Adoption of Sons, which he has
procured for us, Heb. 2. 11.
is not ashamed to call us Brethren: so in respect of this new birth, whereby
he begets us to a spiritual and everlasting life, he disdaineth not to own
us as his Children. Esaias 53. 10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed:
says the Prophet Esaias. Psalm. 21. 30.
A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation:
says his Father David likewise of him. and he himself, of himself* Heb. 2.
13.
Behold I, and the children which God has given me. Whence the Apostle
deduceth this conclusion: Ibid. ver. 14*
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same. He himself, that is, he who was God
equal to the Father, for who else was able to make this 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians.
2. 10. Gal. 6. 15.
new creature, but the same John. 1. 13. Iam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 1 John 5. 1.
God that is the Creator of all things? (no less power being requisite to the
effecting of this, then was at the first to the producing of all things out of
nothing:) and these new (...). 1 Pet. 2. 2. with 1. 23.
babes being to be John 3. verse. 5, 6, 8.
borne of the Spirit; who could have power to send the Spirit, thus to beget
them, but the Father and the Son from whom he proceeded? the same blessed
Spirit, who framed the natural body of our Lord in the womb of the Virgin,
being to new mould and fashion every member of his mystical body unto his
similitude and likeness.

For the further opening of which mystery (which went beyond the apprehension
of Ibid. verse. 4, 9, 10.
Nicodemus, though a master of Israel) we are to consider; that in every
perfect generation, the creature produced receives two things from him that
does beget it: Life and Likeness. A curious limmer draws his own sons
portraiture to the life (as we say) yet, because there is no true life in it,
but a likeness only; he cannot be said to be the begetter of his picture, as
he is of his Son. And some creatures there be that are bred out of mudde or
other putrid matter: which although they have life, yet because they have no
correspondence in likeness unto the principle from whence they were derived,
are therefore accounted to have but an improper and equivocall generation.
whereas in the right and proper course of generation (others being esteemed but
monstrous births that swarve from that rule) every creature begets his like:

-- nec imbellem feroces
Progener ant aquilae columbam.
Now touching our spiritual death and life, these sayings of the Apostle would
be thought upon. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
We thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead: and that be dyed
for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves but
unto him which dyed for them and rose again. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5
God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in sin, has quickened us together with Christ. Colos. 2. 13.
And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has
he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. Gal. 2. 20.
I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. From all which we may
easily gather, that if by the obedience and sufferings of a bare man, though
never so perfect, the most sovereign medicine that could be thought upon
should have been prepared for the curing of our wounds: yet all would be to no
purpose, we being found dead, when the medicine did come to be applied.

Our Physician therefore must not only be able to restore us unto health, but
un to life it self: which none can do but the Father, Son and holy Ghost; one
God, blessed for ever* to which purpose, these passages of our Savior also are
to be considered. John 5. 26.
As the father has life in himself: so has he given to the Son to have life
in himself. John 6. 57.
As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats
me, even he shall live by me. Ibid. ver. 51.
I am the living bread, which came down from heaven; if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give; is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. the substance whereof is briefly
comprehended in this saying of the Apostle: 1 Cor. 15. 45.
The last Adam was made a quickening spirit. An Adam therefore and perfect Man
must he have been; that his flesh, given for us upon the Cross, might be made
the conduit to convey life unto the world: and a quickening spirit he could not
have been, unless he were God, able to make that flesh an effectual
instrument of life by the operation of his blessed spirit. For, as himself
has declared, John 6. 63.
It is the Spirit that quickens; without it, the flesh would profit nothing.

As for the point of similitude and likeness: we read of Adam, after his
fall, that he Genesis 5. 3.
beg at a son in his own liknesse, after his image. and generally, as well
touching the carnal as the spiritual generation, our Savior has taught us
this lesson. John 3. 6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is borne of the
Spirit, is spirit. Whereupon the Apostle makes this comparison betwixt those
who are borne of that first man, who is of the earth earthy, and of the second
man, who is the Lord from heaven. 1 Cor. 15, 48, 49.
As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such
are they also that are heavenly: and as we have borne the image of the earthy,
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. We shall indeed hereafter bear
it in full perfection: when Phil. 3. 11.
the Lord Jesus Christ shall change our base body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body; according to the working, whereby he is able even
to subdue all things unto himself. Yet in the mean time also, such a
conformity is required in us unto that heavenly man, that Ibid. ver. 20.
our conversation must be in heaven, whence we look for this Savior: and that
we must Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
put off, concerning the former conversation, that old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of our mind,
and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. For as in one particular point of domestical authority, 1. Cor. 11.
7.
the Man is said to be the image and glory of God, and the Woman the glory of
the Man: so in a more universal manner is Christ said to be 2. Cor. 4. 4.
the image of God, even Heb. 1. 3.
the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person; and we
Romans 8. 29.
to be conformed to his image, that he might be the firstborn among those many
brethren, who in that respect are accounted 2. Cor. 8. 23. So where the Hebrew
has Gods image, Number. 12. 8. and Psalm. 17. 15. the Greek renders it, his glory.
the glory of Christ.

We read in the holy story, that God Number. 11. 7, 25.
took of the spirit which was upon Moses, and gave it unto the seventy Elders;
that they might bear the burden of the People with him, and that he might not
bear it, as before he had done, himself alone. It may be, his burden being
thus lightened, the abilities that were left him for government were not
altogether so great, as the necessity of his former employment required them to
have been: and in that regard, what was given to his assistants, might perhaps
be said to be taken from him. But we are sure the case was otherwise in him of
whom now we speak: unto whom John 3. 34.
God did not thus give the spirit by measure. And therefore although so many
millions of beleivers do continually receive this Philip. 1. 19.
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; yet neither is that fountain any way
exhausted, nor the plenitude of that wellspring of grace any whit empayred or
diminished: it being Gods pleasure, Colos. 1. 19.
that in him should all fulness dwell; and that John. 1. 16.
of his fullness all we should receive grace for grace. that as in the natural
generation there is such a correspondence in all parts betwixt the begetter and
the infant begotten, that there is no member to be seen in the Father, but
there is the like answerably to be found in the Child, although in a far less
proportion: so it falls out in this spiritual, that for every grace which in
a most eminent manner is found in Christ, a like grace will appear in Gods
child, although in a far inferior degree; similitudes and likenesses being
defined by the Logicians to be comparisons made in quality, and not in quantity.

We are yet further to take it into our consideration, that by thus enliving
and fashioning us according to his own Image, Christ's purpose was not to raise
a seed unto himself dispersedly and distractedly, but to John 11. 58.
gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad: yea and
to Ephesians. 1. 10.
bring all unto one head by himself, both them which are in heaven and them
which are on the earth. that as in the Tabernacle, Exodus 26. 33.
the veil divided between the holy place and the most holy; but the curtains
which covered them both were so coupled together with the taches, that it might
still Ibid. verse. 6. and (...).
be one Tabernacle: so the Church militant and triumphant, typified thereby,
though distant as far the one from the other as Heaven is from Earth, yet is
made but one Tabernacle in Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 2. 21. 22.
in whom all the building fitly framed together grows unto an holy temple in
the Lord, and in whom all of us are builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit.

The bond of this mystical union betwixt Christ and us (as Sermon to the
commons house of Parliament, ann. 1620.
elsewhere has more fully been declared) is on his part that John 6. 63. 1.
Cor. 6. 17. and 15. 45. Phil. 2. 1. Romans 8. 9. 1. Ioh. 3. 24. and 4. 13.
quickening Spirit, which being in him as the Head, is from thence diffused to
the spiritual animation of all his members: and on our part Gal. 2. 30. and.
5. 5. and 3. 11. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Faith, which is the prime act of life wrought in those who are capable of
understanding by that same spirit. Both whereof must be acknowledged to be of so
high a nature: that none could possibly by such ligatures knit up so admirable
a body, but he that was God Almighty. And therefore although we did suppose
such a man might be found who should perform the Law for us, suffer the death
that was due to our offense and overcome it; yea and whose obedience and
sufferings should be of such valve, that it were sufficiett for the redemption
of the whole world: yet could it not be efficient to make us live by faith,
unless that Man had been able to send Gods spirit to apply the same unto us.

Which as no bare Man or any other Creature whatsoever can do; so for Faith
we are taught by S. Colos. 2. 12. 2. These 1. 11.
Paul, that it is the operation of God, and a work of his power, even of that
same power, wherewith Christ himself was raised from the dead. Which is the
ground of that prayer of his, that the Ephesians. 1. 19, 20, etc.
eyes of our understanding being enlightened, we might know what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to ms-ward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when be raised him from
the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above
all principality, and power, and might, and every Name that is named not only
in this world but also in that to come: and has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be head over all things to the Church; which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all.

Yet was it fit also, that the Head should be of the same nature with the Body
which is knit unto it* and therefore that he should so be God, as that he might
partake of our Flesh likewise. Ephesians. 5. 30.
For we are members of his body, says the same Apostle; of his flesh, and of
his bones. And John 6. 35.
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, says our Savior himself, and
drink his blood; ye have no life in you. Ibid. verse. 56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
declaring thereby, first, that by this mystical and supernatural union we are
as truly conjoined with him, as the meat and drink we take is with us; when by
the ordinary work of nature it is converted into our own substance. secondly,
that this conjunction is immediately made with his humane nature. thirdly, that
the Revel. 5 12. and 13. 18.
Lamb slain, that is, 1. Cor. 1. 23. and 2, 2*
Christ crucified, has by that death of his made his flesh broken and his
blood poured out for us upon the cross to be fit food for the spiritual
nourishment of our souls; and the very wellspring from whence, by the power
of his Godhead, all life and grace is derived unto us.

Upon this ground it is, that the Apostle tells us, that we Heb. 10. 19, 20.
have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus; by a new and
living way which he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say,
his flesh. That as in the Tabernacle, there was no passing from the Holy to the
most Holy place, but by the veil: so now there is no passage to be looked for
from the Church Militant to the Church Triumphant, but by the flesh of him, who
has said of himself; John 14. 6.
I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes unto the father but by
me. Jacob in his dream beheld Genesis 28. 12, 13.
a ladder set upon the earth, the top whereof reached to heaven, and the Angels
of God ascending and descending on it, the Lord himself standing above it. Of
which vision none can give a better interpretation then he, who was prefigured
therein, gave unto Nathanael. John 1. 51.
Hereafter you shall see heaven opened, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man. Whence we may well collect, that the only
means whereby God standing above, and his Israel lying here below are
conjoined together, and the only ladder whereby Heaven may be scaled by us, is
the Son of man. The type of whose flesh, the veil, was therefore commanded to
be Exodus 26. 31. and 36. 35.
made with Cherubims; to show that we come Heb. 12. 22. 24.
to an innumerable company of Angels, when we come to Jesus the Mediator of
the New Testament: who as the Head of the Church has power to Heb. 1. 14.
send forth all those ministering spirits, to minister for them who shall be
heirs of salvation.

Lastly, we are to take into our consideration, that as in things concerning
God, the maine execution of our Saviors Priesthood does consist; so in things
concerning Man he exercises both his Prophetical office, whereby he opens
the will of his Father unto us, and his Kingly, whereby he rules and
protecteth us. It was indeed a part of Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Hagg. 2. 11. Mal. 2. 7.
the Priests office in the old Testament to instruct the people in the Law of
God, and yet were Esai. 28. 7. Ier. 6. 13. and 8. 10. and 14. 18. and 23. 11,
33, 34. Lam. 2. 20.
they distinguished from Prophets: like as in the new Testament also, Ephesians. 4.
11.
Prophets as well as Apostles are made a different degree from ordinary
Pastors and Teachers who received not their doctrine by immediate inspiration
from heaven; as those other 2. Pet. 1. 21.
holy men of God did, who spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Whence
Saint Paul puts the Hebrews in mind, that God who (...). Heb 1. 1.
in sundry parts, and in sundry manners spoke in time past unto the fathers by
the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son Christ Jesus:
whom therefore he styleth Heb. 3. 1, 2.
the Apostle, as well as the high Priest of our profession; who was faithful
to him that appointed him, even as Moses was in all his house.

Now Moses, we know, had a singular preeminence above all the rest of the
Prophets: according to that ample testimony which God himself gives of him.
Number. 12. 6, 7, 8.
If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him
in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so,
who is faithful in all mine house: with him well I speak mouth to mouth, even
apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall be
behold. And therefore we find, that our Mediator in the execution of his
Prophetical office is in a more peculiar manner likened unto Moses: which he
himself also did thus foretell. Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16. etc. Act. 3. 22, 23.
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy brethren, like unto me, umto him ye shall hearken. According to all that
thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly,
saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me
see this great fire any more, that I dye not. And the Lord said unto me, They
have well spoken, that which they have spoken. I will raise them up a Prophet
from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words into his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall
come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall
speak in my name, I will require it of him.

Our Prophet therefore must be a man raised from among his brethren the
Israelites ( Romans 9. 5.
of whom, as concerning the flesh, he came) who was to perform unto us that
which the fathers requested of Moses: Exodus 20. 19 Deuteronomy. 5. 25, 27.
Speak thou to us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we
dye. And yet (that in this also we may see, how our Mediator had the
preeminence) Exodus 34. 30, 32, 33.
when Aaron and all the children of Israel were to receive from the mouth of
Moses all that the Lord had spoken with him in mount Sinai, they were afraid to
come nigh him, by reason of the glory of his shining countenance: so that he
was feign to put a veil over his face, while he spoke unto them that which he
was commanded. But that which for a time was thus 2. Cor. 3. 7, 10, 11, 13.
made glorious, had no glory in respect of the glory that excels; and both
the glory thereof, and the veil which covered it, are now abolished in Christ:
the veil of whose flesh does so overshadow Heb. 1. 3.
the brightness of his glory, that yet under it we may John 1. 14.
behold his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father; yea and 2.
Cor. 3. 18.
we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the
Lord.

And this is daily effected by the power of the ministry of the Gospel,
instituted by the authority, and seconded by the power, of this our great
Prophet: whose transcendent excellency beyond Moses (unto whom, in the
execution of that function, he was otherwise likened is thus set forth by the
Apostle. Heb. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6.
He is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as he who has
builded the house has more honor then the house. For every house is builded
by some one: but he that built all things is God. And Moses verily was
faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which
were to be spoken after: but Christ as the Son, over his own house. 1* Tim. 3.
15.
This house of God is no other then the Church of the living God: whereof as he
is the only Lord, so is he properly the only Builder. Christ therefore being
both the Lord and the Mat. 16. 18.
Builder of his Church, must be God as well as Man: which is the cause, why we
find all the several mansions of this 2 Timothy 2. 20.
great house to carry the title indifferently of 1. Cor. 11. 16.
the Churches of God and Romans 16. 16.
the Churches of Christ.

True it is, that there are other ministerial builders, whom Christ employed
in that service: this being not the least of those gifts which he bestowed upon
men at his triumphant Ascension into heaven, that Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
he gave not only ordinary Pastors and Teachers, but Apostles likewise, and
Prophets, and Evangelists; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Which what great power
it required, he himself does fully express in passing the grant of this high
Commission unto his Apostles. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, Amen.

S. Paul professes of himself, that he 1. Cor. 15. 10.
labored more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles: yet not I, says
he, but the grace of God which was with me. And therefore although 1. Cor. 3.
9, 10.
according to that grace of God which was given unto him, he denies not but
that, as a wise masterbuilder, he had laid the foundation; yet he acknowledges
that they upon whom he had wrought, were Gods building as well as Gods
husbandry. For who, says Ibid. verse. 5, 6, 7.
he, is Paul, and who is Apollo, but ministers by whom you believed, even as
the Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollo watered* but God gave the
increase. So then neither is he that planteth anything, neither he that
waters: but God that gives the increase.

Two things therefore we find in our great Prophet, which do far exceed the
ability of any bare Man; and so do difference him from all the Luke 1. 70.
holy Prophets, which have been since the world began. For first we are
taught; that Matt. 11. 27.
no man knows the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him: and that John 1. 18.
no man has seen God at anytime; but the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Being in his bosom, he is become
conscious of his secrets, and so out of his own immediate knowledge enabled to
discover the whole will of his Father unto us. whereas all other Prophets and
Apostles receive their revelations at the second hand, and according to the
grace given unto them by the Spirit of Christ. Witness that place of S. Peter
for the Prophets: 1. Pet. 1. 10, 11.
Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you; searching what or what
manner of time THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST WHICH WAS IN THEM did signify, when it
testified before hand the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should
follow. and for the Apostles, those heavenly words which our Savior himself
uttered unto them, whilst he was among them. John. 16. 13, 14, 15.
When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he
shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak; and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall
receive of mine, and show it unto you. All things that the Father has, are
mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you.

Secondly, all other Prophets and Apostles can do more (as has been said) but
plant and water; only God can give the increase* they may teach indeed and
baptize; but unless Christ were with them by the powerful presence of his
Spirit, they would not be able to save one soul by that ministry of theirs.
We, 1. Pet. 2. 5.
as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house: but, Psalm. 127. 1.
except the Lord do build this house, they labor in vain that build it. For
who is able to breath the spirit of life into those dead stones, but he, of
whom it is written? John 5. 25.
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God; and they that hear it, shall live. and again: Ephesians. 5. 14.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. Who can awake us out of this dead sleep, and give light unto these
blind eyes of ours; but the Lord our God, unto whom we pray, that he would
Psalm. 13. 3.
lighten our eyes, least we sleep the sleep of death?

And as a blind man is not able to conceive the distinction of colors,
although the skilfullest man alive should use all the art he had to teach him;
because he wants the sense whereby that object is discernable: so 1. Cor. 2.
14.
the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God (for they are
foolishness unto him;) neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. VVhereupon the Apostle concludes, concerning himself and all his
fellow laborers; that 2. Cor. 4. 6, 7.
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ: but we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us. Our Mediator therefore (who must
Heb. 7. 25.
be able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him) may not want
the excellency of the power, whereby he may make us capable of this high
knowledge of the things of God, propounded unto us by the ministry of his
servants: and consequently, in this respect also, must be God, as well as Man.

There remains the Kingdom of our Redeemer: described thus by the Prophet
Esaias. Esaias. 9. 7.
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom; to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever. and by Daniel. Dan.
7. 13* 14.
Behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to
the Ancient of days; and they brought him near before him. And there was given
him dominion and glory and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages
should serve him his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. and by the angel
Gabriel, in his embassage to the blessed Virgin. Luke 1. 31, 32, 33.
Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call
his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest:
and the Lord God shall give him the throne of his father David And he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no
end.

This is that new Ier. 30. 9. Hos. 3. 5. Ezech. 34. 23. and 37. 24.
David our King, whom God has raised up unto his Gal. 6. 16.
own Israel* who was in truth, that which he was called* the Son of Man, and
the Son of the Highest that in the one respect, Ephesians. 5. 39.
we may say unto him, as the Israelites of old did unto their David; 2. Sam. 5.
1.
Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh: and in the other, sing of him as David
himself did; Psalm. 110. 1. Matthew. 22 43, 44. Act. 2. 34, 35.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. So that the promise made unto our first parents, that
Genesis 3. 15.
the seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, may well stand with
that other saying of S. Paul; that Romans 16. 20.
the God of peace shall bruise Satan under our feet: seeing 1. John 3. 8.
for this very purpose the Son of God was manifested 1. Tim. 3. 16
in the flesh, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. and still that
foundation of God will remain unshaken: Esai 43. 11.
I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior. Hos. 13. 4.
Thou shall know no God but me: for there is no Savior beside me.

Two special branches there be of this Kingdom of our Lord and Savior: the
one of Grace, whereby that part of the Church is governed which is militant
upon earth; the other of Glory, belonging to that part which is triumphant in
Heaven. Here upon earth, as by his Prophetical office he works upon our Mind
and Understanding, so by his Kingly he rules our Will and Affections; 1. Cor.
10. 5.
casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. Where, as we must needs acknowledge, that Phil. 2* 13.
it is GOD which works in us both to will and to do, and that it is 2. These.
5. 23.
he which sanctifies us wholly* so are we taught likewise to believe, that
Heb. 2. 11.
both he who sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, namely
of one and the self same nature; that the sanctifier might not be ashamed to
call those; who are sanctified by him, his brethren* that as their nature was
corrupted and their blood tainted in the first Adam, so it might be restored
again in the second Adam; and that as from the one a corrupt, so from the other
a pure and undefiled nature might be transmitted unto the heirs of salvation.

The same Psalm. 84. 11.
God that gives grace, is he also that gives glory* yet so, that the streams
of both of them must run to us through the golden pipe of our Saviors
humanity* 1. Cor. 15. 21.
For since by man came death; it was fit that by man also should come the
resurrection of the dead. even by that man, who has said, John 6. 54.
Who so eats my flesh* and drinks my blood, has eternal life; and I will
raise him up at the last day. Who, then 2. These. 1. 10.
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made mavelous in all
them that believe: and Phil. 3. 21.
shall change this base body of ours, that it may be fashioned like unto his
own glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself Unto him therefore that has thus Revel. 1. 5, 6.
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for
ever and ever. AMEN.

PHILIP. 3, 8. I COUNT ALL THINGS BUT LOSS FOR THE EXCELLENCY OF THE KNOWLEDGE
OF CHRIST JESUS MY LORD.
FINIS.

