A BODY OF DIVINITY, OR THE SVMME AND SVBSTANCE OF Christian Religion,
Catechistically propounded, and explained, by way of Question and Answer:
Methodically and familiarly handled. Composed long since by JAMES USHER B. of
ARMAGH. And at the earnest desires of diverse godly Christians now Printed and
Published.

Whereunto is adjoined a Tract, entitled IMMANVEL, OR THE MYSTERY OF THE
Incarnation of the SON OF GOD; Heretofore written and published by the same
Author.

JOHN 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for THO:
DOVVNES and GEO: BADGER, and are to be sold in S. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleetstreet. MDCXLV.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I do here present and commend unto thee a book of great
worth and singular use, which was written and finished about twenty years
since: the Author whereof is well known to be so universally eminent in all
Learning, and of that deep knowledge, and judgment in sacred Divinity, that
he transcendeth all elogies and praises which I can give him. I commend it unto
the (Christian Reader) under a twofold notion; the first respects the
subject matter of this whole Work, which is of greatest excellency, ad being
The sum and substance of Christian Religion, upon which as a most sure
foundation we build our faith, ground all our hopes, and from which we reap,
and retain all our joy and comfort in the assurance of our salvation; which as
at all times it is most profitable to be read, studied and known, so now (if
ever) most necessary in these our days, wherein men never more neglected these
fundamental principles, as being but common and ordinary truths, and spend
their whole time, study, and discourse about Discipline, Ceremonies, and
circumstantiall points; and herein also not contenting themselves with those
common rules, and that clear light which shines in the Word; they are only
led by their own fantasies, daily creating unto themselves diversity of new
opinions: and so falling into sects and schisms they break the bond of love,
and fall off from the communion of Saints, as though it were no Article of
their Creed; and being in love with their own new Tenets, as being the
conception and birth of their own brains, they contend for them more then for
any fundamental truths; and not only so, but also hate, malign, and most
bitterly, and uncharitably censure all those that differ from them in their
opinions, though never so conscientious and religious, as though they professed
not the same faith, yea, served not the same God, nor believed in the same
Christ; but remain still Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and in
comparison of themselves no better then Papists, or at the best but carnal
Gospellers. The second notion under which I commend it respects the Work it
self, or the manner of the Authors handling it, which is done so soundly and
solidly, so judiciously and exactly, so methodically and orderly, and with that
familiar plainness, perspicuity and clearness, that it gives place to no
other in this kind either ancient or modern, either in our own, or any other
Language which ever yet came to my view; in which regard I may say of it, as it
is said of the virtuous woman; Many have done excellently, but this our Author
exceeds them all. I will add no more in the deserved praises of this Work,
but leave it (Christian Reader) to thy self to peruse and judge of it,
commending thee to the Word of Gods grace and the good guidance of his holy
Spirit, who is able to build thee up in fruitful knowledge, to lead thee into
all truth, to direct and support thee in the ways of godliness, and to give
thee an everlasting inheritance amongst the blessed.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, JOHN DOWNAME.

The Connection of these Points together, and Dependence of them one upon
another.
IN Christian Religion we are to consider the Ground thereof, contained in the
Scripture. Parts, which treat of Gods Nature, in his Essence, considered
absolutely in it self: where, the doctrine of divine Attributes which respect
either His perfection, in his Simpleness, whereby he is exempted from
Composition and division. Infiniteness, whereby he is exempted from all measure
of Time, by his eternity. Place, by his immensity.

Life, whence he is called The living God, Considered in his All Sufficiency
Al-seeing wisdom Foreknowledge. Counsel.
Almighty power.
Holy will, wherein is seen, his Goodness, and therein his love unto his
creatures. mercy or grace showed them in their misery.
Justice, in his word, called his Truth. deeds disposing of all things rightly.
rendering to the creatures according to their works.




Persons, subsisting in one and the same undivided Essence.
Kingdom, in his Eternal decree which men must not curiously pry into, but
content themselves with what is made manifest. Execution thereof, in the works
of Creation of things Invisible The highest Heavens. Angels.
Visible Unreasonable. Reasonable man: consisting of Body. Soul.


Providence, Common unto all creatures, Proper, respecting the everlasting
condition of principal Creatures. Angels Good. Bad.
Men, who are ordered in This life, by the tenor of a twofold Covenant: Nature
or Works, where we are to consider the Conditions, and Events, Shame Primary,
the fall of our first parents. Secondary, the corruption of Nature, original
Actions, actual, of omission. commission.


Death, comprehending all the curses of the Law whereunto the nature of man
stands subject.

Grace, wherein we are to consider the state of Christ the Mediator, in his
Person, and there in his Natures and their Union: where, of his Conception
Nativity.
Distinction.
Two fold state of Humiliation, Exaltation.

Office, with his Calling thereunto, Execution thereof, concerning, God the
party offended, wherein his priestly office is exercised, the parts whereof are
Satisfaction, giving contentment to Gods Justice by his Obedience to the Law,
Suffering for our sin.
Intercession, soliciting Gods mercy for those he has redeemed.
Man the party offending, to whom he communicates the grace, by him purchased,
by his Prophetical office Kingly office



The rest of mankind, who are called by participation of his grace: where we
are to consider, 1. The company thus called out of the world, The Catholic
Church of Christ, where such as obey this calling in Outward profession alone,
hold only external communion with it. Inward affection also, internal with
the Head Christ Jesus, there being a Mutual donation, whereby the Father gives
Christ to them. them to Christ.
Mystical union, whereby they are knit together by Gods quickening Spirit.
The rest of mankind, whence arises the Communion of Saints.

2. Grace whereunto they are called. Reconciliation Justification: where, of
Justifying Faith. Adoption, and therein of Hope.
Sanctification, and therein of Love: here consider the Rule of Holiness, the
moral law, contained in the ten Commandments, wherein are to be considered,
General rules to be observed in the exposition of them. Distinction of them
into two tables containing the duties we owe unto, God: namely, Having the true
God, and entertaining him in all the powers of the soul. Com. 1. Honoring him
with that worship which is to be given from men to him, Every day as occasion
requires, either in Solemn worship, prescribed in the 2. Com. Glorifying his
name in the common course of our life, in the 3. Com.
One day certain in the week, prescribed in the 4. Com.

Man respecting, Such acts as are joined with advised consent in duties which
we owe unto, Special persons in regard of some particular relation which we
bear unto them, prescribed in the 5. Com. All men in general, for the
preservation of their Safety, in the 6. Com. Chastity, in the 7. Com. Goods, in
the 8. Com. Good name, in the 9. Com.

The first thoughts and motions of evil toward our neighbor that do arise
from the corruption of our nature, in the 10. Com.


Exercise thereof Repentance. Fruits thereof, in Resistance of sin by
Christian warfare, where, of the spiritual Armor: Conflict with the World
Flesh Devil
in prosperity adversity:
here, of bearing the cross,
Abounding in good works, especially toward God in Prayer, the rule whereof
is contained in the Lords Prayer, wherein are to be considered the 1 Preamble.
2 Petitions 3 concerning Gods glory: 3 touching our necessities.
3 The Conclusion, and there, of thanksgiving.
Fasting.
Our brethrens Edification, in respect of their souls. Almsgiving, for the
good of their bodies,





3 Means, whereby they are called: The outward ministry of the Gospel,
wherein consider 1 Minister. 2 Parts of the ministry, Word. Seals annexed
thereunto, viz. Sacraments for confirming the promises to the obedient, which
are either of Initiation or Admission into the Church. Continual nourishment.
Censures for ratifying of threatenings toward the disobedient in, Word, by
admonition. Deed, by Suspension. Excommunication.



3 The kinds thereof: namely, the Old ministry before Christ, called The old
Testament; where, of the 1 Word of the Gospel more sparingly, and darkly
delivered. 2 Types and Ceremonies. 3 Sacraments Initiation; Circumcision.
Nourishment; Paschall Lamb.

New, from the coming of Christ unto the end of the world, called The new
Testament, wherein is to be considered the cleernes and efficacy of the Word
Sacraments Initiation; Baptism. Nourishment; The Lords Supper.


4 Diverse states of the Church.



The world to come, by the sentence of a twofold Judgment, Particular, upon
every soul as soon as it departs from the body. General, upon all men at once
both in soul and body: therein is to be considered 1 Judge, Christ coming
with the glory of his Father. 2 Parties to be judged Quick, of whom there shall
be a change. Dead, of whom there shall be a resurrection.
3 Sentence and execution thereof: where, of the The torments of the Damned.
The joys of the Blessed.











THE HEADS OF THE BODY OF DIVINITY DIVIDED INTO Two and fifty Heads.
1. OF Christian Religion, and the grounds thereof; Gods Word contained in the
Scriptures. 1 Pet. 1. 19. 21. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.

2. Of God and his Attributes, Perfection, Wisdom, and Omnipotency. 1 Timothy 1.
17. Psalm. 147. 5.

3. Of Gods Goodness and Justice, and the Persons of the Trinity. Exodus 34. 6,
7. 1 John 5. 7.

4. Of Gods Kingdom, and the Creation of all things. 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12.
Psalm. 145. 10, 11, 12. Act. 17. 24.

5.Of the Creation of man in particular, and the Image of God according to
which he was made. Genesis 1. 26, 27.
6. Of Gods Providence, and continual government of his creatures. Psalm. 103.
19. and 66. 7.
7. Of the good Angels that stood, and the evil Angels that forsook their
first integrity. Jude ver. 6. Rev. 12. 7.

8. Of the Law of nature, or the Covenant of works made with man at his
Creation, and the event thereof in the fall of our first Parents. Gal. 3. 10.
Genesis 2. 17. Eccl. 7. 31.

9. Of Original and Actual sin, whereunto all mankind by the fall is become
subject. Romans 5. 12. 14.
10. Of Gods curse, and all the penalties due unto sin, whereunto man is
become subject as long as he continues in his natural estate. Gal. 3. 10.
Deuteronomy. 28. 45.

11. Of the Covenant of Grace, and the Mediator thereof, Jesus Christ our Lord,
his two distinct natures in one Person, together with his Conception and
Nativity. Mat. 1. 21, 22, 23. Gal. 4. 4, 5.

12. Of the state of Humiliation and Exaltation of our Savior, his office of
Mediation, and calling thereunto. Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9. Heb. 5. 4, 5.

13. Of his Priestly office, and the two parts thereof, Satisfaction and
Intercession. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 10. 12.

14. Of his Prophetical and Kingly office. Luke 4. 18, 19. Isay 9. 6, 7.

15. Of the calling of men to partake of the grace of Christ both outward and
inward, and of the Catholic Church thus called out of the world, with the
members and properties thereof. Heb. 3. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Heb. 12. 23.

16. Of the mutual donation whereby the Father gives Christ to us and us unto
Christ: and the mysteriall union whereby we are knit together by the band of
Gods quickening spirit, with the Communion of Saints arising from thence,
whereby God for his Sons sake is pleased of enemies to make us friends. Cant.
2. 16. Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23, 24.

17. Of Justification, and therein of justifying faith and forgiveness of
sins. Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. and 4. 6, 7.
18. Of Adoption, whereby in Christ we are not only advanced into the state of
friends, but also of sons and heirs, and therein of the spirit of Adoption and
Hope. Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. 23, 24, 25.
19. Of Sanctification, whereby the power of sin is mortified in us, and the
image of God renewed; and therein of love. Ephesians. 1. 4. Col. 3. 9, 10. 12. 14.

20. Of the direction given unto us for our sanctification, contained in the
Ten Commandments; with the rules of expounding the same, and of distinction of
the Tables thereof. Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40.
21. The first Commandment, of the choice of the true God, and the
entertaining him in all our thoughts. Exodus 20. 2, 3.
22. The second Commandment, of the solemn worship that is to be performed
unto God; and therein of Images and Ceremonies. Exodus 20. 5, 6.
23. The third, of the glorifying of God aright in the actions of our common
life; and therein of swearing and blaspheming. Exodus 20. 7.
24. The fourth, of the certain time set apart for Gods service, and therein of
the Sabbath and Lords day. Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.
25. The fifth, of the duties we owe one unto another, in regard of our
particular relation unto such as are our Superiors, Inferiors, and equals.
Exodus 20. 12.
26. The sixth, of the preservation of the safety of men's persons, and therein
of peace and meekness. Exodus 20. 13.
27. The seventh, of the preservation of chastity, and therein of temperance
and marriage. Exodus 20. 14.
28. The eight, of the preservation of our own and our neighbors goods, and
therein of the maintaining of justice in our dealing one with another. Exodus
20. 15.
29 The ninth, of the preservation of our own and our neighbors good name, and
the maintaining of truth in our testimony, and truth. Exodus 20. 16.
30 The tenth, of contentedness: the first motions of concupiscence which do
any way cross that love we owe to our neighbor: whereto for conclusion may be
added the use of the Law. Exodus 20.
31 Of Repentance. Acts 26. 20. 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. Jer. 31. 18, 19.

32 Of the spiritual warfare and Christian armor. Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12.
33 Of resistance of the temptations of the Devil. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9.
34 Of resisting the temptations of the world, both in prosperity and
adversity; and here of patient bearing of the Cross. Gal. 6. 14. Romans 8. 35,
36, 37.

35. Of resisting the temptations of the flesh. Gal. 5. 14. Col. 3. 5, 6.

36. Of new obedience and good works, and necessity thereof. Lev. 1. 74, 75.
Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.

37. Of Prayer in general, and the Lords Prayer in particular, with the
Preamble thereof. Matthew. 6. 6, 7.
38. Of the three first Petitions which concern Gods glory. Matthew. 6. 9, 10.
39. Of the three latter which concern our necessities. Ver. 11. 12, 13.
40. Of the conclusion of the Lords Prayer, wherewith is to be handled the
point of praise and thanksgiving. Matthew. 6. 13.
41. Of fasting. Matthew. 5. 16, 17, 18.
42. Of mutual edifying one another, and liberality toward the poor. Ephesians. 4.
28, 29. Heb. 13. 16.

43. Of Ministers, and ministry of the Gospel; and therein of preaching and
hearing the Word. Romans 10. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

44. Of the Appendants of the Word, Sacraments, which are the seals of the
promises, and Ecclesiastical censures, which are the seals of the threatenings
of the Gospel. Romans 4. 11. Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17.

45. Of the ministry of the old Testament, before the coming of Christ, with
the Word, Types, and Sacraments thereof. Heb. 9. 1. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3,
4.

46. Of the ministry of the new Testament, and comparing the Word and
Sacraments thereof with the old. Joh. 1. 17. Heb. 12. 27, 28.

47. Of Baptism. Matthew. 28. 19. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

48. Of the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24.
49: Of the diverse estates of the Church in prosperity and under persecution,
in integrity and corruption, and the rending thereof by schisms and heresies.
1 Timothy 4. 12, 13. 2 These. 2. 3, 4.

50. Of death, and the particular Judgment following. Heb. 9. 27.
51. Of the general Judgment, and therein of the Judge Christ Jesus his
coming in glory: and the parties to be judged, both quick and dead; with the
resurrection of the one, and the change of the other. 1 These. 4. 15, 16, 17. 1
Cor. 15. 51, 52.

52. Of the last sentence and the execution thereof; of the torments of the
damned, and joys of the blessed. Matthew. 25. 34, 35.

A LARGE EXPLICATION OF THE BODY OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
1 TIMOTHY 4. 15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that
thy profiting may appear to all.
WHat is that which all men especially desire? All men desire eternal
happiness.


Eternal Life and Happiness.

How do men look to obtain Happiness?

By Religion, Religion the means to obtain happiness.
which is a thing so proper to man, that it does distinguish him more from
beasts then very Reason, that is made his form; for very beasts have some
sparkles or resemblance of Reason, but none of Religion.

Is Religion generally to be found in all men?

Yes; for the very heathens condemned them to death that denied all Religion:
and there is no people so barbarous, but they will have some form of Religion,
to acknowledge a God; as all India, East and West, shows.

May a man be saved by any Religion?

No; No salvation but by the true Religion.
but only by the true, as appears, Joh. 17. 3. This is life eternal to know
thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ: and He that knows not the Son,
knows not the Father.

Which be the chief false Religions that are now in the world?

Heathenisme, Diverse kinds of false Religion.
Turkisme, Judaisme, Papisme.

What do you observe out of this diversity of Religions in the world?

The misery of man when God leaves him without his Word; an example whereof
may be seen in the Idolaters, 1 King. 18. 27. and Romans 1. 22, 23. and some
making a stick or a straw, othersome a red cloth for their God, as the Lappians.

Seeing then there are so many Religions in the world, and every one looks to
obtain happiness by his own Religion; of (what Religion are you?

I am a Christian.

What is Christian Religion?

It is the acknowledging of the only true God, What Christian Religion is.
and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

How prove you that?

By that saying of our Savior Christ, Joh. 17. 3. This is life everlasting
(which is the reward of Christian Religion) that they may know thee to be the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: where he means not a
bare contemplative knowledge, but a thankful acknowledging, which
comprehends all Christian duties, consisting in faith and obedience; for he
that being void of the fear of God, which is the beginning and chief point of
knowledge, Prove. 1. 7. abides not in God, but sins: dwells in darkness,
who has neither seen God, nor known him, 1 John 3. 6.

What do you call the Doctrine which shows the way unto everlasting life and
happiness?

It is commonly termed Theology or Divinity, and the familiar Declaration of
the principles thereof (for the use especially of the ignorant) is called
Catechizing, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.

What is Catechizing?

A teaching by voice and repetition of the grounds of Christian Religion, Of
Catechizing what it is.
Gal. 6. 6. Act. 18. 23. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 19.

Where should it be used, and by whom?

Both at home by the Master of the House, Where to be used, and by whom.
and in the Church likewise by the Minister.

Why at home?

Because houses are the Nurseries of the Church.

Show some reasons and arguments to prove the necessity of Catechizing and
instructing in Religion. The necessity of it.


Abraham for his care in this duty, Genesis 18. 19.

Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Ephesians. 6. 4.

Adams fall, and consequently they must be enlightened and informed by
teaching, if they will not dye, which Solomon therefore commands, Prove. 22.
6. and our Savior Christ bids children be respected, Mark. 10. 14, 15, 16.

Hannah brought up Samuel to the Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 1. 24. and Mary Jesus to
the Temple, when he was twelve years old, Luke 2. 42. by which we perform
the effect of consecrating our children to God, Exodus 13. 2.



Joel 2. 28. Act. 2. 17.

But is it not some disgrace and baseness that men of years and place should
be Catechized?

If men will be Christians, which is their greatest honor, they must hold it
no disgrace to learn Christ: Noble Theophilus held it none, who was thus
catechized, as Luke shows Chap. 1. 4. likewise Apollos, Act. 18. 28.

To come then to the declaration of Christian Religion; tell me wherein does
the happiness of man consist?

Not Eccles. 1. 2. True happiness consists in God. How we come to enjoy God.
in himself, nor in any other created thing, but only in God his Creator, who
alone being infinite, is able to fill the heart of man.

How may we come to enjoy God?

By being joined unto him, and so partaking of his goodness; for happiness is
to be found by Job 22. 21.
acquaintance and fellowship with him who is the foundation of blessedness,
man so Joh. 17. 3. Gal. 4. 9.
knowing him, or rather being known of him, that he Eccle. 12. 13.
may serve him and be 2 Cor. 5. 9.
accepted of him, honor him and be 1 Samuel 2. 30.
honored by him.

By what means come we to the knowledge of God?

By such means as he has revealed in himself; Means to know God.
for God dwells in the light that no man can come unto, whom no man has
seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6. 16. except he show himself unto us: not that he
is hidden in the darkness, for he dwells in the light, but that the
dullness of sight, and blindness of our hearts cannot reach unto that light,
except he declare himself unto us; like as the Sun is not seen, but by his
own light, so God is not known but by such means as he has manifested himself.

By what means has God revealed himself?

By his Divine works and by his holy Word, By his Divine Works, and holy Word.
as the Prophet David plentifully and distinctly expressed in the nineteenth
Psalm, The Heavens declare the glory of God, Job. 22. 20.
and the firmament shewth his handy work, Joh. 6. 68.
and so continuing unto the seventh verse touching his Works, and from thence
to the end of the Psalm, touching his Word; The law of the Lord is perfect
converting the Soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure making wise the simple.

What gather you of this?

That all curious searching to know more of God then he has showed of himself
is both vain and hurtful to the searchers, especially seeing by his Works and
Word he has declared as much as is profitable for men to know, for his glory
and their eternal felicity. Therefore Moses says, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret
things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are revealed,
belong unto us, and to our children for ever.

What be the Divine works whereby God has showed himself?

The Creation, Of the Divine Works of God.
and preservation of the world, and all things therein; so the Apostle to the
Romans says, That all men are inexcusable, seeing that which may be known of
God, is made manifest within them; for God has made it manifest unto them. For
the invisible things of God while they are understood in his works by the
Creation of the world, are seen, even his eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1.
19, 20. Also preaching amongst the gross Idolatrous Lystrians, Act. 14. 17.
he says, that God has not left himself without Testimony, bestowing his
benefits, giving rain and fruitful seasons from heaven, filling our hearts
with food and gladness.

And preaching among the learned, and yet no less superstitious Athenians, he
cites and canonizeth the Testimony of the Poets, Plato.
to show that God is not far from every one of us, Galen.
for in him we live, Homer.
move, and have our being, Act. 17. 27, 28. For whosoever amongst the Heathen
Poets, Virgil.
and Philosophers, which professed wisdom, Ovid.
has not been wilfully blind, have learned by contemplation of the Creatures
of the world, that God is the Maker and preserver of the same.

What use is there of the knowledge obtained by the Works of God?

There is a double use, The uses of knowing God by his Works.
the one, to make all men void of excuse, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 1. 20.
and so it is sufficient unto condemnation.

The other is to further unto salvation, and that by preparing and inciting men
to seek God, If happily by groping they may find him, as the Apostle shows,
Act. 17. 27. whereby they are made more apt to acknowledge him when he is
perfectly revealed in his Word, or after they have known God out of his Word,
by contemplation of his infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, most gloriously
shining in his Works, to stir them up continually, to reverence his Majesty,
to honor and obey him, to repose their trust and confidence in him; and so the
Children of God do use this knowledge of God, gathered out of his Divine
Works, as appears in many places of the Scriptures, and especially of the
Psalms, which are appointed for the exercise of the whole Church, Psalm. 8.
Psalm. 19. Psalm. 95. Psalm. 104. and 136. etc.

Are not the Works of God sufficient to give knowledge of the only true God,
and the way unto everlasting happiness?

They may leave us to be without excuse, and so are sufficient unto
condemnation, but are not able to make us wise unto Salvation, because of
things which are necessary unto Salvation, some they teach but imperfectly,
others, not at all, as the distinction of the Persons in the Godhead, the fall
of man from God, and the way to repair the same.

Where then is the saving knowledge of God to be had perfectly?

In his holy Word, Of Gods holy Word the Scriptures.
for God according to the riches of his Grace, has been abundant toward us in
all wisdom and understanding, and has opened unto us the Mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself, as the
Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1. 7, 8, 9.

What course did God hold in the delivery of his Word unto men?

In the beginning of the world he delivered his Word by Revelation, How the
Scriptures were delivered.
and continued the knowledge thereof by Tradition, while the number of his true
worshippers were small, but after he chose a great and populous Nation, in
which he would be honored and served, he caused the same to be committed
to writing for all ages to the end of the world: for about the space of two
thousand five hundred years from the Creation, the people of God had no written
Word to direct them; Thence for the space of three thousand one hundred years,
unto this present time, the Word of God was committed unto them in writing, yet
so that in half that time Gods will was also revealed without writing
extraordinarily, and the holy books indicted one after another, according to the
necessity of the times, but in this last half, the whole Canon of the
Scriptures being fully finished, we and all men, unto the worlds end, are left
to have our full instruction from the same without expecting extraordinary
revelations, as in times past.

Were these Revelations in times past delivered all in the same manner?

No; Revelations.
for (as the Apostle notes, Heb. 1. 1.) at sundry times, and in diverse manners
God spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets. The diverse kinds
are set down in Numb. 12. 6. and 1 Samuel 8. 6. and may be reduced to these two
general heads, Oracles, and Visions.

What call you Oracles?

Those Revelations that God, Oracles.
as it were, by his own mouth delivered to his servants, and that ordinarily by
Vrim and Thummim, or by Prophets extraordinarily called.

What do you understand by Visions?

Those Revelations whereby God signified his will by certain images and
representations of things offered unto men, Visions.
as may be seen in the Visions of Daniel, Ezekiel, Jeremie, etc.

How were these Visions presented unto men?

Sometime to men waking, sometime to men sleeping, sometime to the mind,
sometime by the eyes, to the imagination of men sleeping were offered divine
dreams, in expounding whereof we read that Joseph and Daniel excelled; but now
they together with all other extraordinary Revelations are ceased.

Where then is the Word of God now certainly to be learned?

Only out of the Book of God contained in the holy Scriptures, which are the
only certain testimonies unto the Church of the Word of God, 1 John 5. 9. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

Why may not men want the Scriptures now as they did at the first, from the
Creation until the time of Moses, for the space of 2513. years?

First, because then God immediately by his voice and Prophets sent Heb. 1. 1.

Secondly, traditions might then be of sufficient certainty by reason of
Methusalem lived with Adam the first man 243. years, and continued unto the
Flood: Shem lived at once with Methusalem 98. years, and flourished above 500.
years after the Flood: Isaac lived 50. years with Shem, and died about 10.
years before the descent of Israel into Egypt: So that from Adams death unto
that time, three men might by tradition preserve the purity of Religion; but
after the coming of Israel out of Egypt man's age was so shortened, that in
the days of Moses (the first Penman of the Scriptures) it was brought to 70.
or 80. years, as appears by the Psalm. 90. 10.

Thirdly, God saw his true religion greatly forgotten in Egypt; (Israel
Ezekiel 20. 8.) and having brought Israel then his people from thence, did not
only restore, but also increased the same, adding thereunto many more
particulars concerning his service, which were needful for men's memories to be
written.

Fourthly, God having gathered his Church to a more solemn company Moses to
write the other words which he had heard from him in the Mount, Exodus 34. 27,
28.

Fifthly, thus God provided that the Churches of all ages and times

What is Scripture then? What Scripture is.


The Word of God written by men inspired by the holy Ghost for the perfect
building and salvation of the Church: or holy Books written by the inspiration
of God to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. 2 Pet. 1. 21. 1 Pet.
20. 21. Joh. 20. 31.

If that the Scriptures be written by men which are subject unto infirmities,
how can it be accounted the Word of God?

Because it proceeds not from the wit or mind of men, but holy men set apart by
God for the work of God spoke and writ as they were moved by the holy Ghost;
therefore God alone is to be counted the Author thereof, who inspired the hearts
of those holy men whom he chose to be his Secretaries, who are to be held only
the Isntrumental cause thereof.

When Jeremy brought the Word of God to the Jews they said it was not the Word
of the Lord, but he spoke as Baruc the son of Neriah provoked him, Jer. 43. 2.
and so some perhaps in these days are so ungodly as to take the Jews part
against Jeremy and all his fellows: How may it appear therefore that this
Book which you call the Book of God, and the holy Scriptures is the Word of God
indeed, and not men's policy?

By the consonant testimony of men in all ages from them that first knew these
Penmen of the holy Ghost with their writings until our time; That the
Scriptures are the Word of God.
and reasons taken out of the Word themselves, agreeable to the quality of the
writers; both which kind of arguments the holy Scriptures have as much and far
more then any other writings; wherefore as it were extreme impudency to deny
the works of Homer, of Plato, Virgil, Tully, Livy, Galen, etc. when as consent
of al ages have reached and delivered them unto us, which also by the tongue,
phrase, matter, and all other circumstances agreeable are confirmed to be the
works of the same Authors whose they are testified to be; so it were more then
brutish madness to doubt of the certain truth and authority of the holy
Scriptures, which no less, but much more then any other writings for their
Authors are testified and confirmed to be the sacred Word of the ever-living
God; not only testified I say by the uniform witnesses of men in all ages, but
also confirmed by such reasons taken out of the writings themselves, as do
sufficiently argue the Spirit of God to be the Author of them; for we may learn
out of the testimonies themselves as David did, Psa. 119. 125. That God has
established them for ever.

Let me hear some of those reasons which prove that God is the Author of the
holy Scriptures? Reasons to prove God to be the Author of the holy Scriptures.


First, the true godliness and holiness wherewith the writers of the
Scriptures shined as Lamps in their times, and far surpassed all men of other
religions, 1 Efficient.
which shows the work of Gods Spirit in them, Isntrumental.
and how unlikely it is that such men should obtrude into the Church their own
inventions in stead of Gods Word.

Secondly, 2 The simplicity and sincerity of the writers.
the simplicity, integrity, and sincerity of these Writers in matters that
concern themselves and those that belong unto them, doing nothing by
partiality, 1 Timothy 5. 21. neither sparing their friends nor themselves; so
Moses, for example, in his writing spared not to report the reproach of his own
Tribe, Genesis 34. 30. and 49. 5. 7. nor the incest of his parents of which he
himself was conceived, Exodus 6. 20. nor the Idolatry of his brother Aaron,
Exodus 32. nor the wicked murmuring of his sister Miriam, Numb. 12. nor his own
declining of his vocation by God to deliver the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, Exo. 4. 13, 14. nor his own murmuring against God in his impatiency,
Number. 11. 11, 12, 13, 14. nor his want of faith after so many wonderful
confirmations, Number. 20. 12. and 27. 14. Deuteronomy. 32. 51. And though he were in
highest authority, and having a promise of the people to believe whatsoever he
said, Exodus 19. 8. and 20. 19. and 24. 3. he assigns no place for his own
sons to aspire either to the Kingdom or to the high Priesthood; but leaves
them in the mean degree of common Levites: all which things declare most
manifestly that he was void of all earthly and carnal affections in his
writings, as was meet for the Penman and Scribe of God; hereunto also may be
added that he writes of himself, Numb. 12. 3. that he was the meekest of all
the men that were upon the face of the whole earth, which no wise man would in
such sort report of himself; if he were left to his own discretion.

Thirdly, 3 The quality and condition of the Penmen of holy Scriptures.
the quality and condition of the Penmen of these holy writings, some of whom
were never trained up in the school of man, and yet in their writings show that
depth of wisdom, that the most learned Philosopers could not attain unto. Some
also were before professed enemies to the truth, whereof afterward they were
Writers: Amos was no Prophet but an Heard-man and a gatherer of wild figs,
Amos 7. 14. Matthew a Publicane, employed only in the gathering of Toll,
Matthew. 9. 9. Peter, James and John, Fishermen, whose liberty of speech when the
chief Priests and the Elders of Jerusalem beheld and understood, that they were
unlettered and ignorant men, it is recorded, Acts 4. 13. that they marvelled
and took knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus: Paul from a bloody
persecuter converted to be a Preacher and a writer of the Gospel, showed by
that sudden alteration, that he was moved by a command from heaven to defend
that Doctrine which before he so earnestly impugned.

Fourthly, 4 The heavenly matter of holy Scripture.
the matter of the holy Scripture being altogether of heavenly Doctrine, and
savouring nothing of earthly or worldly affections, but every where renouncing
and condemning the same, declares the God of heaven to be the only inspirer
of it.

Fifthly, 5 The Doctrine of the Scriptures above humane capacity.
the Doctrine of the Scripture is such as could never breed in the brains of
man; three Persons in one God; God to become man; the Resurrection, and such
like; man's wit could never hatch, or if it had conceived them, could never hope
that any man could believe them.

Sixthly, 6 The concord of the several writers one with another.
the sweet concord between these writings, and the perfect coherence of all
things contained in them, notwithstanding the diversity of persons by whom,
places where, times when, and matter whereof they have written; for there is a
most holy and heavenly consent and agreement of all parts thereof together,
though written in so sundry ages, by so sundry men, in so distant places, one of
them does not gainsay another, as men's writings do; as our Savior Christ
confirms them all, Luke 24. 44.

Seventhly, 7 The prophesies fulfilled in their due time.
a continuance of wonderful prophesies foretelling things to come so long
before, marked with their circumstances; not doubtful like the Oracles of the
Heathen, or Merlins prophesies, but such as expressed the things and persons by
their names, which had all in their times their certain performance, and
therefore unto what may we attribute them but to the inspiration of God? Vide
Calvin's Institut. lib. 1. cap. 8. Thus was the Messiah promised to Adam 4000.
years before he was born, Genesis 3. 15. and to Abraham 1917. years before the
accomplishment, Genesis 12. 3. The deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, to
the same Abraham 400. years before, Genesis 15. 13, 14. The prophesies of Jacob,
Genesis 49. concerning the twelve Tribes, which were not fulfilled till after the
death of Moses, and that of the continuance of the Tribes and Kingdoms of
Judah held until the coming of Christ: In the first Book of Kings, the 13.
chapter 2, 3. there is delivered a prophecy concerning Josias by name 331. years,
Esa. 45. 1. concerning Cyrus 100. years before he was borne; Daniels
prophesies, and that especially of the 70. weeks, Dan. 9. 24. are wonderful;
so likewise are those of the rejection of the Jews, the calling of the
Gentiles, the kingdom of Antichrist, etc. some of which now we see fulfilled.

Eighthly, 8 The Majesty and authority of the Scriptures.
the great Majesty, full of heavenly wisdom and authority, such as is meet to
proceed from the glory of God, shining in all the whole Scripture; yea,
oftentimes under great simplicity of words, and plainness and easiness of
style, which nevertheless more affected the hearts of the hearers, then all
the painted eloquence and lofty style of Rhetoricians and Orators; and argues
the holy Ghost to be the Author of them, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and 21. 24. and 2. 15.

Ninthly, 9 The motives used in them to persuade, not reason, but commands.
in speaking of the matters of the highest nature they go not about to persuade
men by reasons, as Philosophers and Orators, but absolutely require credit to
be given to the^, because the Lord has spoken it: they promise eternal life
to the obedient, and threaten eternal woe to the disobedient; they prescribe
Laws for the thoughts, to which no man can pierce; they require sacrifice, but
they prefer obedience; they enjoin fasting, but it is also from sin; they
command circumcision, but it is of the heart; they forbid lusting, coveting,
etc. which is not to be found in any Laws but in his that searches the heart.

Tenthly, 10 The end and scope of the Scriptures, which is Gods glory.
the end and scope of the Scriptures is for the advancement of Gods glory, and
the salvation of man's soul; for they entreat either of the noble acts of God
and of Christ, or the salvation of mankind, and therefore by comparing this
with the former reason we may frame this argument; If the Author of the
Scripture were not God, it must be some creature; if he were a creature, he
were either good or bad; if a bad creature, why forbids he evil so
rigorously, and commands good so expressly, and makes his mark to aim at nothing
but Gods glory, and our good? if he were a good creature, why does he challenge
to himself that which is proper to God only, as to make Laws for the heart, to
punish and reward eternally, etc? if it were no creature good nor bad, it must
needs be God.

Eleventhly, 11 Their admirable power.
the admirable power and force that is in them to convert and alter man's mind,
and to incline their heart from vice to virtue ( Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Psalm. 119.
111. Heb. 4. 12. Acts 13. 12.) though they be quite contrary to men's affections.

Twelfthly, 12 Their antiquity.
the Writers of the holy Scriptures are the most ancient of all others: Moses
is ancienter then the gods of the heathen, that lived not long before the wars
of Troy, about the time of the Judges; and the youngest Prophets of the Old
Testament, match the antientest Philosophers and Historians of the heathen.

Thirteenthly, 13 The hatred of the Devil, and wicked men against them.
the deadly hatred that the devil and all wicked men carry against the
Scriptures, to cast them away and destroy them, and the little love that most
men do bear unto them, prove them to be of God; for if they were of flesh and
blood, then flesh and blood would love them and practice them, and every way
regard them more then it does, for the world loves his own, as our Savior
Christ says, Joh. 15. 19. But we (being but carnal and earthly) savor not
the things that be of God, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and until the
Lord open our hearts, and we be born again of Gods Spirit, and become as
newborn babes, we have no desire unto them, 14 The preservation of the
Scriptures.
1 Pet. 2. 2.

Fourteenthly, the mavelous preservation of the Scriptures; though none in
time be so ancient, nor none so much oppugned, 15 Their power to humble a man
and raise him up again.
yet God has still by his providence preserved them, and every part of them.

Fifteenthly, the Scriptures, as experience shows, have the power of God in
them, to humble a man, when they are preached, and to cast him down to hell, 1
Cor. 14. 25.
and afterward to restore and raise him up again, Heb. 4. 12.

Show now how the holy Scriptures have the consonant testimony of all men at
all times since they were written, 16 The consenant testimony of all men at all
times.
that they are the most holy word of God.

First, Joshua the servant of Moses, the first Scribe of God, to whom God spoke
in the presence and hearing of six hundred thousand men, besides women and
children, who was an eyewitness of many wonders, by which the Ministry of
Moses was confirmed, testifies his writings to be the undoubted Word of God;
the same do the Prophets which continued the History of the Church in the time
of the Judges, both of Moses and Joshua.

Likewise all the Prophets which successively recorded the holy Story, and
Prophesies, by divine Revelation, from Samuel unto the Captivity, and from the
Captivity to the building again of the Temple, and of the City, and sometimes
after, receiving the same book of heavenly Doctrine from the former age,
delivered them to their posterity: And Malachi, the last of the Prophets,
closes up the Old Testament with a charge and an Exhortation from the Lord to
remember the Law of Moses delivered in Horeb, and to use the same as a
Schoolmasters to direct them unto Christ, until he came in person himself,
Mal. 4. 4.

Finally, from that time the Church of the Jews, until the coming of Christ
in the flesh, embraced all the former writings of the Prophets as the book of
God; and Christ himself appealeth unto them as a sufficient testimony of him,
Joh. 5. 39. The Apostles and the Evangelists prove the writings of the New
Testament by them, and the Catholic Church of Christ, from the Apostles time
until this day, has acknowledged all the same writings both of the Old and
New Testament, to be the undoubted Word of God. Thus have we the testimony
both of the Old Church of the Jews, Gods peculiar people and firstborn, to
whom the Oracles of God were committed, Act. 7. 38. Hos. 8. 12. Romans 3. 2. and
9. 4. and the view of Christians, together with the general account which all
the godly have made at all times of the Scriptures, when they have crossed
their natures and courses, as accounting it in their souls to be of God, and
the special testimony of Martyrs, who have sealed the certainty of the same,
by shedding their blood for them: Thereunto also may be added the testimony of
those which are out of the Church, Heathens, (out of whom many ancient
testimonies are cited to this purpose, by Josephus contra Appion.) Turks, and
Jews (who to this day acknowledge all the books of the Old Testament) and
Heretics, who labor to shroud themselves under them, etc.

Are there not some divine testimonies which may likewise be added to this?

Yes; 17 The known miracles done by the Writers of the Scriptures.
first, the known Miracles (which the devil was never able to do) that did so
often follow the writers and teachers of the Scriptures. Secondly, the manifold
punishments, and destruction of those that have reviled and persecuted the same.

Are these motives of themselves sufficient to work saving faith, and persuade
us fully to rest on Gods Word?

No; 18 The testimony of the Spirit in the hearts of men.
besides all this, it is required, that we have the Spirit of God, as well to
open our eyes to see the light, as to seal up fully into our hearts that truth
which we see with our eyes: for the same holy Spirit that inspired the
Scripture (1 Cor. 2. 10. and 14. 37. Ephesians. 1. 13.) inclines the hearts of
Gods children to believe what is revealed in them, and inwardly assures them
above all reasons and arguments, that these are the Scriptures of God;
therefore the Lord, by the Prophet Isaiah, promises to join his Spirit with
his Word, and that it shall remain with his children for ever: Esa. 59. 21. The
same promises our Savior Christ unto his Disciples, concerning the Comforter,
which he would send, to lead them into all truth, and teach them all things,
and to put them in mind of all things which he had said unto them, Joh. 14.
26. and 15. 26.

The Lord by the Prophet Jeremiah also promises to give his Law into their
minds, and to write them in the hearts of his children, Jer. 31. 33. And S.
John says to the faithful, that by the anointing of the holy Spirit which is
on them, they know all things, 1 John 2. 20.

This testimony of Gods Spirit in the hearts of his faithful, as it is proper
to the Word of God, so it is greater then any humane persuasions grounded upon
reason or witnesses of men, unto which it is unmeet that the Word of God should
be subject as Papists hold, when they teach that the Scriptures receive their
authority from the Church; for by thus hanging the credit and authority of the
Scriptures on the Churches sentence, they make the Churches work of greater
credit then the Word of God, whereas the Scriptures of God cannot be judged or
sentenced by any; and God only is a worthy witness himself in his Word, and
by his Spirit, which give mutual testimony one of the other, and work that
assurance of Faith in the Elect, that no humane demonstrations can make, nor
any persuasions or inforcements of the world can remove.

Show some further reasons that the authority of the Scriptures does not depend
upon the Church. That the authority of the Scriptures does not depend on the
Church.


First, because we believe the Scriptures is a work of Faith, but the Church
cannot infuse Faith.





What books are the holy Scriptures, What are the books of holy Scriptures.
and by whom were they written?

First, The books of the Old Testament, in number nine and thirty, Moses and
the Prophets. Romans 3. 2. who delivered the same unto the Church of the Jews.

Romans 1. 16. Rev. 1. 11. who delivered them to the Church of the Gentiles.

What language were the books of the Old Testament written in? In what language
the Old Testament was written.


In Hebrew, which was the first tongue of the world, and the most orderly
speech, in comparison of which, all other languages may be condemned of
barbarous confusion, but chosen especially because it was the language of that
time, best known unto the Church, teaching that all men should understand the
Scriptures; only some few portions by the later Prophets were left written in
the Chaldean tongue, (understood by Gods people after their carrying away into
Babylon) namely, the 11 verse of the 10 chap. of Jer. six chapters in Daniel
(from the 4 ver. of the 2 chap. to the end of the 7 chapter.) and three in
Ezra. (the fourth, fifth, and sixth.)

Had the Hebrew Text vowels, or points from the beginning as now it has?

Our Savior says, That the Scriptures of the Old Testament were first written
with vowels and pricks.
Matthew. 5. 18. that not one jot or prick of the Law shall perish, whereby it
should appear that the Law and the Prophets (for of both he speaks
immediately before) had vowels and pricks: God also by Moses commanded the Law
to be written upon two great stones at the entrance of the people into the Land
of promise, that all strangers might read and know what Religion the children
of Israel professed; and he commanded that it should be written well and
plainly, or clearly, Deuteronomy. 27. 8. which could not be performed, except it were
written with the vowelling points, whereunto also belong all those places of
Scripture, which testify of the cleernesse, and certainty of the Scripture,
which could not at all be, if it lacked vowels.

What are the books of the Old Testament?

The books of Moses (otherwise called the Law) and the Prophets; for so are
they oftentimes divided in the New Testament, as Mat. 5. 17. and 7. 12. and 22.
40. Luke 16. 29. and 24. 27. Joh. 1. 45. Act. 13. 15. and 24. 14. and 26. 22.
and 28. 23. Where it is to be understood, that the Law is taken for the whole
Doctrine of God, delivered by Moses, which contains not only the Law, but
also promises of mercy in Christ, as he himself says, Joh. 5. 46. If ye did
believe Moses, you would also believe me, for Moses wrote of me: and whereas
our Savior Christ, Luke 24. 44. unto the Law and the Prophets, adds the
Psalms, which are a part of the Prophets, it is because they were most
familiar to the godly, and generally known of the people by the daily exercise
of them, the former division notwithstanding being perfect.

Which are the books of Moses?

Five in number, The books of Moses.
which are called Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie.

How are the books of these Prophets distinguished?

Into Historical, and Doctrinall; The books of the Prophets.
the former whereof contain the explication of the Law, by practice
principally, the latter by Doctrine chiefly.

How many Historical books be there?

Twelve in number, The Historical books.
viz. the book of Joshua, the book of Judges, the book of Ruth, the two books
of Samuel, the two books of Kings, the two books of Chronicles, the book of
Ezra, the book of Nehemiah, and the book of Ester.

How are the Doctrinall books distinguished?

Into Poetical, The Doctrinal books.
and Prosaicall; which distinction is thought of many to be observed by our
Savior Christ, Luke 24. 44. where he under the name of Psalms comprehends
all those books that are written in the holy Poetical style.

Which are the Poetical books?

Such as are written in Meeter or poesy, The Poetical books.
containing principally, wise, and holy sentences, (whence also they may be
called Sententiall) and they are five in number, viz. The book of Job, the
Psalms, and Solomon's three books, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the
Canticles.

Which are the Prosaicall books?

Such as are for the most part written in prose, The Prosaicall books.
and foretell things to come; (whence also more especially they are termed
Prophetical, or vaticinall) of which kind are sixteen writers in number,
four whereof are called the greater Prophets, viz. Isaiah, Jeremiah, (to whose
prophesies is annexed his book of Lamentations, though written in Meeter)
Ezekiel, and Daniel, and twelve are called smaller Prophets, viz. Hosea, Joel,
Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zachary,
Malachi; which twelve of old were reckoned for one book, and therefore Act. 7*
42. Stephen citing a place out of Amos 5. 25. uses this form; As it is written
in the book of the Prophets.

Be there no other Canonical books of the Scripture of the Old Testament
besides these that you have named?

No; The Apocryphal books.
for those other books which Papists would obtrude unto us for Canonical, are
Apocryphal, that is to say, such as are to lie hid, when there is proof to be
made of Religion.

How prove you that those Apocryphal books are no part of the Canonical
Scriptures?



Romans 3. 2.) nor read and expounded in their Synagogues. See Josephus contra
Appion. lib. 1. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 10.



Luke 24. 27. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

But Malachi was the last Prophet, after whom all the Apocrypha was written.



Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 18. (out of Origin) the Council of Loadicea, Can. 59.
which is also confirmed by the sixth general Council of Constantinople, Can.
2. and many other Testimonies of the ancient Fathers.



Show some of those errors in the particular books.

In the book of Tobie, The errors of the Apocryphal Books.
the Angel makes a lie, saying that he is Azariah the son of Ananias, Tob. 5.
12. which is far from the Spirit of God, and the nature of good Angels that
cannot sin: There is also the unchaste Devil Asmodeus, the seven Angels which
present the prayers of the Saints, Tob. 12. 15. and the magical toys of the
fishes heart, liver and gall, for driving away of Devils, and restoring of
sight, not savouring of the Spirit of God.

Judith in her prayer commends the fact of Simeon, Genesis 34. which the Holy
Ghost condemns, Genesis 49. 5. and prays God to prosper her feigned tales and
lies, Jud. 9. 13. and 18.

Baruch says, he wrote this book in Babylon, Chap. 1. whereas it appears by
Jeremiah 43. 6. that he was with Jeremiah at Jerusalem, and went not from him.
Likewise he writes for offerings, and vessels, after the Temple was burned:
and in the 6 Chapter, v. 2. Jeremiah writes that the continuance of the Jews
in Babylon shall be for seven Generations, whereas the Canonical Jeremiah
Prophesies but of 70. years, Chap. 29. 10. For ten years cannot make a
Generation, neither is it ever so taken in the Canonical Scriptures.

The story of Susanna makes Daniel a young child in the days of Astyages,
and to become famous among the people by the judgment of Susanna, whereas
Daniel himself writes otherwise of his carriage into Babylon, in the days of
Jehoiakim, under Nebuchadnezzar, and of the means by which he was known first
to be a Prophet, Dan. 1. 2.

The story of Bell and the Dragon speaks of Habakkuk the Prophet, in the days
of Cyrus, who prophesied before the captivity of Babylon, which was 70 years
before Cyrus.

The first book of Maccabees, writing an History of things said, and done, does
not much interlace his own judgment: and therefore does err the less, yet in
his Narration, contrary to the second book of Maccabees, in many places, and to
Josephus in somethings: For example, The first book of Maccabees says, that
Antiochus dyed at Babylon in his bed, being grieved in mind for tidings
brought to him out of Persia, 1 Mac. 6. ver. 8. and 16. But in the first
chapter of the second book of Maccabees, it is said, that he was cut in pieces
in the Temple of Nanea, and in the ninth chapter of the same book, that he
dyed of a grievous disease of his bowels, in a strange Country, in the
Mountains, 2 Mac. 9. 28.

The second book of Maccabees is far worse, for the abridger of Jasons
Chronicle, which did set it forth, does not only confound and falsify many
stories, (as it is easy to be proved out of the first book of Maccabees,
Josephus, and others) but also whilst he gives his sentence of diverse facts,
does more bewray the weakness of his judgment: as he commends Razis for
killing himself, 2 Mac. 14. 42. and Judas for offering sacrifice for the dead,
that were polluted with Idolatry, 2 Mac. 12. 45. whereas it is to be thought
rather, that the sacrifice was offered to pacify the wrath of God for them
that were alive, that they should not be wrapped in the curse of the wicked,
as in the story of Achan, Josh. 7. yet he is the more to be born withal,
because he confesses his insufficiency (2 Mac. 15. 38.) which agrees not
with the Spirit of God. The additions unto Ester are fabulous, convinced of
many untruthes by the Canonical book; as namely, first, in the Apocryphal
Ester. Mordecai is said to dream in the second year of Ahashueros, (chap. 11.
2.) but in the Canonical, the seventh year ( Ester 2. 16.) And Bellarmine
making the dream in the seventh year, and the conspiracy in the second, makes
five years difference, and is contrary to Chap. 11. 2. The true says that
Mordecai had no reward, ( Ester 6. 3.) the false says he had, ( Chap. 12. 5.)
Thirdly, and the false also, Chap. 12. 6. The true calls, and the false also,
Haman an Agagite, Ester 3. 2. that is, an Amalekite; the false calls him a
Macedonian, Chap. 16. 10. Also the author of those additions, describes the
countenance of the King to be full of cruelty, and wrath, ( Chap. 15. 7.) yet
he makes Ester to say it was glorious, like an Angel of God, and full of
grace, ( Chap. 13. 14.) either lying himself, or charging Ester with impudent
lying and flattering.

The Book of Wisdom is so far off from being any book of the Old Testament,
that it is affirmed by diverse ancient Writers, that it was made by Philo the
Jew, which lived since Christ, as S. Jerome witnesses, preface in Proverbs:
howsoever the Author would fain seem to be Solomon, Chap. 9. 8. See his
cruel sentence against Bastards in the end of the third Chapter.

Jesus the son of Syrach, shows the frailty of man in diverse places of
Ecclesiasticus, and namely Chap. 46. 20. where he acknowledges that Samuel
indeed, and not a wicked spirit in the shape of Samuel, was raised by the Witch
of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. also Chap. 48. 10. he understands the Prophecy of
Malachi, of the personal coming of Elias, which our Savior Christ does
manifestly refer to John the Baptist, Matthew. 11. 14.

The third book of Esdras is full of impudent lies, and fables, convinced by
the book of Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai, and Ester; For example, Ezra says, that
all the vessels of gold and silver which Cyrus delivered to Sheshbazzar, were
by Sheshbazzar carried from Babylon to Jerusalem, Ezr. 1. 11. This Esdras
says, they were only numbered by Cyrus, not sent, but afterward Darius
delivered them to Zerubbabel, and by him they were brought to Jerusalem, Esdras
4. 44. 57.

The fourth book of Esdras is now rejected of the Papists themselves, as it was
of Hierome, containing also many falsities, dreams, and fables, Chap. 6. 49,
50. Chap. 13. 6. 4. 44. etc. and Chap. 14. 21, 22, etc.

Thus much for the books of the Old Testament, Of the books of the New
Testament.
in what language were the books of the New Testament written?

In Greek, because it was the most common language, best known then to the Jews
and Gentiles, teaching that all Kingdoms should have the Scriptures in a
language which they understand.

How are the Books of the New Testament distinguished?

They are of things revealed Before the writing of them; which are either
Historical, five in number, containing the History of Christ, the 4 Gospels
according to Matthew Mark Luke John.
His Apostles, viz. the Acts.
Doctrinall, 21 Epistles of Paul to the Romans Corinthians 1 2
Galatians Ephesians, Philippians. Colossians Thessalonians 1 2
Timothy 1 2
Titus Philemon Hebrews.
James Peter 2. John 3. Jude.

After the writing of them, as the Apocalypse, or Revelation of S. John which is
the Prophetical Book of the New Testament.


Is it agreed that all these books, and they alone, are the holy Scriptures of
the New Testament?

Yes; howsoever in ancient time they have not been all received with like
consent, yet they have the Testimony of all ages, and there is nothing in any
of them repugnant to the rest of the Canonical Scriptures.

Were there never any Books of the Canonical Scriptures lost?

No; Heaven and Earth shall perish, before one jot or tittle of them shall
perish.

What say you to the Book of Gad and Nathan, 2 Chro. 9. 29. of Ahijah and Iddo,
(2 Chro. 9. 29.) and Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans, Col. 4. 16?

These books often mentioned in the Old Testament, were not Canonical
Scripture, but civil Chronicles wherein the matters of the Commonwealth were
more largely written, as the Chronicle of the Medes and Persians, Esther 10. 2.
and the Epistle mentioned, Col. 4. was rather of the Laodiceans to Paul, then
of Paul to the Laodiceans.

What be the properties of the holy Scripture?

First, The properties of the holy Scriptures. As 1 holy.
they are perfectly holy in themselves and by themselves, whereas all other
writings are profane, further then they draw some holiness from them, which
is never such, but that their holiness is imperfect.

Secondly, 2 Highest in authority.
the authority of these holy writings, inspired of God, is highest in the
Church, as the authority of God, whereunto no learning or degree of Angels or
men, under what name or color soever it be commended, may be accounted
equal, Gal. 1. 8, 9. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. neither can they be judged or sentenced
by any.

Thirdly, 3. Sufficient in themselves.
the books of holy Scripture are so sufficient for the knowledge of Christian
Religion, that they do most plentifully contain all Doctrine necessary to
salvation, they being perfectly profitable to instruct to salvation in
themselves, and all other imperfectly profitable thereunto, further then they
draw from them; whence it follows, that we need no unwriten verities, no
traditions or inventions of men, no Canon of Councels, no sentences of Fathers,
much less Decrees of Popes, for to supply any supposed defect of the written
Word, or for to give us more perfect directions in the worship of God, and the
way of life, then is already expressed in the Canonical Scriptures, Mat. 23.
8. Joh. 5. 39. Mat. 15. 9. Finally, these holy Scriptures are the rule, the
line, the square, and light, whereby to examine and try all judgments and
sayings of men and Angels, Joh. 12. 48. Gal. 1. 9. All traditions, revelations,
decrees of Councels, opinions of Doctors, etc. are to be embraced so far
forth as they may be proved out of the Divine Scriptures, and not otherwise,
so that from them only all Doctrine concerning our salvation must be drawn
and derived, that only is to be taken for truth in matters appertaining to
Christian Religion, which is agreeable unto them, and whatsoever disagreeth
from them is to be refused.

How do you prove that the Scripture is such a Rule? That the Scriptures are a
perfect rule, for doctrine, life, and Salvation.


Since God has appointed the holy Scriptures which bear witness of Christ (
Joh. 5. 39.) to be written for our learning ( Romans 15. 4.) he will have no
other Doctrine pertaining to eternal life to be received, but that which is
consonant unto them, and has the ground thereof in them, therefore unto them
only is the Church directed for the saving knowledge of God, Esa. 8. 20. Luke
16. 29. 31. Insomuch that all Prophesies, Revelations, and Miracles, are to be
judged by their consent with the Law of God written by Moses, to which nothing
is to be added, nor any thing to be taken away from it, ( Deuteronomy. 12. 13. 1,
2.) yea, Christ himself appealeth to the trial of those things which Moses did
write of him ( Joh. 5. 46.) being none other in any respect, but even the same
whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets (which were the interpreters, and
commentaries upon the Law written by Moses) did write of, John 1. 45. and his
Apostles preaching the Gospel among all Nations, taught nothing beside that
which Moses and the Prophets had spoken to be fulfilled in Christ, as S. Paul
testifies, Act. 26. 22. saying, as he taught, all the rest of the Apostles did
teach.

Where do you find that the Scriptures are able to instruct us perfectly to
salvation?

The Apostle Paul, in 2 Timothy 3. 15. does expressly affirm it; and reasons
which may be gathered out of the two Verses following, do plainly prove it.

What are those Reasons?

1. God being author of these books, they must needs be perfect, as he himself
is, who being for his wisdom able, and for his love to his Church willing to
set down such a rule as may guide them to eternal life, has not failed herein.

2. They are profitable to teach all true doctrine, and to confute the false;
to correct all disorder private and public, and to inform men in the way of
righteousness.

3. The man of God, that is, the Preacher and Minister of the Word, is thereby
made complete and perfect, sufficiently furnished unto every good work or duty
of the Ministry.

How does this last reason hold?

Most strongly, for the people being to learn of the Minister, what to believe
and what to do, and more being required of him that must be the eye and mouth
of all the rest, if he may be perfectly instructed by the Scriptures, they are
much more able to give every common man sufficient instruction. Again, seeing
the Minister is bound to disclose the whole counsel of God to his people, (
Acts 20. 27.) he being thereunto fully furnished out of the treasury of the
Word of God; it follows that by him out of the Scriptures they may also be
abundantly taught to salvation.

What further proof have you of the sufficiency of the Scriptures?

The five Books of Moses, which was the first holy Scripture delivered to the
Church, was sufficient for the instruction of the people of that time, in all
that God required at their hands, as appears by that they were forbidden to
add any thing unto it, or to take any thing from it, but to do that only
which was prescribed by the Law, ( Deuteronomy. 12. 32.) The Prince and the people are
commanded to be directed thereby altogether, and not to depart from it, either
to the right hand or to the left, ( Deuteronomy. 17.) How much more the Law and the
Prophets (which did more at large set forth the Doctrine delivered by Moses
both in precepts and promises, in practice and example) was sufficient for the
time that succeeded until John the Baptist? Mat. 11. 12. Luke 16. 16.

What more can you allege for this purpose?

Psalm. 19. 7. David says, the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting Psalm.
119. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandment is
exceeding large.

Luke 16. 29. Abraham in the Parabolicall story testifies that Moses and the
Prophets were sufficient to keep men from damnation.

John 5. 39. Our Savior Christ affirms of the Scriptures of

Acts 17. 11. The Bereans are commended for examining the Doctrine

Acts 26. 22. Paul taught nothing but that which Moses and the

1 John 1. ver. 1, 2, 3, John says what they have heard and seen that

Gal. 1. 8, 9. Paul wishes that if an Angel from heaven came and taught any
other Doctrine we should hold him accursed.

Apoc. 22. 18, 19. there is a curse pronounced against him that adds any
thing or takes away any thing from Scripture.

Cor. 4. 6. Paul says, that no man must presume above that which is written.

John 20. 31. S. John says, that these things are written that we might
believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing, we might
have life through his name; where he speaks not only of his Gospel, but
(being the surviver of the rest of the Apostles) of all their writings: Seeing
then that faith by those things that are written, and eternal salvation by
faith may be attained, it ought to be no controversy amongst Christians, that
the whole Scripture of the old and new Testament does most richly and
abundantly contain all that is necessary for a Christian man to believe, and to
do for eternal salvation.

Obj. 1. Objections against the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures answered.
Yet our adversaries quarrel against this most rich and plentiful treasure of
the holy Scriptures, alleging that we receive many things by tradition which
are not in Scriptures, and yet we believe them; as Mary's perpetual Virginity,
and the baptism of Infants?

We make not Mary's perpetual Virginity any matter of religion, but a likely
opinion so far as it can be maintained; that it were an unseemly and unfitting
thing for a sinful man to use to the act of generation the vessel which was
chosen and consecrated by the holy Ghost to so high an use as was the bringing
forth of the Savior of the world; it has warrant from the Apostles charge,
Phil. 4. 8. of doing whatsoever is honest, whatsoever is of good report,
whatsoever is praiseworthy, etc. As for baptism of Infants it is sufficiently
warranted by reasons of Scripture, though not by example.

Obj. 2. They object that it is by Tradition, and not by Scripture, that we
know such and such Books to be Scripture?

Though new beginners do first learn it from the faithful, yet afterward
they know it upon grounds of Scripture; as an ignorant man may be told of the
Kings Coin, but it is not the telling, but the Kings stamp that makes it
current and good Coin.

Obj. 3. It is objected, that it was by Tradition, and not by Scripture that
Stephen knew Moses to be 40 years old when he left Pharaoh, Acts 7. 23. That
Luke knew a great part of the Genealogy of Christ, Luke 3. That Jude knew
Satan's striving for Moses body, Jude v. 9. and the Prophecy of Enoch, ver. 5.
14. That Paul knew Jannes and Jambres, 2 Timothy 3. 8. and the saying of Christ,
that it is more blessed to give then to receive. Acts 20. 35.

Such particular Histories or speeches might be received from hand to hand, but
no different Doctrine from that which was written.

Obj. 4. The Apostles testimony is objected, 1 Cor. 15. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Hold
the traditions which you have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle.

He means the doctrine he delivered unto them which was nothing different
from that which is contained in the Scriptures. Tim.


The Scriptures you say are a rule and a line, but are they not (as the Church
of Rome imagines) like a rule of lead which may be bowed every way at men's
pleasures? Qu.


They are as a rule of steel that is firm and changes not; An.
( Matthew. 5. 18. Psalm. 19. 9.) for seeing they are sufficient to make us wise
unto salvation, (as is before proved) it follows of necessity that there is a
most certain rule of faith for instruction both of faith and works, to be
learned out of them by ordinary means of reading, prayer, study, the gifts of
tongues and other sciences, to which God promises the assistance of his grace
( Joh. 5. 39. Jam. 1. 5.) And this sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God written, (as the example of Christ our general Captain shows, Mat. 4.)
is delivered unto us by the holy Ghost, both to defend our faith, and to
overcome all our spiritual enemies, which are the Devil and his instruments,
false Prophets, Heretics, Schismatics, and such like, Ephesians. 6. 17. Therefore
the holy Scriptures are not as a nose of wax, or a leaden rule, (as some
Papists have blasphemed) that they may be so writhen every way by impudent
Heretics, but that their folly and madness, as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.
9. may be made manifest to all men.

Are the Scriptures then plain and easy to be understood? Of the perspicuity
of the holy Scriptures.


There are some hard things in the Scripture that have proper relation to the
time in which the Scripture was written or uttered, or which are prophesies of
things to be fulfilled hereafter, which if we never understand we shall be
never the worse for the attaining of everlasting salvation: there are other
things in Scripture belonging to the saving knowledge of God, all which are
dark and difficult unto those whose eyes the God of this world has blinded, (2
Cor. 4. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 5. Joh. 8. 43.) but unto such as are by grace enlightened
and made willing to understand, ( Psalm. 119. 18.) howsoever somethings remain
obscure (2 Pet. 3. 16.) to exercise their diligence, yet the fundamental
Doctrine of faith, and precepts of life are all plain and perspicuous; for all
Doctrine necessary to be known unto eternal salvation, is set forth in the
Scriptures most clearly and plainly even to the capacity and understanding of
the simple and unlearned: so far is it that the Scriptures should be dangerous
to be read of the Lay folks, as Papists hold.

How prove you this which you have said?

Deuteronomy. 30. 10. 11, etc. Moses takes heaven and earth to witness Paul also,
Romans 10. 16. applies to the Gospel.

Psalm. 19. 8. the Prophet David testifies that the Law of the Psalm 119.
105. Thy Word is a Lamp or Candle unto my feet, and a Light unto my paths.

Prove. 1. 4. It gives subtilty to the simple, and to the young man knowledge
and discertion; and Prove. 8. 9. All the words of wisdom are plain to them that
will understand.

Esa. 45. 19. The Lord says, I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of
the earth, I have not said in vain to the seed of Jacob, Seek me.

Cor. 4. 3. Paul says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost,
etc.

Pet. 1. 19. S. Peter commends Christians for taking heed to the word of the
Prophets as unto a light that shines in a dark place, etc.





Tim. 3. 15. Saint Paul affirms that Timothy was nourished up in the
Scriptures from his infancy; namely, by his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother
Eunice, whence the same Apostle commends, chap. 1. 5. If little children are
capable of the Scriptures by the small understanding they have, and less
judgment, there is none so gross (which has the understanding of a man) but
may profit by it, coming in the fear of God, and invocation of his name.

Obj. 1. But here the Papists have many things to object against you, The
Papists objections against the perspicuity of the Scriptures answered.
to prove that the Scriptures are dark and hard to be understood: and First,
that the matters contained in them are Divine, high and beyond man's reason; as
the Trinity, the Creation of nothing, etc.

These matters indeed are above humane reason, Ans.
and therefore are we to bring faith to believe them; not humane reason to
comprehend them: but they are delivered in Scripture in as plain terms as such
matter can be.

Obj. 2. Peter says, that something in Paul's Epistles be hard, and wrested by
men, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

Paul's Epistles are hard, but something in them, which we grant.



Obj. 3. If Scriptures were not dark, what need so many Commentaries upon them,
and why are they so full of Parables and Allegories as they are?

The whole Doctrine of salvation is to be found so plain, that it needs no
Commentary; and Commentaries are for other places that be dark, and also to
make more large use of Scripture then a new beginner can make of himself, which
we see necessary in all humane Arts and Sciences.

Further, though speech of Scripture seem hard at first, yet by custom it
becomes easy, as reading does to children.

Obj. 4. The godly Eunuch could not understand the Scripture without an
Interpreter, Acts 8. 31.

Though he understood not some harder places, yet that hindered him not from
reading plainer places.

Obj. 5. The multitude of learned men that fall into heresies, which they
labor to confirm by Scripture, proves that the Scripture is dark.

It is their naughty hearts that come not with an humble and godly affection
that makes them do so.

Obj. 6. But now we see by experience that there are many that daily read the
Scriptures, and yet understand not the thousandth part of them?

They read them not with care and conscience, with prayer and study, but like
the women who are always learning, but never come to the knowledge of the
truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7.

Obj. 7. If the Scriptures then be so plain and perspicuous, what need is there
of an Interpreter?

First, to unfold obscure places, Acts 8. 31. Secondly, to inculcate and apply
plain Texts, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 14. 3.

Why did God leave some places obscure in the Scriptures?

First, Why God hat^ left some places of Scripture obscure.
that we might know that the understanding of Gods Word is the gift of God, and
therefore might beg it of him by continual prayer.

Secondly, lest we should flatter our wits too much, if all things could
presently be understood by us.

Thirdly, that the Word, for the high and heavenly mysteries contained therein,
might be accounted of, which for the plainness might be less esteemed.

Fourthly, that profane dogs might be driven away from these holy mysteries,
which are pearls prized highly by the Elect alone, Matthew. 13. 45. but would be
trodden down by swine, Mat. 7. 6.

Fifthly, that we might be stirred up to a more diligent search of the same.

Sixthly, that we might esteem more of the Ministry which God has placed in
the Church, that by the means thereof we might profit in the knowledge of these
mysteries.

What assurance may be had of the right understanding of the Scriptures? Of the
Translation of holy Scriptures.


For the words it is to be had out of the original Text or Translations of the
same; for the sense or meaning only out of the Scriptures themselves, ( Nehem.
8. 8.) which by places plain and evident do express whatsoever is obscure and
hard touching matters necessary to eternal salvation.

Why must the interpretation of words be had out of the original Languages?

Because in them only the Scriptures are for the letter to be held
authentical; and as the water is most pure in the Fountain by the springing
thereof, so the right understanding of the words of the holy Scriptures is most
certain in the original tongues of Hebrew and Greek, in which they were first
written, and delivered to the Church, out of the which Languages they must be
truly translated for the understanding of them that have not the knowledge of
those tongues.

What gather you from hence?

That all Translations are to be judged, examined, and reformed according to
the Text of the ancient Hebrew and original Chaldee, in which the old
Testament was printed, and the Greek Text, in which the new Testament was
written; and consequently that the vulgar Latin Translation approved by the
Tridentine Council for the only authentical Text, is no further to be
received of true Christians then it agrees with the original of the Hebrew
and Greek Text.

But what say you of the Greek Translation of the old Testament, commonly
called the Septuagint, approved by the Apostles themselves?

The same as we say of other Translations; for although the Apostles used that
Translation which was commonly received and read among the Gentiles and Jews
that dwelt amongst them, where it differed not in sense from the true Hebrew,
yet where it differed from it they left it, as by many examples may be
confirmed, ( vide Hieron. Prolog. in Matthew.)

How can the certain understanding of the Scriptures be taken out of the
original tongues, An objection grounded on various readings answered.
considering the difference of reading in diverse Copies both of Hebrew and
Greek: as also the difficulty of some words and phrases, upon which the best
Translators cannot agree?

Although in the Hebrew Copy there has been observed by the Nazarites some
very few differences of words by similitude of letters and points; and by the
Learned in the Greek tongue there are like diversities of reading noted in the
Greek Text of the new Testament, which came by fault of writers; yet in most by
circumstance of the place and conference of other places, the true reading may
be discerned; and albeit in all it cannot, nor the Translator in all places
determine the true interpretation, yet this diversity or difficulty can make no
difference or uncertainty in the sum and substance of Christian religion,
because the Ten Commandments and the principal Texts of Scripture on which
the Articles of our faith are grounded, the Sacraments instituted, the form of
prayer taught, (which contain the sum or substance of Christian religion) are
without all such diversity of reading or difficulty of translating, so plainly
set down, and so precisely translated by consent of all men learned in the
tongues, that no man can make any doubt of them, or pick any quarrel against
them.

Why must the true sense or meaning of the Scriptures be learned out of the
Scriptures themselves? Why the Scriptures must be expounded by the Scriptures.


Because the Spirit of God alone is the certain interpreter of his Word written
by his Spirit; for no man knows the things pertaining to God, but the Spirit
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. and no prophecy of Scripture is of any man's own
interpretation; for prophecy was not brought by the will of man, but the holy
men of God spoke as they were led by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. The
interpretation therefore must be by the same Spirit by which the Scripture was
written, of which Spirit we have no certainty upon any man's credit, but only
so far forth as his saying may be confirmed by the holy Scriptures.

What gather you from hence?

That no interpretation of holy Fathers, Popes, Councels, Customs, or practice
of the Church, either contrary to the manifest words of the Scriptures, or
containing matters which cannot necessarily be proved out of the Scriptures,
are to be received as an undoubted Truth.

How then is Scripture to be interpreted by Scripture?

According to the Analogy of Faith, Romans 12. 6. and the scope and circumstance
of the present place, and conference of other plain, and evident places, by
which all such as are obscure and hard to be understood, ought to be
interpreted; for there is no matter necessary to eternal life, which is not
plainly, and sufficiently set forth in many places of Scripture, by which
other places that are abused by the Devil or his ministers may be
interpreted, as our Savior Christ gives example, Mat. 4. 6. when the Devil
abused the Text of Scripture, Psalm. 91. 11. declaring that this place must be
so understood, as it may agree with that most evident and express Commandment
written in Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

What be the special uses of the Scripture rightly understood? The use of
holy Scriptures.


Two: First, to teach Doctrine, by laying out the Truth, and confuting errors.

Secondly, to exhort out of it, by stirring us to good, and turning us back
from evil; whereunto belong those four uses mentioned by the Apostle, in 2 Timothy 3. 16. Two whereof are Theoricall, pertaining to the information of our
judgment in matters of Doctrine, viz. first, teaching of Truth; secondly,
reproving or convincing of Errors. Two are practical, pertaining to the
direction of our life and actions, viz. first, reformation or correction of
Vice, under which is comprehended, first, Admonition, secondly, instruction, or
direction to good life; under which is comprehended Exhortation, and
Consolation, which is a special instruction to patience in adversities, Romans
15. 4.

What persons are meet to read or hear the Scriptures?

The holy Scriptures are reverently and profitably to be read and heard of all
sorts and degrees of men and women, Who must read the Scriptures.
and therefore to be truly translated out of the original Tongues into the
language of every Nation which desires to know them: For the Lay people as
well as the learned must read the Scriptures, or hear them read, both
privately, and openly, so as they may receive profit by them, and consequently
in a tongue they understand, 1 Cor. 14. 2.

How do you prove that the Scriptures ought to be read and heard of all sorts
of people? That all must read the Scriptures, proved.


First, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12. Moses commanded the book of the Law to be read to
all the children of Israel, Men, Women, Children, and

Secondly, Joshua 8. 34. there was not a word, of all which Moses commanded,
that Joshua read not before all the Congregation of Israel, with the Women, and
little ones, and Strangers, that were conversant among them; so likewise did
Josiah, 2 King. 23. 2. 2 Chro. 34. 30. and Ezra, Nehem. 8. 2, 3.

Psalm. 1. 2. David shows this to be the property of a godly man, and
pronounces him to be happy whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and
studieth therein day and night.

Matthew. 22. 29. our Savior teaches that ignorance of the Scriptures, is the
mother of error, not the mother of devotion, as the Papists have affirmed.

Joh. 5. 39. Christ commands all men that seek eternal life in him, to
search the Scriptures; Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, etc.

Act. 17. 11. the Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures.

Tim. 3. 15. the Apostle Paul approved in Timothy, that he had learned the
holy Scriptures from a young child.

Pet. 1. 19. the Apostle Peter commends the faithful for taking heed to the
Scriptures of the Apostles.

Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the word of this
Prophecy.

Col. 3. 16. Let the Word of Christ dwell richly in you, in all wisdom.

Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope; if the Scriptures be written for our learning, they are necessarily to
be read by us.

Romans 7. 7. Paul says, he knew not sin but by the Law; but the knowledge of
sin is necessary for all that will repent and be saved, therefore also is the
knowledge of the Law necessary.

Luke says, that he wrote the Gospel to Theophilus, that he might know the
certainty of those things, which before he was catechized in, Luke 1. 4. but
every one ought to labor to be most certain of their salvation, etc.

Diverse things are opposed by the adversaries, The Papists objections against
reading the Scriptures, answered.
against the necessity of the Scriptures, and the reading of them by all sorts;
as first, there were many believers amongst the Gentiles in the time of the Old
Testament, who yet wanted the Scriptures, (which was kept in Jury) as Job and
his friends.

Those (if any such were after the Law (for Job was before) were bound to have
the Scripture when it was delivered by God, and the Eunuch had it and read it,
Act. 8. 28.

Object. 2. The book of the Law was lost for many years, as appears by 2
King. 22. 8. and yet the Church was then; therefore it may want it.

The loss of that book does argue rather the carelessness of the Priests, in
not keeping it, and the sins of the people, in that God for a time deprived
them of it.

Object. 3. The Church of Christians many years after Christ, wanted the
Scriptures of the New Testament, and contented themselves with bare teaching.

First, though the Church for certain years then had not the New, yet they had
the Old.

Secondly, there passed not many years, before the Gospels, and Epistles of the
Apostles were written, and in the mean time, their heavenly Doctrine inspired
from God, sufficed till they wrote.

Object. 4. There be many poor Countrymen, as Plough-men, and Shepherds,
which never learned to read, which yet are saved, though they never read
Scripture.

They ought to have learned to read, and being not able to read, they might
hear the Scriptures read by others.

Object. 5. If all ought to read Scriptures, then should they understand Hebrew
and Greek, wherein the Scripture was written.

It were happy if they could understand Hebrew and Greek, but howsoever they
may read Translations.

Will it not follow hereof, that preaching and expounding of the Scriptures,
may be neglected as unnecessary?

No, for God has appointed not only reading, but also preaching of his Word,
especially to apply it to the use of all sorts of men to their eternal
salvation, Romans 10. 13, etc. So were the Prophets, Interpreters of the Law, (as
is before showed) the Scribes and Pharisees taught in the Chair of Moses,
Matthew. 23. 2. The Eunuch could not understand the Prophecy of Isaiah without
an interpreter, Act. 8. 31. The Ministry of the Word therefore is necessary,
as the ordinary means unto salvation, 1 Timothy 4. 16. and the people by reading
and hearing of the Scriptures are better prepared to receive profit by
preaching, not discharged from hearing the Preacher.

What is the sum of all that has been delivered hitherto?

That we should labor for a due knowledge of the true God, that we may know
what we worship, and worship what we know, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Joh. 4. 22. and
17. 3. That this knowledge of God is to be had partly by his Works, namely, so
much as may serve to convince man, and make him unexcusable, Romans 1. 19, 20.
Act. 14. 15. but most sufficiently by his Word contained in the holy
Scriptures, which therefore are called his Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 14. because
they testify of God, Joh. 5. 39. what he is, and how he will be served of
us.

Lastly, that forasmuch as all that is written in the Word of God, is written for
our instruction, and learning, Romans 15. 4. therefore we being prepared by true
Prayer, sanctified by Faith, and seasoned with the Spirit of sobriety and
humility, may safely learn so much as is revealed in the Scripture for our
profiting in the knowledge of God.

What is the first point of Religion that we are taught in the Scriptures?
That there is a God.


That there is a God.

Why do you make this the first point?

Because the Scripture says, he that comes to God, must believe that he
is, Heb. 11. 6.

Have any called this into question at any time?

Yea, so says the Prophet David, but he shows also that it was by wicked,
proud, and foolish men, ( Psalm. 14. 1.) whose lives were nothing else but
abomination and corruption, ( Psalm. 10. 4.)

What pretense of reason might they have for this wicked imagination?

Because no man ever saw God yet, by which foolish argument they may deny also
that there is any wind, or that man has a soul, for no man yet ever saw them.

But how come you to persuade your self that there is such a God?

Beside infinite testimonies of the Scriptures, as Genesis 1. 1. Psalm. 19. * the
common consent of all Nations approves this Truth, who rather worship any God,
or gods, then none at all; and though man by nature does desire to be exalted,
and in respect of himself despises all other creatures, as Wood and Stone, yet
when a piece of wood is framed out like a man, and set in the Temple, and man
conceives an opinion, that it is a God, he falls down and worshippeth it, (
Esa. 44. 15. 17.)

How then comes it to pass that the wicked say there is no God? (Psalm. 14.
1.)

First, though upon a sudden passion they may seem to say so, as the Devil
labors to tempt them, yet their very Conscience after does check them.

Secondly, they deny rather Gods providence, then his being, as appears by
Psalm. 10. 4. 11.

What other reasons have you to prove that there is a God?

Romans 1. 19, 20. Act. 14. 17. Zach. 12. 1.) it being evident that the world
could not be made by the Creatures that are in it, neither could it make it
self: as when a man comes into a strange Country, and sees fair and sumptuous
buildings, and finds no body there but birds, and beasts; he will not imagine
that either birds or beasts reared those buildings, but he presently
conceives, that some men either are, or have been there.

Zach. 12. 1.



a Cause, until we come to the first Cause, which is the universal Cause of
the being of all things, and is caused of none.

If we shall observe in Gods Works an infinite multitude, a wonderful Psalm.
104. 24.) as amongst so many millions of men, never a one like another in the
compass of the face, a most constant order, a seemly agreement, and an
endless continuance, or pleasant intercourse, of things coming and going, and
what exceeding Majesty is in them, we must needs attribute these things to a
God.

The consciences of wicked men after sin, are perplexed with fear Romans 2. 15.
Esa. 33. 14. and 57. 20, 21. and 66. 24. Psalm. 14. 5. and 53. 5.) for a man
that commits any sin, as murder, fornication, adultery, blasphemy, etc. albeit
he conceal the matter never so close ( Genesis 38. 10. 13, 14.) that no man
living know of it, yet oftentimes he has a griping in his conscience, and
fears the very flashing of hell fire; which is a strong reason, to show that
there is a God, before whose Judgment seat he must answer for his fact.

There is a devil that suggesteth a temptation against God, into the

The death of the wicked with Gods apparent Judgments upon Psalm. 58. 10, 11.)
prove that there is a God; this is David's argument, Psalm. 9. 16.

The same appears by the rewards of the godly, and the merciful

By the wonderful miracles which God has wrought for his

By the foretelling of things to come so many thousand years before

By the diverse revelations he has made of himself to men, as to Adam, Noah,
Moses, etc.

This ground being now laid, Of the Nature of God.
that there is a God, what does Christian Religion teach us concerning him?

It informs us, first, concerning his nature; ( Act. 8. 12.) Secondly,
concerning his Kingdom; and that respectively as they have relation one to the
other, Act. 28. 23.

What is to been known concerning his nature?

First, what his Essence is; secondly, to whom or what persons it does belong;
In the first he is considered in his unity, in the second, in the Trinity; the
former whereof, in the Hebrew tongue is noted by the singular name of Jehovah,
betokening the simplicity of Essence, the latter by the plural term of Elohim,
importing a distinction of Persons in the Godhead.

Can we understand what the Essence of God is?

Very imperfectly, Of Gods Essence.
for all nature is not able to teach us what God is in himself, neither can man
in nature comprehend him, Job 36. 26. 1 Timothy 6. 16.

Why is not all nature able to teach us what God is?

Because no work is able perfectly to express the worker thereof, but all
nature is a thing wrought by God, therefore it cannot perfectly teach us what
God is.

How prove you that man cannot comprehend him?





Romans 11. 33. therefore much more is God himself past finding out; and the
joys of Heaven are unspeakable, much more therefore is God himself unspeakable.

How then can he be known of us, being incomprehensible?

Though his substance be past finding out of man or Angels, Amos 4. 13. yet may
he be known by his properties, and actions, and we may conceive of him by his
name, Exodus 33. 19. and 34. 5, 6. Psalm. 145. 1, 2, etc. expressing what a one
he is to us, though we be not able to know him according to the excellency of
his glorious nature, only known unto himself, ( Jud. 13. 18.) Therefore he
said to Moses, Exodus 33. 20. My face, that is, the glory of my Majesty (he does
not say, thou may not, or thou shall not, but) thou can not see, for there
shall no man see me and live, but thou shall see my back parts, that is, (
verse. 23.) some small measure of my glory, so far as thou art able to
comprehend it: And even as Princes have their secrets, whereunto all their
Subjects are not made privy, neither is it lawful for them to search into
them, and yet do they so far forth publish their Commandments, as is
profitable for them to know: So the Prince of all Princes has his secrets,
unto which we are not privy, and into which we may not search; yet he has so
far revealed himself unto us (by his Works and Word) as is necessary, and
profitable for us to know, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

What does the Scripture teach us concerning the name of God? The name of God.


Exodus 3. 13. Moses asks this question of God, Behold, when I shall come unto
the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your Fathers has
sent me unto you, if they say unto me, What is his name? what shall I say unto
them? Whereunto God returns this answer in the next verse, I am that I am,
Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you.

What learn you out of Moses his question?

First, that we be careful to be instructed in all things concerning our
calling, thereby to be able to answer all doubts that may be moved; Secondly,
that asking any thing concerning God, as of his name or nature, we must ask it
of himself, who because now he speaks not but by his Ministers, Interpreters
of the Scriptures, (2 Cor. 5. 20. Hosea 12. 10.) we must have our recourse unto
them.

What learn you out of Gods answer?

That the proper name of God is I am that I am, or (as the Hebrew sounds) I
will be what I will be; the Hebrews using the future time for the present as
that which notes a continuance.

What is meant by these words?

Hereby is set forth the manner of the being and essence of God, far otherwise
then the proper names of men, which declare either nothing of their nature and
being, or else not the whole and full thereof.

Is there nothing of God to be known besides his name?

Nothing as touching his being, falling under our weak and shallow capacity.

What names of God in the Scripture are derived from these words?

Two, the name Jehovah, and the name Jah, both which being drawn from this
description of God, does set forth his essence and being, teaching us, that
his eternal and almighty being (whom no creature is able to conceive)
depends of no other cause, but stands of himself.

How is God only said to be, seeing the creatures have their being also?

God is said only to be, because he only is of himself, and all other things
have their being from him, so that in comparison nothing has a being but
God. Therefore the Prophet says, Esa. 40. 17. that all nations before him are
nothing, yea to him less then nothing; and if men be nothing, for whom the
world was made, how much more are all creatures in heaven and earth nothing
before him, and to him less then nothing?

Can you from hence define what God is?

He must have the art and logic of God himself, that must give a perfect
distinction of God, but he may in such sort be described as he may be discerned
from all false gods, and all creatures whatsoever.

Why can there no perfect definition of God be given?

Forasmuch as God is in himself eternal, infinite, and incomprehensible, the
first cause of all causes and effects, there can no definition be given of him;
seeing every definition is an explication of the nature of the thing defined by
words expressing the material and formal cause thereof, but of the first
cause there can be no causes, therefore no words to express them; for these
overreaching terms of thing, being, somewhat, nature, etc. which seem to
contain the Word of God as well as all other things created by him, do not
express any material cause of God, neither do they contain these words God
and creature, as the general does his specials or kinds, but are spoken of
them equivocally, so that the term only, and not the definition of the term
does agree to them; for in the kinds or specials of one general there is no
priority of nature, as is between the cause and effect, neither is this word
Cause affirmed of God, but as a term of the art of Logic; and if substance be
that which upholdeth accidents, as Aristotle teaches, neither may God be
called a substance, for that in him are no accidents, but if substance be taken
generally for a being, it may be said that God is a substance, yet none
otherwise then as he is a being, thing, nature, etc. And if there be no
material cause, there can be no formal cause of God; for although we read in
the Scripture the form of God, Phil. 2. 6. yet the form is not there taken for
any cause of God: but either for that which God indeed is, or for that glory
which of right belongs unto him; for in speaking of God, whom no words of man
are able to express, the holy Ghost oftentimes condescending to the weakness
of our understanding, uses such terms, as being known to men, do signify
something that is like to that, which God indeed is of himself, that we may
understand so much as is expedient for us to know of him.

Whence may the description of God be taken?

From the things whereby he does manifest himself, called in Scripture his
name, Psalm. 145. 1, 2, 3. among which the chief and principal are his
Attributes or Properties.

What are the Properties or Attributes of God? Of the Properties or Attributes
of God.


They are essential faculties of God according to the diverse manner of his
working, 1 John 4. 16. Psalm. 145.

Are they communicable with the creatures?

No; yet of some of them there are some shadows and glimpses in Men and Angels;
(as Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Mercy, etc.) other some are so peculiar to the
divine Essence, that the like of them are not to be found in the creatures, (as
simpleness, infiniteness, eternity, etc.)

How may these Properties be considered?

They may be considered either in themselves, as they are essential, or in
their works, or effects, which are all perfect either as they be absolute, or
as they be actual; absolute in himself, by which he is able to show them more
then ever he will; (as he is able to do more then ever he will do, Mat. 3. 9.
God is able of stones to raise children unto Abraham) actual, is that which he
shows in the Creation and government of the world (as Psalm. 135. 7. All
things that he will he does, etc.) Again, something we may conceive of his
Essence affirmatively, knowing that all perfections which we apprehend must be
ascribed unto God, and that after a more excellent manner then can be
apprehended; as that he is in himself, by himself, and of himself, that he is
one true God and holy; but much more by denial or by removing all
imperfections whatsoever, as of composition by the titles of simple, spiritual
and incorporeall; of all circumscription of time, by the title of eternal; of
all bounds of place, by that of infinite; of all possibility of motion, by
those titles of unchangeable, incorruptible, and such like.

What description can you make of God by these Properties?

God is a Spirit eternal; A description of God.
or more fully, God is a spiritual substance, having his being of himself,
infinitely great, and good, Joh. 4. 24. and 8. 58. Exodus 3. 14. and 34. 6, 7.
Ps. 145. 3. 8, 9.

What learn you hence?

To acknowledge both my being and wel-beeing from him, and for him alone, Acts
17. 28. 1 Cor. 10. 30. Ephesians. 2. 10.

What mean you when you say that God is a substance?

God is such a thing as has a being in himself, of himself, and which gives
a being to all other things.

What mean you by that addition Of himself?

It has a secret opposition to all creatures, which have a being, but not of
themselves, whereas God alone is he in whom we live, and move, and have our
being, Acts 17. 28. which proves that he alone has his being of himself.

How many things conceive you of God, God a Spirit.
when you say that he is a Spirit?

Six things.

First, that he is a living substance.

Secondly, that he is incorruptible.

Thirdly, that he is incorporeall, without body, flesh, blood, or bones, Luke
24. 39.

Fourthly, that he is invisible, ( i.) he cannot be seen with any mortal

Fifthly, that he is intangible, not felt.

Sixthly, that he is indivisible, ( i.) he cannot be divided.

How prove you that God is invisible, and not to be seen with carnal eyes?

That no man has seen God, is plainly set down, 1 John 4. 12. that no man can
see God, is as plainly proved, Exodus 33. 20. 1 Timothy 6. 16. and besides
Scripture, the same is also manifest by reason, for we cannot see our own souls
which are ten thousand times a more gross substance then God, much less can
we see God which is a most pure and spiritual substance.

Obj. 1. We read, Genesis 18. 1. that God appeared to Abraham, and Deuteronomy. 5. 24.
that he showed himself to the Israelites.

God gave them indeed some outward sights whereby they might be certain of his
presence, and therefore it is said, that the Lord appeared unto them, but his
substance or essence they saw not; for to know God perfectly, is proper to God
only, Joh. 6. 46.

Obj. 2. We read, Genesis 1. 26. that man was made according to the image of God:
It would seem therefore that God is corporeal and visible as man is.

The image of God consists not in the shape and figure of his body, but in
the mind, and integrity of nature, or (as the Scripture says) in wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.

Obj. 3. Why then does the Scripture attribute unto him hands, feet, etc?

The Scripture so speaks of him as we are able to conceive thereof, and
therefore in these and such like speeches humbles it self to our capacity,
attributing members unto God to signify the like actions in him.

To what use serves this doctrine, that God is a Spirit?

It teaches us, first, to worship him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 23, 24.
Secondly, to drive away all fond imaginations and gross conceits of God out
of our hearts, and all pictures and similitudes of God out of our sights: that
we frame not any image of him in our minds, as ignorant folks do, who think
him to be an old man sitting in heaven, etc. For seeing that God was never
seen, whereunto shall he be resembled? Moses urges this point hard and often to
the Israelites, saying, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. they heard a voice but saw no similitude;
and adds, ver. 15. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves; he says not
only take heed, but take good heed, and therefore take good heed; for (says he
again) ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you
in Horeb out of the midst of the fire; then he comes in the next four verses
to the thing that they must therefore take heed of, that ye corrupt not your
selves and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness
of male or female, etc. Romans 1. 23.

How may the Attributes or Properties of God be distinguished?

Some do concern the perfection of his essence, some his life, which in God be
one and the same thing, distinguished only for our capacity.

What call you the perfection of Gods essence? The perfection of God.


His absolute constitution by which he is wholly complete within himself, and
consequently needs nothing without himself, but alone suffices himself,
having all things from himself, and in himself; Or thus, perfection is an
essential property in God, whereby whatsoever is in God is perfect, Genesis 17.
1. Psa. 16. 2. and 50. 12. Romans 11. 35, 36.

What arises from hence?

All felicity and happiness, all endless bliss and glory.

What is the felicity of God? The felicity of God.


It is the property of God, whereby he has all fullness of delight and
contentment in himself.

What learn you from the perfection of God?

That he is to seek his own glory, and not the glory of any in all that he
wills, or wills not, does, or leaves undone.

What gather you thereof?

They are confuted that think God is moved to will or nill things in respect of
the creatures, as men that seeing a miserable man are moved to pity; whereas
God of himself, and in himself is moved to save or reject, (we speak here of
reprobation, not of condemnation) to receive some, and to cast away others.

What else?

That all which he does is perfect, howsoever he deals with us.

Wherein does the perfection of Gods essence principally consist?

In simpleness, or singleness, and infiniteness.

Why be these two counted the principal properties of God?

Because they are not only incommunicable themselves, (whereas those which
concern the life of God have some resemblance in the creature) but also make
all other properties of God incommunicable.

What is simpleness or singleness in God? Of the simpleness or singleness
in God.


It is an essential property in God, whereby every thing that is in God is God
himself; therefore without parts, mixture, or composition, invisible,
impassible, all essence, whence he is not called only holy, but holiness, not
only just, but justice, etc. Exodus 33. 19, 20

What gather you from hence?

First, that God has no qualities nor adjuncts in him as the creatures John 1.
5. 7. John 5. 26. John 14. 6.

Secondly, that Gods essence or substance cannot be augmented or Numb. 23. 19.
James 1. 17. Psalm. 33. 11. Esa. 46. 10.

By what light of reason may it be proved that God is thus unchangeable?

Whatsoever is changed, must needs be changed either to the worse, or to the
better, or in a state equal to the former: but God cannot be changed from the
better to the worse, for so he should become of perfect, imperfect; and to
exchange from the worse to the better, it is impossible also, for then he
should have been imperfect before. Lastly, if he should alter from an equal
condition to an equal, so that he should forgo some good which before he had,
and assume some other which before he had not, both before and after this
change he should be imperfect, being destitute of some part of that good which
appertained to him, which to affirm is high blasphemy.

Obj. 1. But diverse things are objected against that immutability of Gods
nature and will: as first, that in the mystery of incarnation, God was made
man, which before he was not.

That was done not by any conversion or change of the divinity, but by the
assumption of the humanity.

Obj. 2. If God cannot change his mind, why is it said, that he repented that
he made man?

The repentance attributed so often to God in the Scriptures, signifies no
mutation in Gods nature, but in his actions, mutably decreed from all eternity;
and the Scripture in this speaks after our manner, that we may better
understand what is the nature of God against sin.

Declare how that is.

When we are grieved with any thing, we do then repent us that ever we did
that thing for which we are grieved; and so is God said to repent him that ever
he made man, with whom he was angry, to show that he was unfainedly and highly
displeased with the evil ways of mankind.

Did not God then change his mind when he drowned the world?

No; but then he did execute that which from everlasting he had decreed.

Obj. 3. It is said, Exodus 32. 14. The Lord changed his mind from the evil
which he threatened to his people.

That is still after the manner of men; for man, because he is but man, cannot
speak unto God but as a man: and therefore Gods speaks again unto man like a
man, because else man should not understand what God is, nor what his will is.

Show me one example hereof in the Scripture.

When Moses prayed for the Israelites he used many reasons to persuade the
Lord, (but especially to confirm his own hope) at the last he said thus, Turn
from thy fierce wrath, and change thy mind from this evil toward thy people;
thus did Moses speak to God, and if he had spoken to a mortal man he could
have said no more nor no less, for man's speech is according to his capacity,
and both are limited, and beyond himself he cannot go: therefore when he shows
what the Lord did, he says, he changed his mind, which was as much as he could
conceive of God concerning that matter. Thus we speak as well as we can, yet in
a broken and imperfect manner to God, as little children speak to their nurses;
and Almighty God speaks in a broken and imperfect language to us again, for our
weakness and understandings sake, as the nurse does to the child: for if the
nurse should speak so perfectly to the child, as she could to one of greater
capacity, the child would not understand her: so if God should speak unto us as
he could, and according to his own nature, we were never able to understand
him, nor conceive his meaning.

Obj. 4. The promises and threatenings of God are not always fulfilled;
therefore it seems that sometimes he changes his mind.

His promises are made with condition of faith and obedience, Deuteronomy. 28. 13. and
his threatenings with an exception of conversion and repentance, Psalm. 7. 12.

What use may we make of this doctrine, of the simpleness and
unchangeablenesse of Gods nature?

First, it ministers comfort unto the faithful for strength of their weak
faith, whilst they consider that the mercy and clemency of God is in all
perfection, and without change unto them; for this is the foundation of our
hope and comfort in this life, that he does not now love, and now hate, but
whom he loves, to the end he loves them, Joh. 13. 1.

Secondly, it gives matter of terror unto the wicked, whilst they consider
his wrath and severity against them to be in most full measure, the one and the
other being God himself. It may also make us fear to offend him, because all
his threatenings are unchangeable except we repent.

What is infiniteness? Gods infiniteness.


It is an essential property of God, whereby all things in his essence are
signified to be without measure and quantity, and consequently, that the
substance of God, his power and his wisdom, and whatsoever is in him, is
incomprehensible, Psalm. 139. 1 Kings 8. 27. John 11. 7, 8, 9. Romans 11. 33.

Wherein does the infiniteness of Gods essence especially consist?

In immensity or exceeding greatness and eternity, or everlastingnesse.

What is his immensity or exceeding greatness?

It is an essential Attribute or property in God whereby he contains all
things, Gods immensity or greatness.
and is contained of nothing, that either is or may be imagined; and
consequently is free from increasing or decreasing, and all comprehension of
place, being present every where, both within and without the world, and
filling all places wholly at all times with his presence, for he is in all
places, in heaven and in earth, and the sea and hell, and all at one time;
neither can he be contained in any compass of place, (as is a man or Angel or
any other creature) but he is in all places, and fills all places at once,
and is beyond all compass of place that we can imagine, 1 King. 8. 27. Ps.
139. 7. and 145. 3. Job 9. 7. Esa. 66. 1. and 40. 12. Jer. 23. 24.

Is God every where bodily?

No, for he has no body.

Is God every where in speculation only?

No, for he works in every thing which he beholds.

How then is he every where?

He is every where essentially, for his essence is not contained in any place,
because he is incomprehensible.

Does he not remove himself from place to place?

He fills heaven and earth and all places, therefore he can neither depart
from any place, nor be absent from any place.

Is he not half in one half of the world, and half in the other half of the
world?

No, but as the whole soul is in the whole body and every part thereof, so God
is whole and wholly in every part of the world.

Obj 1. If God be every where essentially, then he is in the most filthiest
sink and puddle.

It is no abasing of the glory of his Majesty to say that he is there,

All the creatures of God in themselves are exceeding good, and

They are his workmanship, and it is no abasement of the workmaster

Obj. 2. If God be every where, why is it said he dwells in the heavens?
Psalm. 2. 4.

Because his glory and Majesty which is every where alike, shines most
perspicuously and visibly in heaven.

Obj. 3. It is said, Numb. 14. 42. he is not amongst the wicked.

He is not amongst them with his grace and favor to protect and defend them,
but otherwise by his power and providence he is amongst them to bridle their
raging affections, to plague their furious obstinacy, and dispose of their
desperate attempts to his own glory, and good of his people.

Obj. 4. If God be every where at the same instant of time, how is he said to
be sometimes near, sometimes farther off* Esa. 56. 6.

God is said to be near unto us, when by his word or any other means he
offers us grace and favor by them; and when he hears and grants our
prayers, as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. What nation is there so great who have God
so nigh unto them, as the Lord God is in all things that we call upon him for?

Obj. 5. If God be in hell, then all goodness is there, for he is all
goodness; and so consequently there is no want of joy in the damned.

The damned in hell feel no part of his goodness, that is, of his mercy and
loving favor; but of his power and justice. So that God is in hell by his
power and in his wrath.

To what purpose and use serves this doctrine of the immensity or infinite
greatness of God?

The consideration thereof should put us in mind, that nothing which is vile
and base should be offered unto God in the worship of him. Secondly, it serves
to drive all gross and idolatrous conceits of God out of our minds, and to
detect and bewray the impiety and blasphemy of those persons, who either by
making of pictures (as they thought) of God, or by maintaining of them, being
made; or by suffering them to stand still without defacing, (especially if it
be known) have thereby denied God to be incomprehensible. For those pictures
and resemblances of God which ignorant men have forged in their own brain do
tell us, and say, that God may be comprehended and contained within a place,
yea, in a small place, or in any place, as a man or other creature, which is
most high blasphemy against the Majesty of Almighty God.

What is his eternity?

It is an essential property of God whereby his essence is exempted from all
measure of time, Gods eternity.
and therefore is the first and the last, without either beginning or end of
days. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Esa. 41. 4. and 44. 6. Psalm. 90. 2. Rev. 1. 8. 11.

In what respect is God called eternal in the Scriptures?







Is it necessary that we should know this?

Yea, that we may here stay our selves with the certain hope of eternal life
grounded upon his eternity.

How may that hope be grounded upon his eternity?

Very well; for God being eternal, he can for ever preserve us, and seeing he
has promised, he will for ever preserve us, Ps. 48. 14. and 103. 17. Hereby
likewise are we strengthened not only in the immortality of our soul, but also
in the immortality of our bodies after the resurrection, considering that by
his everlastingnesse he gives continual being to such of his creatures, as
he is pleased to give a perpetual continuance unto.

Why else is God said to be eternal?

That so he might be discerned from all other things created; for nothing is
like unto God, as the Scriptures testify: Esa. 40. 18. Psalm. 113. 45.

How is God said to be alone everlasting, seeing Angels and souls of men shall
be also everlasting?

In regard of the time to come they are everlasting, but not in regard Alpha
and Omega, Rev. 1. 8.

Their continuance is such as it is not absolute and by it self, but Tim. 6.
16.

Is it necessary we hold God to be eternal, that so he may be discerned from
all things created?

Yea, we hold it in that respect for two causes.

First, because certain heretics have thought either all the creatures,

Secondly, that all idolatrous cogitations of God may be excluded

What is the life of God? The life of God.


It is an essential property of God, whereby the divine nature is in
perpetual action, living and moving in it self; hereof is that speech in the
Scripture so often used, The Lord lives: hereof likewise is that form of
asseveration or oath used so often both by God, Number. 14. 21. Romans 14. 11. and
by man, 1 Samuel 19. 6. Jer. 4. 2. As the Lord lives; and hereof it is, that the
Lord so ordinarily in the Scriptures has the name of the living God, Psalm. 42.
2. Jer. 10. 10. Heb. 3. 12. and 10. 31.

Why is God called a living God?

For four causes; first, because he only has life in himself and of Psalm.
35. 10. and 36. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 16. John 5. 26.

Because he is the only giver of life unto man, Genes. 2. 7. Acts 17. 28.

Because he is the God especially (not of the dead, but) of the living; Mat.
22. 32. for all live unto him.

To distinguish him thereby from all the false Gods of the heathen, Psalm. 115.
5, 6.

What may be known as touching the life of God?

As all life is active in it self, so the chief life (such as is in the highest
degree to be attributed unto God) is operative in three faculties and
operations; viz. in understanding, in power, and will.

What then be the attributes whereby this life of God is signified?

His all-sufficiencie, and his holy will; the former whereof comprehends his
omniscience or all-knowing wisdom, and his omnipotence or almighty power.

What is the knowledge or wisdom of God? Of the knowledge and wisdom of God.


It is an essential property of God whereby he does distinctly and perfectly
know himself, and of and by himself all other things that are, were, or shall
be, or can be; understanding all things aright, together with the reason of
them: Mat. 11. 27. Heb. 4. 13. Job 12. 13. Psalm. 139. 11. John 21. 17. 1 Timothy
6. 16.

How many things do you conceive of God by his attributes?

Four things. 1. That he knows all things. 2. That he can be deceived in
nothing. 3. That he most wisely has disposed and ordered all things, insomuch
that he cannot justly be reproved in any of them. 4. That he keeps not his
wisdom to himself, but bestows it upon his creatures, so that whatsoever
wisdom they have, they have it from God.

After what sort does God understand and things?

Not by certain notions abstracted from the things themselves, but by his own
essence; nor successively (remembering one thing after another) or by discourse
of reason, but by one and the same eternal and immutable act of understanding,
he conceives at once all things, whether they have been or not.

How great is this wisdom of God?

It is infinite even as God is infinite Psalm. 147. 5. Esa. 40. 28.

What be the branches thereof when it is referred to Gods actions?

Foreknowledge and counsel, Foreknowledge and Counsel of God.
Acts 2. 23.

What is the foreknowledge of God?

That by which he most assuredly foreseeth all things that are to come, Acts
2. 23. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Though this be not properly spoken of God, but by reason of
men to whom things are past, or to come.

Is this foreknowledge of God the cause why things are done?

No, but his will.

What is the Counsel of God? The Counsel of God.


That by which he does most rightly perceive the best reason of all things
that are or can be, Job 12. 12, 13. Prove. 8. 14. Ephesians. 1. 9.

For the clearer knowledge of this wisdom of God, what is there further to be
considered?

For the better understanding of this attribute, Gods absolute wisdom and
knowledge.
we must consider that the wisdom of God is tvvo-fold. First, it is absolute,
and we do so term it, because by it God can, and does simply and absolutely
know all things from all eternity: Heb. 4. 13. Psalm. 94. 11. Secondly, it is
special, whereby he does not only know his elect children as he knovveth all
things else, but also he does acknovvledge them for his own, and does discern
them from others, and love them before others; 2 Timothy

Of which do the Scriptures properly speak, when they attribute wisdom to God?

They speak then of his absolute knowledge, whereby he does not only know
alvvayes, and most perfectly himself and the whole order of his mind, but
also understands and knovveth all his works, and the works of all his
creatures, past, present, and to come; with all the causes and circumstances
of all.

How do the Scriptures speak of this absolute knowledge?

The Scriptures speak of it two ways, either of the knowledge it self, or else
of the things known, and so they show first, what and what manner of thing it
is, and secondly, what things are known of God.

Now tell me what knowledge is in God, and what wisdom does best agree to his
divine nature.

The best way to find out that, is first to consider what wisdom and knowledge
does not agree with his nature and essence: for his knowledge and wisdom are
infinitely greater than any we can affirm to be in God.

How shall we find what knowledge is not agreeing with his divine nature?

This is the best way; we must consider and set before us all the kinds of
knowledge, and all the ways and means whereby any knowledge is to be attained
unto amongst men and Angels, then shall we see that the wisdom and knowledge
of God are far more excellent every way, then the most excellent that can be
found or thought upon amongst men and Angels.

Declare then by what ways and means we know a thing.

By two ways or means we do know all that we do know; one way is by our
senses, viz. by hearing, seeing, feeling, smelling and tasting; another way is
by our understanding.

Whether does God know any thing by senses or no?

He cannot, because he is not as man, but is a Spirit, and bodilesse; and
therefore has no senses.

Why then do the Scriptures speak of the eyes, ears, etc. of God?

Although the Scriptures do attribute eyes to God whereby he beholds all
things, and ears whereby he hears all things, etc. yet indeed he has none
of all these, but these be figurative speeches used for our capacity and
understanding, signifying that nothing is hidden from the Lord.

Whether then does God know things by understanding, or no?

Yea, but not as we do.

Why, what manner of knowledge is that which we have by our understanding?

It is either an opinion, or a belief, or a skill and learning.

What is an opinion?

An opinion is no certain and evident knowledge of a thing, but is still
doubtful what to affirm or deny; and therefore such a knowledge is not in God,
for he knows certainly.

What manner of thing is belief or faith?

It is a certain, but not an evident knowledge; for look what we believe only,
that we do not see nor know by the light of natural understanding, therefore
it is no evident knowledge; but it is a certain and true knowledge, because he
is most true which revealed it unto us; for faith or belief is a most certain
knowledge grounded upon the report of another.

Whether does this kind of knowing things agree with the nature of God or no?

No, for God knows all things in himself and of himself; but not by the
report of another.

What say you to skill and learning, that is both a certain and evident
knowledge of things; does not that agree with the nature of God?

Such knowledge does not agree with his nature.

Why so?

Because it comes by knowledge that went before, and it is gotten by reasoning
and debating of things, by defining and dividing, and by searching out the
causes of things; but in God is neither before, nor after; first, nor last; and
God has no knowledge after such a sort. Again, our knowledge which way soever
it be considered, whether it be a habit in us, or an action in us, is
imperfect; for we know not all things, and those things which we do know we
know not all at once, but one thing after another, and yet still but in part.

Declare then in a word, how God does know all things.

God does most perfectly know and understand all things at one instant; without
any conceit of mind, altering this way or that way.

All our knowledge is a thing distinguished from our mind and understanding; is
it so in God?

No, for the knowledge or wisdom of God is a most simple and perfect essence,
yea, it is his very essence and substance, and God is all knowledge, all
wisdom, and all understanding, infinitely more then all men and Angels can
conceive.

Does God know and understand every thing particularly?

Yea, he knows the natures and properties of every particular thing.

How prove you that?

By the Scripture, and by reason, for the Scripture says, that God saw every
thing that he made that it was good; this is not spoken generally of all, but
especially of every one creature. Again, reason makes it manifest by three
examples in the Scriptures, Genesis 1. First, Adam gave to every living thing a
proper name, Genesis 2. 20. according to its proper nature; whereby it appears
that Adam had a distinct and particular knowledge of every thing: how much more
then had God this especial knowledge of every particular thing, who gave to
Adam whatsoever wisdom and knowledge he had?

Secondly, 1 King. 4. 33.
Solomon's wisdom and knowledge was so great that he was able to dispute, and
did thereby dispute of the nature of all trees, plants, fishes, fowl, worms,
beasts, and all natural things; as one that was most skillful in them: how
much more then does God know all things and their natures particularly, who
gave such wisdom to Solomon?

Thirdly, Mat. 10. 29, 30.
our Savior Christ says of the Father, that all our hairs be numbered by him,
and that a Sparrow falls not to the ground without the will of our heavenly
Father; if not without his will, then not without his knowledge.

Whether does God know all the motions of our wills and our thoughts?

Yea, God does certainly know the motions of the will, and the thoughts of the
heart in all men, and the issue of them all, which is manifest by these places
of Scripture following; Genesis 6. 5. Psa. 94. 11. Pro. 21. 1. Jer. 17. 9, 10.
Hereof it is that we cite him to be the witness of our hearts when we swear by
him.

Whether has God the knowledge of all evils or no?

God knows all evils and sins which lie lurking in all men's hearts, and this
is manifest by these places of Scripture following, Genesis 6. 5. Psalm. 69. 6. Job
11. 11. Psalm. 90. 8, 9.

What if he did not know all these evils?

It is impossible but he must know them for two causes: First, if he did not,
his knowledge would be imperfect. Secondly, if he did not know them, he could
not be a just Judge, neither could he reward every one according to his works
and thoughts, which to affirm were ungodly and blasphemous.

Obj. That which is nothing cannot be known, but sin and evil is nothing,
(for it is nothing else but a taking away, or failing of good, and it is a mere
corruption) and therefore sin and evil cannot be known of God.

We know what is evil, and we know evil things, and we do discern them
from good things, but we know evil only by his contrary, that is good; as we
know nothing by something, darkness by light, death by life, sickness by
health, vice by virtue; thus by the knowledge of good evil is known unto us,
and therefore seeing as God (who is the chief good) he does by himself know
all good things, he must of necessity also know and understand all the evil
that is in all good things.

Whether may God know those things which are not?

God knows the things which are not, and he does also truly know the things
which shall never come to pass.

What reason can you yield for this?

The reason is, because he knows all things by his essence, therefore he
knows all things which are subject to his divine essence and power, and
therefore also are possible, but shall never come to pass.

But does he know them eternally, or in time?

He knows them all eternally; that is, for ever and ever, he knew, and does
know them, as the Scripture does testify, Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 19.

Can you make this manifest by any earthly comparison?

Yea; a builder by virtue of his art does conceive in his mind the form of a
house, which house he will never build; how much more can God do the same, for
God can make more worlds, and he knows that he can, and yet he does it not.

Again, although there were never an Eagle in the City, yet we can conceive in
our minds what an Eagle is: much more does God know all things which are not
in act, and which never shall be.

Obj. This is something which you say, but your last similitude of the Eagle
does not hold; for therefore we keep the knowledge of an Eagle in our minds,
though all be gone, because the similitude of the Eagle which was sometimes in
the City does still remain in our minds and understandings: But what similitude
can there be in the mind of God, of those things which are not, which never
were, and which never shall be?

Yes; the very essence and similitude of God is a similitude of all those
things that may be if he will, which he must needs know, for he does most
perfectly know himself. And thus if we consider his power or almighty essence,
all things should be done which he can do and does know.

Then whether is his knowledge and power the cause of all things, which are,
which have been, and which shall be?

The only foreknowledge of God alone which the Grecians call
Theoreticascientia, that is, a knowledge beholding all things, is not the cause
of things, but his foreknowledge with his will which the Grecians call
Practicascientia, that is, a working knowledge, that is the cause of things.

Whether may the knowledge or wisdom of God fail or be deceived at any time,
or no?

The knowledge of God is most certain, and cannot any way be deceived, for all
things are known of God as they are; and all things are, as they are known of
God, and therefore his knowledge cannot any way be deceived, Heb. 4. 13.

Obj. But things do often change and alter, and therefore they are not always
as they are known?

Although things be changed and altered, yet God does know thereof; and
although they change and alter, yet his knowledge does never alter, nor change,
neither is it uncertain.

Whether may the knowledge which God has, be increased, diminished, or altered?

No, it cannot, it is always the same, firm and constant, and can by no means
be increased, diminished, nor altered; for he neither forgets any thing, nor
is ignorant of any thing, neither is any thing new unto him, for the Scripture
says, all things are always manifest in his sight; S. James says (1. 17.)
with God is no change nor shadow of change, therefore his knowledge is always
one and the same. Solomon says, Many devices are in a man's heart, but the
Lords counsel shall stand, Prove. 19. 21.

But if his knowledge be always one and the same, why does the Scripture say
that the Lord will forget our sins, and blot them out of his remembrance, and
remember them no more.

These and such like phrases of speech are not to be understood of the simple
knowledge of God, as though he should know them no more, but of his judicial
knowledge unto punishment; for although he does know and remember our sins
always most perfectly, yet he will not know them nor remember them to bring
them into Judgment, and so to punish us for them when we do truly repent;
that is, they shall be no more judged or punished, or laid to our charge if we
be in Christ, then if he had quite and clean forgotten them, and never did
remember them; and these speeches serve to arm us against the despair and
doubting of our salvation being truly in Christ.

Where is the wisdom of God specially of us to be considered?

The wisdom of God shines unto us most clearly in his works of Creation and
preservation in the world; and not only in his works, but also in his
Gospel, whereby he calls and gathers his Church out of the world to be
saved by his Son our Mediator Jesus Christ, Eccl. 3. 11. Psalm. 104. 24. 1 Cor.
1. 21.

Was this saving wisdom of God known to the Philosophers and natural wise men
in the world?

No, it was not, but only to the elect children of God.

Is the wisdom of God to be perfectly conceived of us? Matthew. 11. 25.

No; neither is it communicated to any creature, neither can be, for it is
unconceiveable, as the very essence of God himself is unconceivable and
unspeakable as it is, and his vvisdome as we have heard before, is his very
essence, that is, his very Godhead or God himself, and that it is unconceivable
the Scriptures do testify, Psalm. 147. 5. ^om. 11. 33.

What use may we make of this doctrine? The uses.


First, by this doctrine of Gods unspeakable knowledge and vvisdome,

Secondly, seeing our God is such a God as knovveth all things

Thirdly, it must make us to walk always before the Lord according

Fourthly, it serves to confirm our faith and trust in the providence Psa.
103. 13, 14.

Fifthly, this should be our consolation against the fear of hell and despair,
Joh. 17. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29.

What is the omnipotency or almighty power of God? Of the Omnipotency or
almighty power of God.


It is an essential property in God, whereby he is able to effect all things,
being of power sufficient to do whatsoever he wills or can will, Genesis 35.
11. Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Nehem. 1. 5. Job 8. 3. and 9. 4. and 11. 7. and 42. 1, 2.
Psalm. 115. 3. Deuteronomy. 4. 35. Mat. 19. 26. Luke 1. 37.

Are there any things which God cannot will, or do?

Yea, three kind of things.



Tit. 1. 2. to deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. to allow wickedness, Hab. 1. 13. to
be forgerfull, to do the works of a increated nature, etc. for the disability
of such things confirms, not weakneth Gods Omnipotency.



In what respects then is God said to be almighty?

Psalm. 135. 6. Esa. 40. 28.

Psa. 33. 9. and 148. 5. and 143. 5.





Acts 17. 28. Esa. 40. 29. so that there is no power but is from God.

What mean you when you say, all power is in God? It should seem by that
speech that there are more powers in God then one?

That we may rightly understand what power is in God, it were very requisite
that we did first consider how many vvays this word Power is taken in the
Scriptures.

Declare then how or in what sense it is taken in the Scriptures.

In the Scripture this word Power is taken two vvays, or in two senses,
sometimes for authority which is grounded upon law, by which authority one may
do this or that if he be able to do it; sometimes it is taken for might and
strength, or ability to do a thing if one has authority to do it: and these
are distinguished by two words amongst the Grecians and the Latins. For when
the Grecians speak of power that signifies authority and right, Mat. 28. 18.
then it is called (...), when they take power for strength, then it is termed
by them (...) amongst the Latins being taken the first way, it is called
potestas, being taken the second way, that is, for might or strength, it is
called potentia, and in English we call them both power.

It seems by your speech that they are not only distinguished, but that they
may also be separated the one from the other.

It is true, for so they are; as for example, a King may have great force and
strength, and by his great power he may be able to overthrow and destroy a
whole Country or Kingdom over which he has no authority. Again, some King
has power, that is, authority over his rebels, and yet has not power, that
is, strength enough to subdue them; so some perhaps have might and strength
enough to govern and rule another man's wife, another man's children, or another
man's servant, over which he has no power, that is, authority. And again,
fathers have authority over their own children; all husbands over their own
wives; and all masters over their own servants; and yet all have not power,
that is, strength and ability to rule them.

I perceive by this which you have said, that in creatures these two may be
separated one from the other, and many times are, but what are they in God?

In God they are not divided, but distinguished; for he has all power, that
is, all authority over all things; and he has all power, that is, all
strength, force, might, and ability to do all things with all things at his
good pleasure; and this power is not given him, but he has it in himself, and
of himself, most perfectly, absolutely, and eternally.

But of what power do we speak when we say that God is almighty? whether do
you mean his right and authority, or his strength and ability, or both?

Both are in God essentially, but when the Scripture speaks of Gods
omnipotency it means (and so do we) his strength and ability, whereby he is
able to do whatsoever he will, not excluding his right.

If all power or might be in God, tell me how manifold is this power which is
attributed to God in the Scriptures.

To speak simply, the power of God is but only one, and a most simple and
single thing, which is his essence and substance, yet for diverse respects it is
said to be manifold; and it may be considered two ways.

As it works always, and can work in God himself; for God in

As it works out of God himself in the creatures, as when he created

How many ways may Gods power be considered, as it works in himself?

Two ways: First, as it is common to all the three Persons in the

Secondly, the other working in God himself, is that by which the

How many ways do you consider the power of God working out of himself?

That power which has relation or respect to things created is twofold; Gods
absolute power.
the first is a power absolute, whereby he is able to do whatsoever he will,
the other is a power actual, whereby he does indeed whatsoever he will.

Where does the Scripture speak of the absolute power of God, by which he can
do more then he does if he would?

Yea, of such a power speaks our Savior Christ, I could pray to my Father,
and he could give me more then twelve Legions of Angels: but he would not ask
it, and his Father would not give it: see Mat. 26. 53. Phil. 3. 21.

How does the Scripture speak of Gods actual power?

Of this power the Prophets and Apostles make mention, Gods actual power.
when they join his power and his promises together, that is, when they say he
is not only able to perform, but does and will perform indeed whatsoever he
has promised: and of this power Paul does speak when he says, That God will
have mercy upon whom he will; and every where in the Scriptures we read, that
God has done what he would, given to whom he would; whereby we see that God
could and can do more then he would or will, Psalm. 135. 6.

How great is this working, or mighty power of God?

It must needs be high and very great, Gods power Infinite.
for it is infinite and has no end.

Declare how it is infinite.

It is infinite two ways, or in two respects: First, in it self, and of it self
it is infinite.

Secondly, as it is extended to the creatures, which may be called the object
of Gods power, it is also infinite.

Why do you say it is infinite in it self or of the own nature?

Because the power of God is nothing else but his divine essence, and the
essence of God is of his own nature, by it self, and of it self infinite.

Show how Gods power is infinite as it is extended to the creatures.

Because the power of God does extend it self to infinite things, therefore we
say that it infinite.

Declare how that is.

I mean the things which God can perform or bring to pass by his power are
infinite, and therefore his power is infinite; for God never made so many, nor
so great things, but he could have made more, and greater if he would: as for
example, he adorned the Firmament with an innumerable company of Stars, and yet
he could have decked it with more; and to speak in a word, God can always
perform infinite things more then he does, if he will, and therefore both in it
self, and out of it self, it is infinite.

Whether can this Omnipotency of God be communicated to any creature?

No, it cannot; for to be truly and essentially omnipotent, is proper to God
only, and omnipotency is Gods essence, and therefore whosoever is God is
omnipotent, and whosoever is omnipotent must needs be God, whose power is a
chief power and infinite; and the power of any creature is not infinite, but
finite, and so consequently no creature can be omnipotent, except we would
say that a creature or a thing created can be both a creature and a God, or a
Creator too; which is both absurd and blasphemous.

If God can do all things, whether can he sin or no; as to lie and to be
unfaithful in his promises, etc.

God cannot sin, and yet for all that he is still omnipotent, for to sin is no
part or point of omnipotency, but of impotencie: to sin is nothing else but to
leave the right and perfect way, or to fall from a right and perfect action,
which shows want of power to uphold himself that does so; which power
is not wanting in God, for he is omnipotent; and being omnipotent, he cannot
go from strength to weakness, and from perfection to imperfection, etc. and
therefore he cannot sin.

By what Scripture can you prove this that you say?

The Apostle Paul is of that mind that God cannot do all things: his words be
these, (2 Timothy 2. 13.) If we believe not, yet abides he faithful, he cannot
deny himself; he does not say he will not deny himself, but he cannot deny
himself; and his reason is, because (as he says himself) God is faithful
not only in his will, but also by his nature; and therefore since God is
faithful, by nature he cannot but stand to his promises which he made
according to the good pleasure of his will, and by nature he is omnipotent,
therefore he cannot be impotent: by nature he is good and the chief good,
therefore he cannot become evil, nor do evil.

But whether can God be moved, or be subject to passions or sufferings or no?

He cannot, for the power whereof we speak, when we say that God is omnipotent,
is altogether active and not passive; neither can any passive power be in God:
and to this effect speaks Saint Augustine, when he says, Discitur Deus
omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult; that is, God is
called omnipotent in doing what he will, not in suffering what he will not.

Some say that God can sin, but he will not, and that he can be subject to
passions, but he will not, and that he can do whatsoever can be imagined or
thought, but he will not; what say you to those?

Of them I say nothing, but their opinion is both foolish and ungodly; for God
cannot do any thing which disagreeth from his nature, and therefore he cannot
sin, etc. Romans 19. 15. not because his will is against it, but because it is
against his nature and natural goodness; 1 John 1. 5. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Heb. 1.
13. therefore do the Scriptures deny any iniquity to be in God, and Saint
Augustine says to that effect, Deus injusta facere non potest, quia ipse est
summa justitia; that is, God cannot be unjust, because he is most just and
righteous it self.

Obj. But yet for all this, God does in some sort will sins, for he does not
permit it against his will; and besides that, he commanded some things which
were sins, as Abraham to kill his innocent son, and Shimei to curse David;
did he not?

So far forth as God does command, or will, or work any thing, that thing is
not sin in God, for he both wills and works in great wisdom, and according
to his most holy will; and therefore no action can be sin in God, but every
action of God is most holy and good, and so says the Scripture, Psalm. 145. 17.

To what use serves the doctrine of Gods omnipotency?

The use of this doctrine are many. The uses.
It serves,



Jos. 23. 14. Number. 23. 19. This did strengthen Abraham's faith greatly; for Paul
says thus of him, he did not doubt of the promise of God through unbeleefe,
but was strengthened in the faith, and gave the glory to God; being fully
assured that he which had promised, was also able to do it. Romans 4. 20, 21.

Mat. 8. 2. How much more shall we obtain those things which we ask, if we
be persuaded of his power, and doubt not of his promises?



Job acknovvledge, Job 1. 21.

Ps. 50. 15. Joh. 10. 29. Dan. 3. 17, 18, and 4. 32.

Paul does reason from Gods omnipotency, about the rejection and election of
the Jews and Gentiles; Romans 11. 23. 25.



Thus much concerning the all-sufficiencie of God, Of Gods will.
what is his will?

It is an essential property of God, whereby o^ himself and with one act he
does most holily will all things, approving or disapproving whatsoever he
knovveth, Romans 9. 18. James 4. 15. Ephesians. 1. 5.

What learn you of this?

First, that nothing comes to pass by mere hap or chance, but as God in his
eternal knowledge and just will has decreed before should come to pass.

Secondly, that whatsoever comes to pass, though we know not the causes
thereof, and that it be contrary to our wills, yet we should bear it patiently,
and therein submit our wills to the good will and pleasure of God.

How is the will of God distinguished?

Into his secret or hidden, and his revealed or manifest will; the former is
known to himself, by which he wills diverse things of which man neither does
know, nor is to ask a reason of; and of this the Scripture speaks thus, If
so be the will of God, 1 Pet. 3. 17. The latter is the guide of man in all his
actions containing Gods Commandments, wherein is set down what we ought to do
or leave undone; as also his promises which we ought to believe, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Is not the secret will of God contrary to his revealed will?

No, in no wise; It differs in some respects, but it is not another will,
much less contrary.

How differs it?

The secret will of God considers especially the end, the revealed will the
things that are referred to the end; and the secret will of God is the event of
all things, where the revealed will is of those things only which are
propounded in the word, as to believe in Christ, and to be sanctified, etc.
John 14. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.

It may seem that the revealed will of God is sometimes contrary to it self,
as when God forbids murder and theft, yet God commands Abraham to kill his
Son, and the Israelites to take the goods of the Egyptians.

Here is no contrariety; because God in giving a Law to man gives none to
himself, but that he may command otherwise: therefore the Law has this
exception, that it is always just, unless God command otherwise.

But it seems that the secret will of God is often contrary to the revealed
will, seeing by the former many evil things are committed, and by the other
all evil is forbidden.

In as much as by the providence of God evil things come to pass, it is for
some good, as Gods glory, or good of the Church, or both; in which only
respect they by the providence of God are done, or suffered to be done.

How then does God will that which is good, and that which is evil?

He wills all good so far as it is good, either by his effectual good
pleasure, or by his revealed approbation; and that which is evil, in as much
as it is evil, by disallowing and forsaking it: and yet he voluntarily does
permit evil, because it is good, that there should be evil; Acts 14. 16.
Psalm. 81. 12.

Is there any profit of this knowledge of Gods will?

Yea, great profit for us to know what God will have us to do, and what he
will do with us, and for us, is a thing wherein stands our salvation,
therefore we are willed by the Apostle to enquire diligently after the same,
Romans 12. 2.

But the same Apostle in the eleventh Chapter, verse. 34. before says, Who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who was his Counselor? that is to say, none:
therefore it seems that the will of God cannot be known; and consequently,
that it may not be sought after.

Indeed by that we learn not to search into the secret counsels of God, which
he never revealed in his word, neither has promised to reveal in this world;
but after the revealed will of God, which he has vouchsafed to make known in
his word, we may and ought to enquire of God; as for the will and counsel which
he has kept to himself, we may admire and adore it with Paul and David; but
that we may not search after it, is manifestly proved by these places
following: Acts 1. 7. Exodus 33. 18, 19, 20. Job. 21. 23.

Whether can Gods secret will be known or no?

If he does reveal it, it may.

How does God reveal his secret will?

Two ways. First, sometimes by his Spirit, as when he showed his Prophets many
of his judgments that were to come. Secondly, sometime by the thing it self
which he wills, or by the effects of his will; as when a thing does fall out
which was before unknown: as for example, a man does not know before it come,
whether he shall be sick or not, or of what disease, or when, or how long, but
when all these things are come to pass, then it is manifest what was Gods will
before concerning that matter.

Show me what is our duty in respect of this secret will of God.

Our duty is twofold: First, we must not curiously search after the knowledge
of it, but worship and reverence it.

Secondly, before it be made manifest by the effects, we must generally rest
quietly in the same.

Show me how, by an example.

Thus a Christian must resolve with himself, Whatsoever the Lord will do
with me; whether I live or die, whether he make me rich or poor, etc. I rest
content with his good will and pleasure.

What must we do when his will is revealed unto us?

Then much more must we rest in it, and be thankful for it, as Job was, who
said, The Lord has given and taken, even as it pleases the Lord, etc. Job 1.
21.

What call you the revealed will of God?

The revealed will of God is twofold: the one is that which is properly
revealed in the Law, that is, what God requires to be done of us; and
therefore it is called the Law: and after this we must enquire. The other is in
the Gospel, which shows Gods will toward us, and what he has decreed of
us in his eternal counsel as touching our salvation.

God indeed by his Law has made it known what his will is, that of us must be
done and fulfilled; but has he revealed in his word what is his will and
pleasure toward us?

Yea, he has so, and that is proved by these places of Scripture following,
John 6. 40. Ephesians. 1. 5. Matthew. 3. 17. John 5. 39. and after the knowledge of
this will of God we must diligently enquire.

But whether may this will of God be known of us or no?

Yes, it may, for as it is revealed in the Scripture, so it is also confirmed
and sealed before our eyes in the Sacraments, and the daily benefits which we
receive from the Lord.

And is this sufficient to persuade us to believe his will?

No, for except the Lord does persuade us by his holy Spirit we shall neither
believe it, nor know it, as appears by these places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 2.
16. Mat. 11. 25. but if we have the Spirit of God, there is no need to go up
into heaven, or to go beyond the Sea to know it, because the word is near unto
us, in our hearts; as Paul says, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. For touching the matter of
our salvation, the will of God is so clearly laid open in the preaching of the
Gospel, that it needs not to be more clear.

If at any time we cannot know nor understand this will of God, as touching our
salvation, in whom is the fault?

The fault is in our selves, and the reason is because we are carnal and
natural, and destitute of the Spirit of Christ; for Paul says, The carnal
and natural man cannot perceive the things of God; but if the Spirit of Christ
does come and open our understanding, and correct our affections, we can no
longer doubt of his will; and therefore the Apostle immediately after adds,
and says, but we have the mind of Christ.

Whether is this will of God made known to every one of Gods children
particularly or no?

Yes, it is, for Paul having the Spirit of Christ says, that this will of God
was manifested unto him, when he says, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loved me, and gave
himself for me; and to the Corinthians he says, but God has revealed them:
that is, the joys of heaven to us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

How does this prove that we can have this knowledge?

Very well, for if all the Elect are led by the same Spirit that Paul had, it
will also persuade them of this will of God as well as Paul.

But how prove you that they have the same Spirit?

That the same Spirit is given to all the elect, I prove it out of the Prophet
Esaias, who says thus; My word and my Spirit shall not depart from thy mouth,
nor from thy seed for ever: Esa. 59. 21. which is such a blessing, as no
blessing can be desired in this world greater, more excellent or more heavenly:
for when we are once armed with the knowledge of this will of God, we shall
pass through fire and water without any danger, Esa. 43. 2. we shall overcome
the world and death, and triumph over our enemies, as Paul did, Romans 8. 38, 39.

Whether are there more wills in God then one, or no?

The will of God, in some respects is but one, and in some respects it is
manifold.

How is it but one?

For the better determining of this point, we must first consider how many
significations there be of this word, Will, in God.







May we call the decree of Gods will, the will of God?

Yea, very well; as the Testament of one that is deceased is called the last
will of the Testator, because it is the firm and last decree of the Testators
will, and mind, concerning the disposing of his goods; and the Scriptures do
make the will of God and the counsel or decree of his will to be all one, as
appears in these places following, Esa. 46. 10. Acts 4. 27, 28. Joh. 6. 40.

How is the will of God manifold?

There be two respects chiefly for which the will of God is said to be
manifold, or more then one.

Joh. 6. 40.

The other which he will have done of us, is that which is expressed in his
Word, and that is to believe in Christ, and to walk in his laws, Psalm. 143. 10.
of which David says thus, Teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God,
and Paul says, Romans 2. 18. Thou know his will, that is, his law.

Which is the other respect for which God is said to have many wills?



Show how that is.

He wills good things properly and absolutely by themselves and for
themselves; he wills evil things for another end, Romans 12. 2. and that is
for good too: and the first is called the good will of God, and acceptable to
himself; the latter is called the permissive will of God, or a voluntary
permission in God, because he is not compelled or constrained against his will,
to will them. Again, sometime he wills simply and absolutely, sometimes he
seems to will conditionally, and some things he reveals at one time, some
at another, and some things he does for which he gives a reason, and the
reasons of some things are secret to himself only and for ever.

Why then belike you grant that in God there be many wills?

No, I deny that; for although in those aforesaid respects the will of God is
said to be manifold for our understanding, yet for all that indeed and in truth
the will of God is but one only, and that most constant, eternal, and
perpetual: as for example, he willed some things in the old Testament, he has
willed other things in the new Testament, yet one and the same will in God
decreed both. Again, his will was that some things in the old Testament should
last for a time, that is, to the coming of Christ; or, as the Apostle says,
to the time of reformation, Heb. 9. 10. But he wills that the things of the
new Testament shall last to the end of the world, and yet one will in God
decreed both these from everlasting. Again, although God seems to us to will
some things absolutely and simply, and some things conditionally, yet in truth
to speak properly, all things whatsoever God wills, he wills absolutely and
simply; and whereas he is said to will some things conditionally, that is to be
referred to the manifestation of his will, for there is not in God any
conditional will, but only that which opens his will in this or that, or on
this or that condition; for a condition in God is against the nature of his
eternal kingdom and knowledge.

Obj. God commands many things to be done which are not done, so that there
is a will declared in his word, and there is another in him forbidding or
hindering that which he commands in his Law, and therefore there are in God
many wills.

The things which God commands are of two sorts: some are absolutely
commanded, without any condition expressed or concealed; as that Moses should
cause all things about the Tabernacle to be made according to the pattern given
him in the Mount; other some things are commanded and set down with condition,
as when Christ said, Mark 10. 17. 19. If thou will inherit eternal life keep
the Commandments, and the Law says, Do this and this, if thou will live; and
these are propounded conditionally to all, as well the elect as the reprobate;
God his absolute will is always one and the same.

And are they propounded to both after one sort?

No, not so; for although they be given to the elect with condition, yet the
will of God to them is absolute; for Gods will simply is, that all his elect
shall be saved, if not always, yet at the last; and because of their own
strength they cannot do the Commandments of God, therefore God does give them
strength by his Spirit; and because by this strength they cannot do Gods will
perfectly, therefore it is fulfilled for them by Christ, which is made theirs
by faith, and in whom God does accept their broken and imperfect obedience, as
if it were whole and perfect.

But as for the wicked and reprobates it is not so with them, for although God
does give them a law to obey, and does promise them life if they do obey it,
yet his will to them is not so absolute, that they shall keep it, neither shall
they obtain the promises either in themselves or in Christ.

But does not God mock and delude the Reprobate, when he wills them in his
law to do this and that which yet is not his will to be done?

No, he does not delude them; for although he does not show what he will
absolutely have done of them, which is properly his will indeed, yet by his law
he does teach what is their duty, and the duty of all men, adding moreover that
whosoever shall neglect and fail in this their duty, he sins grievously
against God, and is guilty of death.

Can you make this plain by some instance, or example, or any Parable in the
Scripture?

Yea, it is manifest in the Parable of the Kings supper, and the bidden guests;
they which were first bidden and came not, were not deluded by the King,
because he signified unto them what he liked, and what was their duty, but yet
he did not command that they should be compelled to come in, as the two sorts
which were bidden afterward: where we see that the Kings will was not alike in
bidding the first as it was in the second, for in calling the latter sort his
will was absolute that they should come indeed, and so caused, that they did
come; but to the first he only signified what he liked if they had done it.

How do you apply this to the matter in question?

I apply it thus, as it cannot be said that the first bidden guests were mocked
by the King, although his will was not so absolute for their coming, as it was
in calling and commanding the second sort of guests; so it cannot be said that
God does delude and mock the Reprobate in giving them a law to obey, although
it be not his absolute will that they should come and obey the law; for it is
sufficient to leave them without excuse, that they know what is acceptable to
God, and what is their duty to God, who has absolute authority and power over
them and over all.

Obj. God commands Pharaoh to let Israel go, and yet his will was to the
contrary, therefore there were two contrary wills in God, one revealed, the
other concealed.

It follows not, for the will of God was one only, and most constant, and
that was that Israel should not be sent away by Pharaoh, and so that was
fulfilled; as for the Commandment given to Pharaoh, it was a doctrine to teach
Pharaoh what he must have done if he would avoid so many plagues, and yet
showed him his duty, and what was just and right to be done, but it was no
testimony of the absolute will of God.

Whether does God will evil or sin, Whether God does will evil.
or no?

Before we can answer to this question, we must consider of three things.







Go to then, show first how many ways sin is to be considered?

Sin is to be considered three ways.





Romans 1. 26. for one sin does beget another, as one Devil calls seven Devils,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

Now declare how many things you do consider in sin.

In every sin there be three things.

The action, and that is either inward, or outward: the action which

The second thing in every sin, is the deformity or corruption of the

The third thing in every sin, is the offense or guiltiness thereof, Romans 6.
23. who in his justice rewards sin with death, as justice indeed gives to
every one his due.

Now come you to your third point, and show how many ways one is said to will a
thing.

We are said to will a thing two ways; either properly, for it self; or
improperly, for another end.

What mean you by a proper willing of a thing?

We do will a thing properly for it self, or for it own sake, when the thing
which we will or desire is of its own nature to be wished and desired; as for
the body, health, food, apparel, and such like; or for the soul, faith,
repentance, patience, etc. We do will a thing improperly, when the thing which
we will is not of it self to be wished; but yet we will have it for some good
that may come thereof: as for example, we will the cutting off some member of
the body, not because of it self it is to be wished, but for the health of the
body which does follow that cutting.

What difference is there between these two wills?

There is great difference; for those things which we will properly, we love
and approve them, we incline unto them, and we delight in them; but that which
is known of it self to be evil, our will is not carried unto that with love and
liking, but does decline from it; and whereas a man wills a member of his
body to be cut off, we may rather call it a permission then a willing, and yet
a vvilling permission.

You have showed how many ways sin is to be considered; how many things are to
be considered in every sin, and how we are said to will a thing: Now let me
hear what you say to the matter in question; that is, whether God does will sin
or no?

Before I answer directly to your question, I think it is not amiss to show
what every one must carefully take heed of in answering to this question, for
in answering there is danger.

Let me hear what dangers must be avoided in answering?

There are two; and every one must avoid them, and sail between them as between
two dangerous rocks.

The first is this, we must take heed lest we make God the author of sin by
affirming that he wills sin, as the Libertines do, and as Adam did, Genesis 3.
12. for that were the next way not only to put off our sins from our selves,
and lay them upon God, but also to cast off all conscience of sin, and all fear
of God, then the which nothing can be more blasphemous against God and
pernicious to our selves.

What is the second thing to be avoided?

The other is this, we must take heed that we affirm not any evil to be in the
world which God knows not of, or whether God will or no, for that were to
deny Gods omnipotency, and al-knowledge.

These are two dangerous rocks and heresies indeed, but now I expect a direct
answer to the question.

That cannot be at once, but by going from point to point according to our
former distinction of sin, and vvilling.

Very well then; declare first of all, what things God does properly will which
of themselves are to be willed.

1 Cor. 10. 31.
and to adore his glory, as in Esa. 48. 11. Pro. 16. 4. Romans 11. 36.



Whether does God will punishments or no?

Yea, his will is the first and efficient cause of all punishment: which is
proved by this reason and argument; every good thing is of God, every
punishment being a work of justice is a good thing, therefore every punishment
is of God, and he does will it.

What say you to the words in Ezekiel 18. 23. 32. I will not the death of a
sinner?

That place is to be understood only of the elect, for properly indeed, God
does not will their death, and therefore to keep them from death, meaning
eternal death, he gives them repentance.

Whether does God will sin as it is a punishment of sin that went before?

Yes, he does, and it usual with God to punish one sin with another: as for
example, the hardening of Pharaohs heart was a sin in Pharaoh, and God brought
it upon him not as a sin, but as a punishment of his former sins.

You say that in every sin is an action or deed, which is either inward or
outward; whether does God will that or no?

So far forth as it is an action only God does will it, but not the corruption
and deformity of the action, for in him we live, move, and have our being,
Acts 17. 28.

But whether does God will sin properly, as it is a transgression of the law,
and a corruption in the action or no?

No, he does not, neither can be, for it is against his nature, and to this
effect serve these places of Scripture following, Psalm. 5. 5. Heb. 1. 15. 1 John 1. 4. and reason does confirm it many vvayes; for look what God does
will properly, he loves and allows it, but God hates and damneth sin as
the Scriptures witness, and therefore he does not will it properly, Zach. 8.
17. Again, he has sent his Son to take away the sins of the world, and to
destroy the works of the Devil, therefore he does not will them.

Lastly, if God should properly will sin, then he must be the author of sin,
but he is not the author of sin, for the Scriptures do never attribute sin
unto God, but unto the devil and unto men, To. 9. 14. 1 Ioh. 2. 16.

But although God does not properly will sin, yet he does willingly permit sin;
does he not?

Yes; but for the better understanding how God does permit sin we must
consider how many vvays, or in how many senses one is said to permit a thing,
and that is three vvays.

To permit is sometime of two good things, to grant that which is

And is thus God said to permit sin in this sense?

No, by no means; for sin (as it is sin) has no show of good in it which may
be compared with a greater good.

Which is your second way of permitting?

Sometimes to permit is to grant one evil to go unpunished, that

And are not you of that mind?

No, God forbid I should; for the Apostles rule is both general and true, we
must not do evil that good may come thereof, lest we be damned justly,
therefore no man may by the law of God admit any sin to avoid another, Romans 3.
8.

What is your third way of permitting?

To permit, does sometime signify not to hinder and stop evil when Psalm. 81.
11, 12. Acts 14. 16. That he does permit them willingly and not constrained
thereunto, these places do show, Romans 9. 19. Esa. 46. 10.

For what cause does not God hinder sin, but permit it?

Not without cause, but that he may use our sins (which is his infinite
goodness and wisdom) to his own glory: for hereby his justice in punishing of
sin, and his mercy in pardoning of sin is made manifest and known, to the great
glory of God and praise of his Name.

Whether does God alter his will at any time or no?

For the better understanding of this question, we must consider two things.
First, how many ways our will is changeable. Secondly, the causes that move us
to change our wills.

Very well; declare the first, how many ways our wills are changeable?

The will of a man is changeable two ways: First, when we begin to will a thing
which we did not will before. Secondly, when we leave to will that which we
willed before.

Now show what be the causes thereof; and first why a man does will that which
he willed not before.

The causes of these be two; first our ignorance, because we do know that to be
good afterward which we knew not before to be good, and then we will that
which we could not before; for ignoti nulla cupido, for of that which is
unknown there is no desire. The second cause arises from the alteration of
nature, as if that which was hurtful to us at one time became profitable to
us at another time, then we will have that at one time, which we would not
another: as for example, in summer our will is inclined to cold places, but in
winter our will is altered, and does affect and desire the warm.

Whether is there any such cause in God to make him change his will, or not?

No, neither of these causes can be in God; not the first, for he does most
perfectly know all things from all eternity; not the second, for there is
nothing in God for which any thing may be found to be profitable or hurtful, he
is always the same, having need of nothing, and therefore he cannot will any
thing that is new to him, and consequently his will is not changeable.

But what say you to the second way of changing our wills; that is, of leaving
to will that which before we had determined, whereof comes that?

For this there may be yielded two reasons. 1. We do change our wills of our own
accord, because the latter thing does seem to us to be better then the former.
2. Being constrained or against our minds we do oftentimes change our wills,
because our first counsel was hindered by some cross event, that it could not
have his due effect.

Whether are any of these two causes in God, that for those he should change
his will?

No, God does neither of his own accord, nor yet by constraint change his
will, but his decrees are, and ever have been, and always shall be fulfilled,
and none shall hinder the will of God, for it does always remain one and the
same; and this doctrine is most strong^y guarded and fenced with these places
of Scripture, Number. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 19. Mal. 3. 6. Esa. 46. 10. Romans 11. 29.

Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. 4. It is the will of God that all men should be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth, and yet all are not saved; therefore
Gods will is mutable.

If this place be under stood of Gods revealed will, then the sense is this,
that God does call all men by the preaching of his word to the knowledge of his
truth, and to eternal salvation, if they will believe in Christ: but if it be
understood of the secret will of God, the sense may be threefold; First, all
men, that is, of all sorts and degrees, he will have some. Secondly, so many as
are saved, all are saved by the will of God. Thirdly, God wills that all
shall be saved; that is, all the Elect: for in the Scriptures, this word all,
is put sometimes for the Elect, without the Reprobate; as Romans 5. 18. Cor. 15.
22.

What is there comprehended under the holiness of Gods will? The holiness of
Gods will.


Holiness is a general attribute of God, Esa. 6. 3.
in respect of all the special properties of his nature, Psalm. 145. 17.
in respect whereof he most justly loves, likes, and prefers himself
above all: unto which most holy will must be referred both affections, (to
speak according unto man) as love and hatred; with their attendants, goodness,
bounty, grace and mercy on the one side; displeasure, anger, grief and fury on
the other: and also the ordering of those affections, by justice, patience,
long-suffering, equity, gentleness, and readiness to forgive.

What instructions do you draw from the holiness of God?

That as every one comes nearer unto him in holiness, so they are

That this ought to kill in us all evil thoughts and opinions which

Wherein does the holiness of God especially appear?

In his Goodness and Justice, Exodus 20. 5. 6. and 34. 6, 7. Nahum 1. 2, 3.
Jer. 32. 18, 19.

What is Gods goodness? Of gods goodness.


It is an essential property in God, whereby he is infinitely good in and of
himself, and likewise beneficial to all his creatures; Ps. 145. 7. Mark. 10.
18. James 1. 17. Mat. 5. 45. Psalm. 34. 9.

How many ways then is the goodness of God to be considered?

Two ways: either as he is in his own nature of himself simply good and
goodness it self, ( i. so perfect, and every way so absolute, as nothing can
be added unto him) or else as he is good to others: both ways God is in
himself a good God, but especially for his goodness toward us, he is called a
good God, as a Prince is called a good Prince.

Show how that is.

A Prince may be a good man if he hurt no man, and lives honestly, etc. but he
is not called a good Prince except he be good to his subjects, that is, if he
be not mild, gentle, liberal, just, a defender of the godly, a punisher of
the wicked; so that the good may live a quiet and a peaceable life in all
honesty and goodness: 1 Timothy 2. 2.
so the Scriptures call God a good God, because he is not only good in himself,
yea and goodness it self, but also because he is good to others; that is,
mild, gracious, merciful, his nature is not cruel, savage, nor bloody
toward us, but most mild, pleasant, sweet, and such as may allure all men to
trust in him, to love him, to call upon him, and to worship him. Psalm. 16. 11.
34. 9.

Is nothing good but God?

Nothing of it self, and perfectly, Matthew. 19. 17. howbeit, by him, and from
him, do come good things. Genesis 1. ult. which have not their goodness of
themselves; for whatsoever goodness is in the creatures, it is of God the
Creator; and they are so far forth good, as they are made good by God, and
are made partakers of his goodness. 1 Cor. 4. 7. James 1. 17. Again, that
goodness which is in the things created, whether it be natural or
supernatural, is imperfect and finite, but the goodness of God is most
perfect and infinite; and therefore only God is truly good, and goodness it
self: yea, he is Summum bonum, that chief good of all to be desired.

Is the goodness of God extended unto all creatures?

Yea, it is so; and as this is known by daily experience, so it is witnessed by
the Scriptures following, Psalm. 119. 64. and 145. 15. Mat. 5. 45.

Has God showed his goodness to all alike?

No, for the things created are of two sorts; either invisible, or visible;
invisible as Angels, unto whom the Lord has given more excellent gifts then to
the other.

And was his goodness parted equally among them?

No, for some he suffered to fall into sin, for which they were thrust down
from heaven to hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4. others he has preserved by his grace, that
they should not fall away from him.

Is his goodness alike to his visible creatures?

No, for of them some are endued with reason, as mankind, some are void of
reason, and therefore is man called a Lord over the rest of the creatures.

Is the goodness of God alike to reasonable creatures?

No, for of them God in his mercy has chosen some to eternal life, whom he
has purposed to call effectually in his time, that they may be justified and
glorified by Christ; others he has in his justice left to their sins without
any effectual calling, to perish for ever.

What testimony of Scripture have you that Gods goodness is far greater to
the Elect, then to the Reprobate?

It appears by the words of our Savior Christ, Mat. 13. 11. and of the
Prophet Asaph, Ps. 73. 1. yet God is good, that is, singularly good, to Israel,
even to the pure in heart, but God makes his Elect only to be pure in heart,
Psalm. 51. 10.

Does the goodness of God toward all men turn to the good of all men?

No, for in the Reprobate Gods goodness is turned into evil, and serves to
their destruction, 2 Cor. 2. 15. and that is through their own fault, for they
do contemn and altogether abuse the goodness of God, and for all his
goodness bestowed upon them continually, they never trust him, nor trust in
him. Romans 2. 4. Psalm. 106. 13.

How may we use the goodness of God to our good, and to our salvation?

If we have the goodness of God in a true and worthy estimation, if we use it
with fear and reverence, and thereby learn to repent us of our sins, and to
repose all our trust and confidence in the Lord for his goodness, then shall
all things, yea, even our sins work for our good; The uses of Gods goodness.
Romans 8. 28.

What use must we make of Gods goodness?

It teaches us that we have and do serve a true God, for he is no

We learn hereby, that by this goodness of his, he uses all things

If our God be so good, we should be ashamed to offend him, as it is

If God be so good, and goodness it self, we must trust him, and

It teaches us never to lay the fault upon God for any thing, nor to

Seeing God is good to us, we ought to be good one toward another.

To what end is it, that the goodness of God is not to all alike? 1 Timothy 2. 9.

It serves to the adoring and beautifying of Gods Church, 1 Timothy 2. 9.

It serves to the maintenance of mutual love, and society amongst Cor. 12.
20. Ephesians. 4. 7. 12.

It makes to the greater manifesting of the glory of the goodness of

From the consideration of Gods special goodness toward us his Tit. 2. 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8.

What be the several branches of the goodness of God?

His graciousnesse, his love, and his mercy; Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5.

What is the graciousnesse of God? The graciousnesse of God.


It is an essential property whereby he is of himself most gracious and
amiable, and freely declares his favor unto his creatures above their desert,
Psalm. 145. 8. 15, 16. Romans 11. 6. Tit. 2. 11.

Is he only gracious?

Only in and of himself, for that whatsoever is gracious and amiable, it is
from him.

What learn you from this?

That we ought to love and reverence God above all; for seeing gracious and
amiable men do win love and reverence from others, in whose eyes they appear
gracious and amiable, who is able more to win this at our hands, then God who
is the fountain of all graciousnesse and amiablenesse?

For the better understanding of this attribute, show how this word Grace is
used in the Scripture.

It is used in three several significations, sometimes it is put for
comeliness, stature, meekness, or mildness; Luke 2. 25. sometime for free
favor whereby one embraces another, pardoning former injuries, and receiving
the party offending into favor again. Genesis 6. 8. Thirdly, it is taken for all
kind of gifts and graces, which of his free favor are bestowed; whether
temporal or eternal: Acts 2. 23. Ephesians. 4. 7.

Whether is there grace in God according to the first signification of grace or
no?

Yea, for God is of his own nature most gracious, and grace it self, which
grace was in Christ Jesus from his infancy, (as he was man) and did every day
more and more increase, Luke 2. 52. Psalm. 45. 9. And amongst all things that
were created, there was nothing endued with such grace, as was the humane
nature of Christ, and that was by the fullness of the Godhead which dwelt
bodily in him, Coloss. 2. 9.

Whether is grace properly attributed to God in the second sense or no?

Yea, most properly; for God does justify us: that is, he does account us for
just through his Son Jesus Christ, and that of his free grace and favor,
without any desert of our parts or any thing in us, Romans 3. 20. 24. and 4. 16.

What be the causes of this grace or favor of God?

The efficient cause is his goodness and free will; the final cause cause
thereof is the salvation of his chosen children, and the glory of himself, and
of his Son Christ Jesus.

What be the effects of Gods grace to us wards?

In general, the grace of God (whereof there is no cause in us but only his
own goodness and will) is the first cause, the middle cause, and the the last
cause, and the only cause of all that belongs to our salvation. Romans 9. 11.
And particularly, it is the cause of our Election, of our Redemption, of the
sending of Christ into the world, of our Calling, of the preaching of the
Gospel; Ephesians. 1. 4. John 3. 11. 34. Romans 5. 8. It was the cause why the
Apostles were called to the preaching of the Gospel, Gal. 1. 15, 16. Ephesians. 3.
8. 9. It is the cause of our Faith, of the forgiveness of our sins, of our
whole justification, of our regeneration, of our renovation, of our love to God
and our neighbor, of the Holy Ghost in us, of our good works, of our
obedience, of our perseverance, of the fear of God, of eternal life, and of
life it self. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Phil. 2. 13. Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 3. 24.
Tit. 3. 5. 1 John. 4. 9. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Jerem. 32. 40. and in a word, the
beginning, the continuance, and the accomplishment of our whole salvation, does
depend wholly upon the grace and favor of God; and what good thing soever we
have, or have had, or may have, belonging either to this life or to the life to
come, is to be attributed wholly to the grace and favor of God.

What is the love of God?

It is an essential property in God whereby he loves himself above all, Of
the love of God.
and others for himself, 1 John 4. 16. Romans 5. 8. John 3. 16. Tit. 3. 4. Mal.
1. 2, 3.

What learn you from hence?

That we should love him dearly, and other things for him.

That we may the better know what the love of God is, declare first what love
is in our selves.

It is a passion of the mind whereby we are so affected toward the party whom
we love, that we are rather his then our own, forgetting our selves to do him
good whom we so love.

And is love such a thing in God?

No, the true love of God is not such as our love is.

What difference is there?

There is great difference two ways; First, in time, for love was in God
before it was in us, or in any thing created; for he loved himself and us also
before the world was. John 17. 23. Secondly, they differ in nature and quality,
for that love which is in God is most perfect and pure, Romans 9. 13. without
passion; but in us it is imperfect, and matched with passions, with impure
affections and grief of the mind.

After what manner does the Scripture express the love of God?

In the Scriptures God does compare himself to a father and to a mother loving
their children, to a hen gathering her chickens together under her wings, to a
good shepherd seeking up his sheep, and to diverse other things.

And wherefore serve these comparisons?

They are for our profit two ways. First, to show us that Gods love toward us
is most vehement and sincere. Secondly, to make us bold in coming to him, and
calling upon him; so for this love Christ Jesus calls us by all the names of
love, as his servants, his kinsmen, his friends, his spouse, his brethren; and
by many names more: to show, that he loves us with all loves, the fathers love,
the mothers love, the masters love, the husbands love, the brothers love, etc.
and if all loves were put together, yet his love exceeds them all, for all
could not do so much for us, as he alone has done.

If love does not signify any affection or passion in God, as it does in us,
what then does it signify?

In God it signifies three things most perfect; first, the eternal good will
of God toward some body; for the love of God, (supposed toward the Elect) is
his everlasting good will, or his purpose and determination to show them mercy,
to do them good, and to save them; as in Romans 9. 11. 13. Secondly, the effects
themselves of his love or good will, whether they be temporal, concerning this
life, or eternal, concerning the life to come; as in the 1 John 3. 1. Thirdly,
the pleasure and delight which he takes in that which he loves, and so it is
taken in Psalm. 45. 7. 23.

What things does God love besides himself?

Besides himself God loves all things else, whatsoever he made, but he loves
not sin and iniquity, for he never made it, as Saint John says, 1 John 2.
16. Again he loves his Son being manifested in the flesh, and he loves his
chosen children for his Sons sake, with whom he is well pleased; Mat. 3. last
verse.

Obj. 1. The Scripture says that God does hate all that work iniquity, how
then can God both hate and love one and the same man?

In every wicked man we must consider two things: First, His nature; Secondly,
his sin. His nature is the work of God, and that he loves, but his iniquity
is not of God, and that he hates.

Obj. 2. God does afflict his children, therefore he does not love them.

Whom he loves he corrects, and therefore he corrects them because he
loves them, even as a goldsmiths tries his gold in the fire, because he
loves it.

Whether does God love all alike or no?

No, he prefers mankind before all his other creatures, for which cause God
is called Philanthropos, that is, a lover of men; and this appears by three
effects of his love.

First, he made him according to his own Image, that is, in righteousness and
true holiness. Genesis 1. 26. Ephesians. 4. 24.

Secondly, he made him Lord over all his creatures, Psalm. 8. 5, 6.

Thirdly, he gave his own Son to death for his ransom.

Does God love all men alike?

No, for he loves his Elect better then the Reprobate; for the Elect he
calls effectually by his Spirit in their hearts, when he calls others but
by the outward voice of the Gospel, etc.

Again, amongst the Elect themselves, some are actually wicked, and not yet
reconciled nor called, as was Paul before his conversion; but the rest are
called and already made holy by Faith in Christ, as Paul was after his
conversion; and of these, he loves the latter sort with a greater measure of
love then the former; as the Scripture testifies in Prove. 8. 17.

What manner of love does God bear to his elect?

It has three adjuncts or properties; First, it is free without desert.

Secondly, it is great without comparison.

Thirdly, it is constant without any end.

How is the love of God said to be free?

It is free two ways: first, because nothing caused God to love us, but his
own goodness and grace, and therefore Saint John says that his love was
before ours, 1 John 4. 7.

Secondly, it is free, because God in loving us, did not regard any thing that
belonged to his own commodity; for as David says, he has no need of our
goods, but only to our own salvation he loved us, Psalm. 162.

Wherein does the greatness of Gods love appear to his Elect?

It appears two ways: First, by the means which God uses to save us by,
that is, the death of his Son, and so John sets forth his love, 1 John 3.
16. when he says, (...), that is, as if he should say, so vehemently, so
ardently, so earnestly, so wonderfully did he love us, that for our salvation
he spared not his own only begotten Son, but gave him to the death of the
Cross for our salvation.

What else does set forth the greatness of Gods love toward us?

The consideration of our own selves, for he did not only give his only Son to
death for us, but it was for us being his enemies; and this circumstance is
used by the Apostle to express the same, Romans 5. 7, 8.

Where find you it written that Gods love is constant and perpetual?

That is manifestly showed in these Scriptures following, Hos. 11. 9. John 13.
1. Romans 11. 29. for God is unchangeable in his love which is his essence and
nature, and therefore is God called love in the Scriptures, 1 John 4. 8.

What use must we make of Gods love?

First, Uses of Gods love.
it fills our hearts with gladness, when we understand that our God is so
loving, and love it self, and what is this but the beginning of eternal life,
if eternal life consist in the true knowledge of God as our Savior Christ
says, John 17. 3?

Secondly, out of the knowledge of this love, as out of a fountain springs
the love of God and our neighbor; for S. John says, he that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love, 1 John 4. 8.

Thirdly, when we consider that God loves all his creatures which he made, it
should teach us not to abuse any of the creatures to serve our lusts and
beastly affections, for God will punish them which abuse his beloved, as he
punished the rich glutton which abused the creatures of God, Luke 16.

Fourthly, we are taught to love all the creatures, even the basest of all,
seeing that God loves them, and for the love he bears to us, he made them,
and we must (if we love them for Gods sake) use them sparingly, moderately, and
equally or justly; to this end we are commanded to let our cattle rest upon
the Sabbath day as well as our selves; to this end we are forbidden to kill the
damme upon her nest, and to this end we are forbidden to musle the mouth of the
Ox which treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 9.

Fifthly, we are taught from hence to love mankind better then all other
creatures, because God does so; and therefore we must not spare any thing that
we have that may make for the safety of his body, and the salvation of his
soul. And for this cause we are commanded to love our enemies, and to do them
good, because our good God does so.

Sixthly, from Gods love we learn to prefer the godly brethren and those that
profess sincerely the same religion that we profess, before other men,
because Gods love is greater to his elect then to the reprobate, and this does
the Apostle teach us, Gal. 6. 10.

Seventhly, whereas Gods love is freely bestowed upon us, this teaches us to
be humble, and to attribute no part of our salvation to our selves, but only to
the free love of God.

Eighthly, from hence arises the certainty of our salvation; for if Gods love
was so free and great when we were his enemies, much more will it be so and
constant also to us being reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 10.

What is the mercy of God? Of the mercy of God.


It is his mind and will always most ready to succor him that is in misery; or
an essential property in God, whereby he is merely ready of himself to help
his creatures in their miseries, Esa. 30. 18. Lam. 3. 22. Exodus 33. 19.

Why add you this word merely?

To put a difference between the mercy of God and the mercy that is in men, for
their mercy is not without some passion, compassion, or fellow-feeling of the
miseries of others, but the mercy of God is most perfect and effectual, ready
to help at all needs of himself.

But seeing mercy is grief and sorrow of mind conceived at another miseries,
how can it be properly attributed to God in whom are no passions nor griefs?

Indeed in us mercy may be such a thing, but not in God; mercy was first in
God, and from him was derived to us, and so he is called the Father of mercies,
2 Cor. 1. 3. and when it came to us, it was matched with many infirmities and
passions, but it is improperly attributed to God from our selves as though it
were first in us.

Declare then briefly what things of perfection are signified by this word
[mercy] in God?

By the name of [mercy] two things are signified in God properly. First, the
mind and will ready to help and succor. Secondly, the help it self, and
succor or pity that is then showed.

Where in the Scripture is mercy taken the first way?

Those places of Scripture are so to be understood wherein God does call
himself merciful; and says, that he is of much mercy; that is, he is of such
a nature as is most ready to free us from our evils.

Where is it taken in the other sense for the effects of mercy?

In Romans 9. 15. where it is said, God will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy; that is, he will call whom he will call; he will justify whom he
will; he will pardon whom he will; and will deliver and save from all their
miseries and evils whom he will; and these be the effects of Gods mercies.
Again, in Exodus 20. 6. it is so taken.

From whence springs this mercy of God?

The essence and being of God is most simple without any mixture or
composition; and therefore in him there are not diverse qualities and virtues as
there be in us, whereof one depends upon another, or one differs from
another, but for our capacity and understanding, the Scripture speaks of God
as though it were so, that so we may the better perceive what manner of God,
and how good our God is.

Well then, seeing the Scriptures do speak so for our understanding, let us
hear whereof this mercy comes.

The cause is not in us, but only in God himself, and mercy in God does spring
out of his free love toward us.

Why do you say out of the free love of God? are there more loves in God then
one?

There are two kinds of love in God: one is wherewith the Father loves the
Son, and the Son the Father, and which the holy Ghost bears toward both the
Father and the Son; and this love I call the natural love of God, so that the
one cannot but love the other; but the love wherewith he loves us is
voluntary, not being constrained thereunto, and therefore is called the free
love of God, and thereof it comes to pass that mercy is also wholly free,
that is, without reward or hope of recompense, and excludes all merit.

How prove you that the mercy of God arises out of his love?

That the love of God is the cause of his mercy, it is manifest in the
Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1. 2. Paul saluteth Timothy in this order, Grace, mercy and
peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, to show that that
peace which the world cannot give, the mercy of God is the cause of it, and the
cause of his mercy is his grace, and his grace is nothing else but his free
favor and love toward us. The same order does Paul observe in Titus 3. 4, 5.
where he says, when the goodness and love of God our Savior appears not by
the works of righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. First, he sets down the goodness of God as the cause of his love.
Secondly, his love as the cause of his mercy. And thirdly, his mercy as the
cause of our salvation; and our salvation as the effect of all: and therefore
there is nothing in us which may move the Lord to show mercy upon us, but only
because he is goodness it self by nature; and to this does the Psalmist bear
witness, Psalm. 100. 5. saying, that the Lord is good, his mercy is
everlasting, and his truth is from generation to generation.

Toward whom is the mercy of God extended or showed?

For the opening of this point we are to consider that the mercy of God is
twofold: First, general; Secondly, special. God as a God does show mercy
generally upon all his creatures being in misery, and chiefly to men, whether
they be just or unjust, Psalm. 140. and 147. and so does succor them, either
immediately by himself, or else mediately by creatures: as by Angels or Men, by
the Heavens, by the Elements, and by other living creatures, and this general
mercy of God is not extended to the eternal salvation of all, but is only
temporary and for a while. Of this read Luke 6. 36.

What say you to the special mercy of God?

That I call the special mercy of God, which God as a most free God has
showed to whom he would, and denied to whom he would: and this pertains only
to the elect, and those which fear him, Psalm. 103. 11. for he shows mercy
upon them to their eternal salvation, and that most constantly, while he does
effectually call them unto himself, while he does freely and truly pardon their
sins, and justify them in the blood of the Lamb Jesus Christ; while he does
sanctify them with his grace, and does glorify them in eternal life: and of
this special mercy we may read in Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6.

How great is the mercy of God?

It is so great that it cannot be expressed nor conceived of us: and that is
proved by these Scriptures following, Ps. 145. 9. James 2. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 32.
Psalm. 57 10.

How long does the mercy of God continue toward us?

Although the mercy of God be great and infinite in Christ, yet for that mercy
which pardons our sins and calls us to faith and repentance by the Gospel,
there is no place after death, but only while we live in this world, which is
warranted by these places ensuing, Gal. 6. 10. Let us do good whilst we have
time; to show, that a time will come when we shall not be able to do good.

Apoc. 7. 17. Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of
life, to show, that the time which is given unto death is a time of repentance,
and of exercising of faith and of works, but after death there is no time but
to receive either an immortal Crown if we have been faithful, or everlasting
shame if we have been unfaithful: Besides these, see Apoc. 14. 13. Mark. 9.
45. Esa. ult. 24. Luke 16. 24, 25, 26. Mat. 15. 11, 12. John 9. 4.

What uses may we make of Gods mercies? The uses of Gods Mercy.


First, it serves to humble us; for the greater mercy is in God, the greater
misery is in us.

Secondly, we must attribute our whole salvation unto his mercy.

Thirdly, we must flee to God in all our troubles with most sure confidence.

Fourthly, we must not abuse it to the liberty of the flesh to sin, although we
might find mercy with God after death, for the mercy of God specially
appertains to those that fear him, Psalm. 103. 11.

Fifthly, the meditation of Gods mercies toward us should make us to love God,
Psa. 116. 1. Luke 7. 47. fear God, Psa. 130. 4. praise God, Ps. 86. 12, 13. and
103. 2, 3, 4.


Sixthly, it must make us merciful one to another, Luke 6. 36. Matthew. 18. 32,
33.

What is the justice of God? Of the Justice of God.


It is an essential property in God, whereby he is infinitely just in himself,
of himself, for, from, by himself alone, and none other, Psalm. 11. 7.

What is the rule of this justice?

His own free will, and nothing else, for whatsoever he wills is just, and
because he wills it, therefore it is just, not because it is just, therefore
he wills it, Ephesians. 1. 11. Psalm. 115. 3. Mat. 20. 15. which also may be applied
to the other properties of God.

Explain this more particularly?

I say, that God does not always a thing because it is just, but therefore any
thing is just, that is just, because God will have it so; and yet his will is
joined with his wisdom: as for example, Abraham did judge it a most just, and
righteous thing to kill his innocent son, not by the law, for that did forbid
him, but only because he did understand it was the special will of God, and he
knew that the will of God was not only just, but also the rule of all
righteousness.

That we may the better understand this attribute, declare unto me how many
manner of ways one may be just or righteous.

Three manner of ways; either by nature, or by grace, or by perfect obedience.

How many ways may one be just by nature?

Two ways: First, by himself, and of himself, in his own essence and being;
thus we say, that in respect of this essential righteousness, there is none
just but God only, as Christ says, none is good but God only.

Secondly, derivatively by the benefit of another, to be either made righteous,
or born just; and in respect of this natural gift of righteousness we say,
that in the beginning Adam was made just, because he was created just, and in
his whole nature was righteous and good, but this righteousness was derived
from God.

Whom do you call just by grace?

All the elect which are redeemed by the death of Christ, and that in two
respects.

First, because the righteousness of Christ is imputed unto them, and so by
grace and favor in Christ their head they are just before God.

Secondly, because of grace and favor they are regenerated by the holy Ghost,
by the virtue of whose inherent righteousness and holiness they are made holy
and just, and whatsoever they do by it is accepted for just for Christ's sake.

Whom do you call just and righteous by yielding perfect and willing obedience
to God and his law?

No man in this world after the fall of Adam (Christ only excepted) ever was,
or can be just after that manner.

What say you of Christ? how was he just?

Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is most perfectly just and righteous every
manner of way.

First, as he is God he is in his own essence, of himself, and by

Secondly, as he was Man he was just by nature, because he was

Thirdly, by virtue of his union with his divine nature, which is eternal

Fourthly, by receiving the gifts of the holy Ghost without measure Psalm. 45. 7.

Fifthly, he did most perfectly obey the law of God, and kept it most

What conclude you upon all this?

That forasmuch as God only is in his own essence and nature by himself, and
of himself, eternal justice and righteousness, therefore this attribute of
justice or righteousness does most properly agree to God.

In how many things is God just?

In three things:

First, in his Will.

Secondly, in his Word.

Thirdly, in his Works.

What mean you when you say that God is just in his Will?

That whatsoever he wills is just, his will (as has been declared) being the
rule of justice.

What mean you when you say that God is just in his Word?

That whatsoever he speaks is just.

What are the parts of Gods Word?

Four: First, the History, which is all true.

Secondly, the Precepts and the Laws, which are perfect.

Thirdly, Promises and Threatenings, which are accomplished.

Fourthly, Hymns and Songs, which are pure, and holy, and undefiled.

In what respect is God just in his Word?

First, he speaks as he thinks.

Secondly, he does both as he speaks and thinks.

Thirdly, there is no part of his Word contrary to another.

Fourthly, he loves those that speak the truth, and hates those that are
liers.

What are the Works of God?

1. His eternal decree whereby he has most justly decreed all things, and the
circumstances of all things from all eternity. 2. The just execution thereof in
time.

What justice does God show herein?

Both his disposing and his rewarding justice.

What is Gods disposing justice?

That by which he as a most free Lord orders all things in his actions
rightly, Psalm. 145. 17.

In what actions does that appear?

First, he has most justly and perfectly created all things of nothing.

Secondly, he has most wisely, justly, and righteously disposed all things
being created.

What is Gods rewarding justice?

That whereby he renders to his creatures according to their works.

Wherein does that appear?

First, he does behold, and approve, and reward all good in whomsoever.

Secondly, he does behold, detest, and punish all evil in whomsoever; to which
justice both his anger and his hatred are to be referred.

What must we understand by anger in God?

Not any passion, perturbation, or trouble of the mind as it is in us, but this
word Anger when it is attributed to God in the Scriptures signifies three
things.

Joh. 3. 36. Romans 1. 18.

Psalm. 6. 1. Hos. 11. 9. Jonah 2. 9.

Romans 2. 5. Mat. 3. 7. Ephesians. 5. 6.

What use may we make of this Attribute?

First, The uses of Gods Justice.
it teaches us that anger of it self is not simply evil, but then it is good,
when it is such as the Scripture attributes to God, and commends to men;
when it says, Be angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26.

Secondly, Gods anger seems to raise us up from security.

Thirdly, we must not be slothful when we see the signs of Gods wrath coming,
but use ordinary means to prevent it.

What is that hatred that is attributed to God?

Not any passion, or grief of the mind as it is in us, but in the Scriptures
these three things are signified thereby.

First, his denial of good will and mercy to eternal salvation, as Romans 9.
13. I have hated Esau; that is, rejected him, and have not vouchsafed him that
favor and grace which I have showed upon Jacob; and we also are said to hate
those things which we neglect, and upon which we will bestow no benefit nor
credit, but do put them behind other things, and therefore it is said, If any
man come unto me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children,
etc. he cannot be my Disciple; that is, he that does not put all these things
behind me, and neglect them for me, so that the love which he bears to them,
must seem to be hatred in comparison of the love which he must bear to me; and
in this sense it is properly attributed to God.

Secondly, the decree of Gods just will to punish sin, and the just punishment
it self which he has decreed, as in Psalm. 5. 6. and Job 30. 21. Thou turnest
thy self merely against me, and art an enemy unto me with the strength of
thine hand; that is, thou do so sore chasten me, as if thou did hate me;
and in this sense also it is properly attributed to God, for it is a part of
his Justice to take punishment of sinners.

Thirdly, Gods displeasure, for those things which we hate do displease us,
and in this sense it is also properly attributed to God, for it is the part of
a most just Judge, to disallow and detest evil, as well as to allow and like
that which is good.

By what reason may this be confirmed?

It is the property of him that loves, to hate and detest that which is
contrary to himself, and that which he loves. For love cannot be without his
contrary of hatred; and as therefore the love of good things does properly
agree to God; so does also the hatred of evil things, as they are evil things.

Secondly, it is manifest by David, that it is no less virtue to hate the
evil, then it is to love the good; and this hatred of sin as it is a virtue,
and perfect hatred cannot be in us but by the grace of God; for every good gift
is from above, etc. and there can be no good thing in us, but it is first in
God after a more perfect manner then it is in us.

What are we to learn thereby?

First, that it is a great virtue, and acceptable to God to hate wickedness,
and wicked men themselves, not as they are men, but as they are wicked; and as
David did, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. And we are no less bound to hate the enemies of
God, as they are his enemies, then to love God, and those that love him. And if
we do so, then we must also flee their company, and have no friendship or
fellowship with them.

Secondly, that we must distinguish betwixt men's persons and their sins, and
not to hate the persons of men, because they are the good creatures of God, but
their sins we must hate every day more and more, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14, 15.

Having spoken of the essence and the essential proprieties of God, tell me
now how many Gods are there?

There is only one God, and no more.

How may this unity of the Godhead be proved?

By express testimonies of Gods word; by reasons grounded thereon; and by
nature it self guiding all things to one principle.

What express testimonies of Gods word have you for this?

Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord: so in the 1 Samuel 2. 2.
Psalm. 18. 31. Esa. 44. 6. and 46. 9. Mark. 12. 29. 32. 1 Cor. 8. 4. 6.

What reasons have you to prove that there is but one God?

First, we are charged to give unto God all our heart, and all our strength,
and all our soul. Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. Mark. 12. 29, 30. If one must have all, there
is none left for any other.

Secondly, God is the chiefest good, Psalm. 144. 15. the first cause, and the
high governor of all things, Acts 17. 28. Psalm. 19. 1. but there can be but
one such.

Thirdly, the light of reason shows that there can be no more but one that is
infinite, independent and Almighty: if God be infinite and omnipotent that does
all things, there can be but one, for all the rest must be idle.

How does nature guide all things to one principle?

The whole course of the world tends to one end, and to one unity, which is
God.

How can that be, when there be so many sundry things of diverse kinds and
conditions, and one contrary to another?

That is true indeed, but yet they all together serve one God.

Is that possible, can you give an instance thereof, in some familiar
resemblance?

Yea, very well; in a field there are diverse battles, diverse standards, sundry
liveries, and yet all turn head with one sway at once, by which we know that
there is one General of the field which commands them all.

What makes this to confirm your assertion that there is but one God over so
many diverse and contrary things in the world?

Yes, for even so in the world we see diverse things not one like another; for
some are noble, some are base, some hot, some cold, some well, some lame, yet
all serve to the glory of God their maker, and the benefit of man, and the
accomplishment of the whole world.

And what gather you from all this?

That there is but one God which commands them all, like the General of a
field.

If one God be the Author of all, why are there so many poisons and noisome
beasts?

They were not created noisome and hurtful at the first, but the sin of Adam
brought the curse upon the creatures, Genes. 3. 17. 18.

Secondly, although God has cursed the creatures for man's sin, yet in his
mercy he does so dispose and order them that they are profitable for us, for
poisons we use them for Physic, and the skins of wild beasts serve against
the cold, etc.

Thirdly, the most hurtful things that are might benefit us if we knew how to
use them; and whereas they annoy us, it is not of their own nature so much as
of our ignorance.

And what do you conclude by all this?

That they have not two beginnings, one good and another bad, as some would
imagine, but one Author thereof, which is God himself, always most good and
gracious.

If there be but one only God, how is it in the Scripture that many are called
Gods, 1 Cor. 8. 5. as Moses is called Pharaohs God, Exodus 7. 1. and Magistrates
are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. as Idols, and the belly, Phil. 3. 19. yea, and
the Devil himself is called God of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4?

The name Elohim or God, is sometimes improperly given to other things, either
as they participate of God his communicable attributes, as in the two first
instances; or as they are abusively set up by man in the place of God (as in
the other;) but properly it signifies him, who is by nature God, and has his
being not from any thing but himself, and all other things are from him, and
in this sense unto us there is but one God and Lord, 1 Cor. 8. 6. unto whom
therefore, the name Jehovah is in Scripture incommunicably appropriated.

Why then are Magistrates called Gods?

For four causes: first, to teach us that such must be chosen to bear

To encourage them in their offices, and to teach them that they

To show how God does honor them, and how they must honor

To teach us to obey them as we would obey God himself, for he Romans 13. 2. and
we must not dishonor those, whom God does honor.

Why are Idols called Gods?

Not because they are so indeed, but because Idolaters have such an opinion of
them.

Why is the belly called a God?

Because some make more thereof then of God and his worship, for all that they
can do and get is little enough for their bellies, and when they should serve
God, they serve their bellies and beastly appetites.

And why is the Devil called the God of this world.

Because of the great power and Sovereignty which is given him over the wicked,
whom God has not chosen out of this world.

There being but one simple and individed Godhead, to whom does this divine
nature belong? is it to be attributed to one, or to many persons?

We must acknowledge and adore three distinct persons subsisting in the unity
of the Godhead. Of the Trinity


But do you not believe the Godhead is to be divided, whilst you believe that
in one God are three persons?

No, not divided into diverse essences, but distinguished unto diverse persons,
for God cannot be divided into several natures, nor into several parts; and
therefore must the persons which subsist in that one essence be only distinct
and not separate one from another, as in the example of the Sun, the beams and
the heat.

What be those resemblances that are commonly brought to shadow out unto us the
mystery of the Trinity?









May it be collected by natural reason, that there is a Trinity of Persons in
the Unity of the Godhead?

No, for it is the highest mystery of Divinity, and the knowledge thereof is
most proper to Christians, for the Turks and Jews do confess one Godhead,
but no distinction of persons in the same.

How come we then by the knowledge of this mystery?

God has revealed it in the holy Scriptures unto the faithful.

What have we to learn of this?





How does it appear in the holy Scripture, that the three Persons are of that
divine nature?

Jehovah, etc.







What special proofs of the Trinity have you out of the old Testament?

Genesis 1. 2, 3.

Genesis 1. 26. The Trinity speaks in the plural number, Let us make man in our
Image after our likeness.

Genesis 19. 24. Jehovah is said to rain upon Sodom from Jehovah out of heaven,
that is, the Son from the Father, or the Holy Ghost from both.

2 Samuel 23. 2. The Spirit of Jehovah, (or the Lord) spoke by me, and Jehovah
the Father with his Word (or Son) and Spirit.

Prove. 30. 4. What is his name, and what is his Sons name, if thou

Isa. 6. 3. The Angels in respect of the three Persons do cry three

Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom

Hag. 2. 5. The Father with the Word and his Spirit make a Covenant.

What are the proofs out of the new Testament?

As all other doctrines, so this is there more clear, as Matthew. 3. 16. 17. at
the Baptism of Christ the Father from heaven witnesses of the Son, the Holy
Ghost appearing in the likeness of a Dove; John Baptist saw the Son in his
assumed nature going out of the water, (there is one Person) he saw the Holy
Ghost descending like a Dove upon him, there is another Person, and he heard a
voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son, there is a third Person.

Matthew. 17. 5. At the transfiguration, the Father in like manner speaks

Matthew. 28. 19. We are baptized into the name of the Father, the

John 14. 16. 26. and 15. 26. and 16. 13, 14, 15. The Father and

Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee; and the power

Acts 2. 33. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and

2 Cor. 13, 14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of

Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts.

Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. God saved us by the washing of the new birth, and

What clear proof have you that these three are but one God, and so that there
is a Trinity in Unity?

1 John 5. 7. It is expressly said, there are three that bear Record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.

What learn you of that the Apostle says they are three?

We learn that the word Trinity although it be not expressly set down in the
word, yet it has certain ground from thence.

What learn you of that that they are said to be three witnesses?

The singular fruit that is in the Trinity of persons in one unity of the
Godhead, whereby great assurance is brought unto us of all things that God
speaks in promise or threat, seeing it is all confirmed by three witnesses,
against whom no exception lies.

What are they said here to witness?

That God has given eternal life unto us, and that this life is in that his
Son, 1 John 5. 11.

How are these being three, said to be but one?

They are one in substance, being, or essence, but three persons distinct in
subsistence, Acts 20. 28. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Mark. 12. 32. 1 Cor. 8.
4, 5, 6. Joh. 14. 16. and 15. 26. and 17. 1.

If three persons among men be propounded whereof every one is a man, can it be
said that these three are but one man?

No, but we must not measure Gods matters by the measure of reason, much less
this which of all others is a mystery of mysteries.

For the better understanding of this mystery, declare unto me what a person is
in general, and then what a person in the Trinity is.

In general, What a person in the Trinity is.
a person is one particular thing indivisible, incommunicable, living,
reasonable; subsisting in it self, not having part of another. Vide
Melanchthon loc. com.


Show me the reason of the particular branches of this definition.













What is a person in the Trinity?

It is whole God not simply or absolutely considered, but by way of some
personal proprieties, it is a manner of being in the Godhead, or a distinct
substance, not a quality, as some have wickedly imagined, for no quality can
cleave to the Godhead, having the whole Godhead in it, Joh. 11. 22. and 14.
9. 16. and 15. 1. and 17. 21. Col. 2. 3. 9.

In what respect are they called Persons?

Because they have proper things to distinguish them.

How is this distinction made?

It is not in nature, but in relation and order.

Declare then the order of the persons of the blessed Trinity.

The first in order is the Father, then those that come from the Father, the
Son who is the second, and the holy Ghost who is the third person in Trinity.

How are these three distinguished by order and relation?

The Father is of himself alone and of no other, the Son is of the Father alone
begotten, the holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son proceeding; and the
Father is called a Father in respect of the Son, the Son in respect of the
Father, the holy Ghost in respect that he proceeds from the Father and the
Son; but the one is not the other, as the fountain is not the stream, nor the
stream the fountain, but are so called one in respect of another, and yet all
but one water.

What then is the Father? Of the Father the first Person of the Trinity.


The first person of the Trinity, who has his being and foundation of
personal subsistence from none other, and has by communication of his essence
eternally begotten his only Son of himself, Joh. 5. 27. and 14. 11. and 20. 17.
Psalm. 2. 7. Heb. 1. 3.

How is it proved that the Father is God?

By express testimonies of the Scriptures, and by reason drawn from the same.

What are those express testimonies?

John 17. 3. This is life everlasting to know thee to be the only God. Romans 1.
7. Grace and peace from God the Father. Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be God the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

What are the reasons drawn from the word of God?

That we are bidden to pray to him, Mat. 6. 6. 9. that he reveals the
mysteries, Mat. 11. 25. 27. suffers his Son to shine, etc. Mat. 5. 45.

How is it showed that he begat his Son of himself?

In that he is called the brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of
his person, Heb. 1. 3. and in that his generation being from eternity, there
was no creature who might beget him.

In what respects is he called the Father?

1t. In respect of his natural Son Jesus Christ, begotten of his own nature
and substance, Mat. 11. 27. 1 John 1. 14. 1 John 4. 14. whence he is called the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. 2ly In respect of his adopted
sons whom he has chosen to be heirs of heaven through the mediation of his
natural Son Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 14. John 1. 12. Romans 8. 14, 15. Mat. 6. 9.
for as he is by nature the Father of Christ, so is he by grace to us that
believe our Father also.

What learn you from hence?

To honor and obey him as a Father, and to be followers of God as dear
children, Mal. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 14. Ephesians. 5. 1.

What other names are given in the Scripture to the first Person?

The Father spoke most commonly in the old Testament, for in these last times
he has spoken by his Son, and he is called by these names.

Jehovah; that is, I am that I am, without beginning or ending. Esa. 42. 8.

Elohim; that is, mighty and strong.

Adonah; that is, Judge, or in whose Judgment we rest.

Lord of Hosts, because he has Angels and men, and all creatures Kings 19. 14.

The God of Jacob or of Israel, because he made a promise to Abraham,
Israelites were the seed of Abraham, Act. 3. 13.

Hitherto of the Father; Of the other Persons of the Trinity in general.
do the other Persons that are of the Father receive their essence or Godhead
from him?

They do, for howsoever in this they agree with the Father, that the essence
which is in them is of it self uncreated and unbegotten, yet herein lies the
distinction that the Father has his essence in himself, or originally, and
from none other; the Son and the holy Ghost have the self-same uncreated and
unbegotten essence in themselves as well as the Father, (otherwise they should
have had no true Godhead) but not from themselves. Essentia Filii est a seipso,
and hac ratione dici potest Autotheos, persona tamen Filii non est a seipso,
ideoque non potest hac ratione dici Autotheos: persona enim ejus genita est a
Patre accipiendo ab eo essentiam ingenitam; that is, the essence of the Son is
of himself, and for this cause he may be said to be God of himself;
notwithstanding the person of the Son is not of himself, and therefore for this
cause he cannot be said to be God of himself; for his person is begotten of the
Father by receiving from him an unbegotten essence.

If these Persons that come from the Father have a beginning, how can they be
eternal?

They have no beginning of time or continuance, but of order, of subsistence
and offspring, and that from all eternity.

Are you able to set down the manner of this eternal offspring?

We find it not revealed touching the manner; and therefore our ignorance
herein is better then all their curiosity, that have enterprized arrogantly the
search hereof; for if our own generation and frame in our mothers womb be above
our capacity, Ps. 139. 14, 15. it is no marvel if the mystery of the eternal
generation of the Son of God cannot be comprehended. And if the wind which is
but a creature be so hard to know, that a man knows not from whence it
comes, and whither it goes, John 3. 8. it is no marvel if the proceeding of
the holy Ghost be unsearchable.

Thus much in general touching the Persons which come from the Father: Of the
second Person in the Trinity.
Now in special what is the Son?

The second Person of the Trinity, having the foundation of personal
subsistence from the Father alone, of whom by communication of his essence he
is begotten from all eternity, Joh. 5. 26. Psalm. 2. 7. Prove. 8. 22, etc. Prove.
30. 4.

What names are given unto him in this respect?

First, the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1. 14. and 3. 18. because he is only
begotten of the nature and substance of the Father.

Secondly, first-begotten, Heb. 1. 6. Romans 8. 29. not as though the Father
begat any after, but because he begat none before.

Thirdly, the Image and brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1. 3. because
the glory of the Father is expressed in the Son.

But why is he called the Word? 1 John 5. 7. and John 1. 1.

He is called the Word, or speech, for so does Logos more properly signify.

First, because as speech is the birth of the mind, so is the Son of his Father.

Secondly, as a man reveals the meaning of the heart by the words of his
mouth, so God reveals his word by his Son, Joh. 1. 18. Heb. 1. 2.

Thirdly, he is so often spoken of, and promised in the Scriptures, and is in a
manner the whole subject of the Scriptures, Joh. 1. 45.

How prove you that the Son is God?

He is in the Scriptures expressly called God, and Jehovah, and likewise the
essential properties, the works and actions of God are given to him, Esa. 9.
6. and 25. 9. Zach. 2. 10, 11. Prove. 1. 22. Joh. 1. 1. and 20. 28. Romans 9. 5.
Phil. 1. 6. Heb. 1. 8. 10. 1 John 5. 20.

How do you prove it by his Works?

His works were such as none could do but God; for,

he made the world, which none could do but God, Heb. 2. 2.

He forgave sins, which none can do but God, Mat. 9. 2.

He gives the holy Ghost, which none can do but God, Joh. 15. 26.

He maintains his Church, which he could not do if he were not Ephesians. 4. 11,
12.

Can you prove the Son to be God by comparing the old Testament* and the New
together?

Yes; for what the old Testament speaks of Jehovah, which is God, that the new
Testament applies to Christ; as,

First, David says, Jehovah went up on high, and led Captivity captive, Psalm.
68. 16. Paul applies it to Christ, Ephesians. 4. 18.

Secondly, the Psalmist says, Jehovah was tempted, Psalm. 95. 9. which Paul
applies to Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 9.

Thirdly, Esaias says, Jehovah is the first and the last, Psalm. 41. 4. this is
also applied to Christ, Apoc. 21. 6.

Fourthly, Esaias says, Jehovah will not give his glory to any other then to
himself, Esa. 42. 8. but it is given to Christ, Heb. 1. 6. therefore Christ is
Jehovah.

For the understanding of the generation of the Son, show me the diverse manners
of begetting.

There is two manners of begetting: the one is carnal and outward; and this is
subject to corruption, alteration and time; the other is spiritual, and
inward, as was the begetting of the Son of God, in whose generation there is
neither corruption, alteration, nor time.

Declare then after what manner this spiritual generation of the Son of God
was, and yet in sobriety, according to the Scriptures.

For the better finding out of this mystery, we must consider in God two
things: First, that in God there is an understanding, Psalm. 139. 2. Secondly,
we must consider how this understanding is occupied in God.

Declare after what manner it is in God.

This understanding is his very being, and is everlastingly, and most
perfectly occupied in God.

Whereupon does Gods understanding work?

Upon nothing but it self, and that I prove by reason, for God being infinite
and all in all, it cannot meet with any thing but himself.

What work does this understanding in God effect?

It does understand and conceive it self: for as in a glass a man does
conceive and beget a perfect image of his own face, so God in beholding and
minding of himself, does in himself beget a most perfect and most lively image
of himself, which is that in the Trinity which we call the Son of God.

Where do you find that the Son is called the perfect Image of God?

Heb. 1. 3. He is called the brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of
his Person, which is all one.

What mean you by engraven Image?

That as wax upon a seal has the engraven form of the seal, so the Son of
God which his Father has begotten of his own understanding, is the very form
of his Fathers understanding, so that when the one is seen, the other is seen
also.

Why then he is Understanding it self, for so is his Father?

Yea, he is so, and he says so of himself; I have Counsel and Wisdom, I am
Understanding, Prove. 8. 14.

But where find you that he was begotten?

He says so himself, in the name of Wisdom, in these words, When there was no
depths then was I begotten, before the Mountains and Hills were settled was I
begotten, Prove. 8. 24, 25.

Yea, he was made the Son of God when he was born of the Virgin Mary; was he
not?

He was indeed then the Son of God, but he was not then made the Son of God.

When then was he made the Son of God?

He was never made in time, for he was begotten of the substance of his Father
from all eternity without beginning or ending.

How prove you that the Son of God was not made, but begotten eternally of the
substance of his Father?

I prove it, first, by scripture, for he says no less himself; I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning and before the earth, Prove. 8. 23. and
therefore he prayed that he might be glorified of his Father with the glory
which he had with his Father before the world.

Secondly, I prove it by reason, for Gods understanding is everlasting,
therefore the second Person which it begets, is so too; for the Father in
his understanding did not conceive any thing less then himself, nor greater
then himself, but equal to himself.

Although the Son of God be from everlasting, yet he is not all one with the
Father, is he?

Yes that he is, and yet not joined with his Father in heaven as two Judges
that sit together on a Bench, or as the seal and the wax, as some do grossly
imagine, but they are both one without parting ( John 10. 30.) or mingling,
whereupon I conclude, that whatsoever the Father is, the Son is the same, and
so consequently that they be co-eternall, co-equall, and co-essentiall.

Men by reason do conceive, and beget reason, what difference is there between
the conceiving of understanding in men, and the conceiving of understanding in
God?

There is great difference; for, first, this conceiving in men proceeds of
sense or outward imagination, which is an outward thing for reason to work
upon, as wood is to fire, but God the Father of himself, begets and
conceives himself, and still in himself, as John says, the only begotten Son
which is in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1. 18.

Secondly, in men, the thing which is understood, and the understanding it self
is not all one, but in God it is all one.

What reason have you for this?

The reason is, because only God is altogether life, and his life is altogether
understanding, and his understanding is the highest degree of life, and
therefore he has his conceiving and begetting most inward of all.

What mean you when you say most inward of all?

I mean that the Father conceives of himself, and in himself, and his
conceiving is a begetting, and his begetting abides still in himself, because
his understanding can no where meet with any thing, but that which he himself
is, and that is the second subsistence in the Trinity which we call Everlasting
Son of God.

Now let me hear what the holy Ghost is, Of the third Person in the Trinity.
and how he proceeds from the Father and the Son.

For the understanding of this matter we must consider two things.

First, that in the essence of God besides his understanding there is a will.

Secondly, what be the properties of this will in God, Esa. 46. 10.

What are the properties of Gods will?

First, it applies his power when, where, and how he thinks good, according to
his own mind.

Secondly, it works everlastingly upon it self as his understanding does.

What do you gather by this?

That because it has no other thing to work upon but it self, it does delight
it self in the infinite good which it knows in it self, for the action of the
will is delight and liking.

And what of that?

That delight which God or his will has in his own infinite goodness does
bring forth a third Person or subsistence in God, which we call The holy Ghost.

What is that same third subsistence in God?

The mutual kindness and lovingnesse of the Father and the Son.

What mean you by this mutual lovingnesse and kindness?

The Father takes joy and delight in the Son or his own Image conceived by his
understanding, and the Son likewise rejoices in his Father as he says
himself; Prove. 8. 3.
and the reason thereof is this, the action of the will when it is fulfilled is
love and liking.

What resemblance can you show thereof in some thing that is commonly used
amongst us?

When a man looks in a glass, if he smile, his image smileth too, and if he
takes delight in it, it takes the same delight in him, for they are both one.

If they be all one then there are not three beeings?

The face is one being, the image of the face in a glass is another being,
and the smiling of them both together is a third being; and yet all are in one
face, and all are of one face, and all are but one face.

And is it so in God?

Yea, for even so the understanding which is in God is one being, the
reflection or image of his understanding which he beholds in himself as in a
glass is a second being, and the love and liking of them both together by
reason of the will fulfilled is a third being in God, and yet all are but of
one God, all are in one God, and all are but one God.

Which of these three is first?

There is neither first nor last, going before or coming after, in the essence
of God, but all these as they are everlasting, so they are all at once and at
one instant, even as in a glass the face and the image of the face, when they
smile, they smile together, and not one before, not after another.

What is the conclusion of all?

As we have the Son of the Father by his everlasting will in working by his
understanding; so also we have the holy Ghost of the love of them both by the
joint working of the understanding and will together; whereupon we conclude
three distinct Persons or in-beeings (which we call the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost) in one spiritual, yet unspeakable substance, which is very God
himself.

But what if some will be yet more curious to know how the Son of God should be
begotten, and how the holy Ghost should proceed from the Father and the Son,
how may we satisfy them?

Well enough; for if any will be too curious about this point, we may answer
them thus, Let them show us how themselves are bred and begotten, and then let
them ask us how the Son of God is begotten; and let them tell us the nature of
the spirit, that beats in their pulses, and then let them be inquisitive at
our hands for the proceeding of the holy Ghost.

And what if they cannot give us a reason for the manner of their own being,
may they not be inquisitive for the manner of Gods being?

No; for if they must be constrained to be ignorant in so common matters which
they daily see and feel in themselves, let them give us leave to be ignorant
not only in this, but in many things more which are such as no eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor wit of man can conceive.

Let us now hear out of the Scriptures what the holy Ghost is?

He is the third Person of the Trinity by communication of essence, eternally
proceeding from the Father and from the Son.

Are you able to prove out of the Scripture that the holy Ghost is God?

Yes; because the many properties and actions of God are therein given to him
as to the Father and to the Son.

Let us hear some of those proofs.

1t. Genesis 1. 2. the work of Creation is attributed to the Spirit of God. 2ly.
Esa. 61. 1. the Spirit of the Lord God is said to be upon Christ, because the
Lord anointed him, etc. 3ly. 1 Cor. 3. 17. and 2 Cor. 6. 16. Paul calls us
Gods Temples, because the Holy Ghost dwells in us, Saint Augustine in his 66.
Epistle to Maximinus says it is a clear argument of his Godhead, if we were
commanded to make him a Temple but of timber and stone, because that worship is
due to God only, therefore now we must much more think that he is God, because
we are not commanded to make him a temple, but to be a temple for him our
selves.

What other reason have you out of the Scripture?

Peter reproving Ananias for lying to the Holy Ghost, said, that he Acts 5. 3,
4.

Have you any more reasons from the Scripture?

Yea, two more, one from Saint Paul, and another from Saint Paul and Esaias
together.

What is your reason from Saint Paul?

When he shows how many sundry gifts are given to men, he says Paul speaks
of but God, 1 Cor. 12. ver. 6. 11.

What is your reason from Esaias and Saint Paul together?

Esaias says in the Chapter 6. 9. I heard the Lord speaking, which Paul
expounds of the Holy Ghost, Acts 28. 25.

But how can you prove out of the Scriptures that the Holy Ghost is God
proceeding from the Father and the Son?

First, John 15. 26. When the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from
the Father, even the spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall
testify of me: That he proceeds from the Father is here expressly affirmed,
that he proceeds from the Son is by necessary consequence employed, because
the Son is said to send him, as John 14. 26. The Father is said to send him
in the Sons name, by which sending the order of the persons of the Trinity is
evidently designed, because the Son is of the Father, and the Father is not
of the Son; therefore we find in Scripture that the Father sends his Son,
but never that the Son sends his Father. In like manner because the Holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father and from the Son, we find that both the Father
and the Son do send the Holy Ghost, but never that the Holy Ghost does send
either Father or Son.

Secondly, John 16. 15. the Son says of the Holy Ghost, all things that the
Father has are mine, therefore said I that he shall take of mine, and shall
show it unto you. All things that the Father has, the Son receives from him
as coming from him, and so whatsoever the Holy Ghost has, he has it not of
himself verse. 13. but from the Son, and so from the Father, as a person
proceeding as well from the one as from the other.

Thirdly, Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts: As the Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of the Father, Esa. 48. 16. The
Lord and his Spirit has sent me; so is he here also called the Spirit of the
Son, and Romans 8. 9. the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Christ. Now, if the
spirit of man in whom there is no perfection be all one with man, much more the
Spirit of the Father is all one with the Father, and the Spirit of the Son is
all one with the Son, and so the Holy Ghost with the Father and the Son is
the same in deity, dignity, eternity, operation, and will.

Why is the third Person called the Spirit?

Not only because he is a spiritual (that is) an immateriall and pure
essence, (for so likewise is the Father a Spirit, and the Son as well as he)
but first in regard of his person, because he is spired, and as it were,
breathed both from the Father and the Son, that is to say, proceeds from
them both. Secondly, in regard of the creatures, because the Father and the
Son do work by the Spirit, who is, as it were, the breath of grace which the
Father and the Son breaths out upon the Saints, blowing freely where it
lists; and working spiritually for manner, means, and matter, where it
pleases, John 20. 22. Psalm. 33. 6. John 3. 8. Acts 2. 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 2. 12,
13.

Why is he called the Holy Ghost?

Not only because of his essential holiness as God, (for so the Father and
the Son also are infinitely holy as he) but because he is the author and
worker of all holiness in men, and the sanctifier of Gods children.

Why does not the Father and the Son sanctify also?

Yes verily, but they do it by him, and because he does immediately sanctify,
therefore he has the title of Holy.

What other titles are given unto him in the word of God?

Psalm. 143. 10.

Sam. 11. 6.

Thirdly, the finger of God, because God works by him as a man Luke 11. 20.

Fourthly, the Comforter, because he strengthens the weak hearts of John 20.
26.

Fifthly, the spirit of Adoption, because he assures our hearts, that Romans 8.
15.

Sixthly, the spirit of love, power, sobriety, wisdom, etc. because it works
all these things in us, 2 Timothy 1. 6, 7. Esa. 11. 2.

What are the special comforts which the children of God receive from the holy
Ghost?

He is in their hearts the pledge of Christ's presence, Ioh. 14. 16, 17, 18. 26.
The witness of their Adoption, Romans 8. 15, 16. The guide of their life, Joh.
16. 13. The comforter of their soul, Joh. 14. 26. and 15. 26. and 16. 13. The
seal of their Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. And the first fruits of their
salvation, Romans 8. 23.

But how are you assured that you have the Spirit? How to know that we have the
Spirit.


Because it has convinced my judgment, Joh. 16. 18. converted my soul, Act.
26. 18. Esa. 61. 1. and having mixed the word with my faith, Heb. 4. 2. it is
become as life to quicken me, Joh. 6. 63. as water to cleanse me, Ezekiel. 36. 25.
as oil to cheer me, Heb. 1. 9. as fire to melt and refine me, How to keep the
Spirit.
Mat. 3. 11.

And how may you keep the Spirit now you have it?

By nourishing the good motions and means of it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. 20. being
fearful to grieve, quench, resist, or molest it, Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
Acts 7. 51. and careful to be led by it, and show forth the fruits of it, Romans
8. 1. 14. Gal. 5. and 18. 22.

Thus much of the three Persons severally, what now remains more to be spoken
of the mystery of the Trinity?

To set down briefly what be the things common wherein the three Persons agree,
Things common to the three persons.
and what be the things proper to each of them, whereby they are distinguished
one from another.

What are the things wherein the three Persons do communicate?

They are considered in regard either of themselves, or of the creatures. In
what they all agree.


What are they in regard of themselves?

They agree one with another in nature, being, life, time, dignity, glory, or
any thing pertaining to the divine Essence; for in all these they are one and
the same, and consequently, Co-essentiall, Co-equall, and Co-eternall.

What mean you when you say they be Co-essentiall? 1. Coc-essentiall.


That they be all the self-same substance or being, having one individual
essence or deity common to them all, and the self-same in them all.

What mean you when you say they be Co-equall. 2. Co-equall.


That as they agree in deity, so they agree in dignity, being of one state,
condition, and degree; and the one having as great excellency and Majesty every
way as the other: therefore their honor and worship is equal and alike; and
one of them is not greater nor more glorious then another, John 5. 18. 23.
Apoc. 5. 12, 13.

What mean you when you say that they be Co-eternall? 3. Co-eternall,


That one was not before another in time, but that one has been of as long
continuance as another, and all of them have been and shall be forever (as
being all of one self-same everlasting continuance.)

How prove you this?

John 1. 1. In the beginning was the word, etc. and at that time the three
Persons spoke, Genesis 1. 26 Let us make man, etc. Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever.

How can there be this equality betwixt the three Persons of the Trinity,
seeing the Father is the first, the Son the second, the Holy Ghost the third?

Because every one of them is perfect God, who is infinite, eternal, and
incomprehensible.

Have they all three one will likewise?

They have, and therefore they will all one and the same thing without any
crossing, contradiction or varying in themselves, as the Son himself said,
John 8. 29. I do always those things that please him, viz. the Father.

Is there nothing else to be said of the Communion of the three Persons betwixt
themselves?

Yes, that first one is in another and possesses one another; the Father Prove.
8. 22. John 1. 1. and 14. 10. 14. 20.

They have glory one of another from all eternity. John 17. 5.

They delight one in another, and infinitely rejoice in one another
fellowship, the Son being the delight of his Father, the Father of the Son,
and the Holy Ghost of both. Prove. 8. 30.

What things have they common in regard of the creatures?

All outward actions, as to decree, to create, to order, govern, and direct, to
redeem, to sanctify, are equally common to the three Persons of the Trinity;
for as they are all one in nature and will, so must they be also one in
operation, all of them working one and the same thing together, Genesis 1. 26.
John 5. 17. 19.

What are the things proper to each of them? Things proper to each of the
Persons.


They likewise are partly in regard of themselves, and partly of the creatures,
whereby the distinction of them is conceived; partly in relation and order of
subsistence betwixt themselves, and partly in order and manner of working in
the creatures.

What things are proper to each of them in regard of themselves?

First, in manner and order of being, the Father is the first Person, having
his being from himself alone, and is the fountain of being to the other
Persons; the Son is the second, having his being from the Father alone, and
in that respect is called the Light, the Wisdom, the Word, and the Image of the
Father. The Holy Ghost is the third, having his being from them both; and in
that respect is called the Spirit of God, of the Father, and of Christ.

Secondly, in their inward actions and properties, the Father alone begets;
and so in relation to the second Person is called the Father; the Son is of
the Father alone begotten; the Holy Ghost does proceed both from the Father and
the Son.

What is proper to each of them in regard of the creatures?

First, the original of the action is ascribed to the Father, John 5. 17. 19.
the wisdom and manner of working to the Son, John 1. 3. Heb. 1. 2. the
efficacy of operation to the Holy Ghost, Genesis 1. 2. 1 Cor. 12. 11.

Secondly, the Father works all things of himself in the Son by the Holy
Ghost, the Son works from the Father by the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost
works from the Father and the Son.

Having spoken of the first part of Divinity, which is of the nature of God, it
follows that we speak of his Kingdom, which is the second.

What is the Kingdom of God? Of the Kingdom of God.


His universal dominion over all creatures, whereby he dispenses all things
externally according to his own wisdom, will and power: or an everlasting
Kingdom appointed and ruled by the counsel of his own will, Luke 1. 33. Esa.
9. 7. Dan. 2. 44. Es. 40. 13. Psalm. 99. 1. and 115. 3. Romans 11. 34, 35, 36.
Ephesians. 1. 11. Esa. 44. 24. and 45. 27.

Wherewith does he reign and rule?

Principally by his own powerful Spirit, which none can resist.

What end does he propound unto himself in his Kingdom?

His own glory, Romans 11. 36. Psalm. 97. 6. Esa. 48. 11. Ephesians. 1. 12. 14.

What is that about which his Kingdom is occupied?

All things visible and invisible.

When shall it end?

Never, either in this world or in the world to come, Psalm. 145. 13.

What manner of Kingdom is it?

A righteous Kingdom, Psalm. 45. 6, 7. and 97. 2.

What instructions are you to gather out of the doctrine of the Kingdom of God?

They are expressed in the 99. Psalm; in the beginning whereof the Prophet
speaks in this manner;

1. The Lord reigns, which teaches us that God alone has, and exercises
sovereign and absolute Empire over all; and that he admits no
fellow-governour with him.

Let the people tremble, showing that all nations and sorts of people

This trembling, does it stand only in fear?

No, but in reverence also, that that which we comprehend not in this Kingdom
with our reason, we reverence and adore.

What learn you thereby?

That we submit our selves to his Kingdom erected amongst us.

That we presume to know nothing but that he teaches us; to will nothing but
what he bids us; to love, hate, fear, and affect nothing but what he
requires.

What does follow in this 99. Psalm?

Verse. 1, 2. He sits between the Cherubims, let the earth be moved; the Lord
is great in Sion, and he is high above all the people. Whence we learn, that
although all the world roar and fret, yet we should not fear, because the
Lord is greater; ( Ps. 39. 1. 4. and 97. 1.) Verse. 3. They shall praise thy
great and fearful name, for it is holy: which shows that God ought to be
magnified because he is great and fearful, and yet holy, and holiness it
self. Ver. 4. The Kings strength also loves Judgment, Thou do establish
Equity, Thou executest Judgment, and Righteousness in Jacob: whereby we learn
this comfort from Gods reigning, that when we are wronged and oppressed by
tyranny of men, we may have our recourse to the just and righteous Judgment of
God which is the righteous Judge of the world. ( Eccl. 5. 7, 8.) Verse. 5. Exalt
ye the Lord our God etc. out of the might, and Majesty, and holiness of the
Lord, we should learn to extol him with praises. Ps. 145. 11, 12.

Seeing God is without beginning, what did he in that infinite space, which was
ere the world was made; it being unbeseeming the Majesty of God to be idle and
unoccupied all that time?

It behooves us to think that he did things agreeable to his divine nature, but
we should be evil occupied in the search of them further then himself has
made them known, which made an ancient Father to give this answer to a curious
inquirer of Gods doings before he made the world, That he was making hell for
those that should trouble themselves with such vain and idle questions. August.
lib. 1. Confess. Chap. 12.

What is that he has revealed unto us concerning that he did before the
beginning of the world?

Besides the inward works of the three Persons of the blessed Trinity (whereof
we have spoken) and the mutual delights which they took one in another, and
glory which they gave one to another; this external act of his is revealed
unto us in the Scriptures, that he has in himself decreed all things;
together with all the circumstances of all things which have or shall be done
from the beginning of the world unto the end thereof.

What then be the parts of Gods Kingdom? The parts of Gods Kingdom.


The decree determining all things from all eternity, and the execution thereof
fulfilling the same in time; for as from eternity he decreed, so in time and
everlastingly he accomplisheth all things unto the full execution of that his
decree. 1 Cor. 2. 16 Ephesians. 1. 11. Acts 4. 28. Psalm. 99. 4. and 135* 6. So that
the first is an eternal, the second a temporal work of God.

What is the decree? Of Gods Decree.


It is that Act whereby God from all eternity according to his free will did by
his unchangeable counsel and purpose, fore-appoint and certainly determine of
all things together with their causes, their effects, their circumstances and
manner of being, to the manifestation of his own glory, Psalm. 99. 4. Mat. 10.
29. Romans 9. 20, 21. and 11. 36. Prove. 16. 4. Ephesians. 1. 4. 11. Acts 2. 23. Jer. 1.
5. 15.

What gather you of this, that Gods decree is defined by his most perfects w^ll?

First, that the things which he decrees are most perfectly good. Secondly,
that we must not subject his decree to our shallow and base capacity, or
measure it by our reason, considering that the will of God from whence the
decree comes, is unsearchable.

What be the parts or kinds of Gods decree?

That which God has decreed concerning all his creatures generally for the
declaration of his power, wisdom, and goodness in their creation and
preservation; and that which he has decreed specially touching the good or
evil of the chief or reasonable creatures, Angels and Men, to declare the
glory of his grace and justice.

What note you in the former?

That God according to his good pleasure has most certainly decreed every
(both) thing and action, whether past, present, or to come; and not only the
things and actions themselves, but also all their circumstances of place and
time, means, manner, and end; so that they shall not come to pass in any
other place or time then he has ordained; and then and there, they shall come
to pass necessarily: Psalm. 99. 4. Acts 27. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
31, 32, 33, 34.

Does this necessity take away freedom of will in election, or the nature and
property of second causes.

No, but only brings them into a certain order, that is, directs them to the
determined end, whereupon the effects and events of things are contingent or
necessary, as the nature of the second cause is; so Christ according to his
Fathers Decree dyed necessarily, Acts 17. 3. but yet willingly, and if we
respect the temperature of Christ's body, he might have prolonged his life, and
therefore in this respect may be said to have died contingently.

What consider you in the especial decree, which concerns the good or evil
of the principal creatures?

The fore-appointment of their everlasting estate and of the means tending
thereunto, the former whereof is called Predestination.

What is Predestination? Of Predestination.


It is the special decree of God, whereby he has from evelasting freely and
for his own glory foreordained all reasonable creatures to a certain and
everlasting estate of glory in heaven, or shame in hell.

What creatures come within this decree?

Both Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21. Matthew. 25. 41. and Men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Romans 9. 13.
22, 23. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Ephesians. 1. 5. John 17. 12. 22. Exodus 33. 14.

What is the cause of this decree?

Only the mere will and free pleasure of God to dispose of his own work as he
will, Romans 9. 21. Jer. 5. 14. and 18. 22. Esaias 64. 8.

What manner of decree is this?

It is a deep and unsearchable, an eternal and immutable decree, Romans 11. 32.
Ephesians. 1. 4.

Is this decree certain and unchangeable?

Yea, it must needs be so, because it is grounded on the eternal and
unchangeable will of God, and therefore there is a certain number of the elect
and reprobate known only to God which cannot possibly be increased or
diminished, John 13. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 19.

How then does Moses wish himself to be blotted out of the book of life? Exodus
32. 32.

He speaks conditionally, if it were possible, to declare his love to Gods
glory and his people as Paul did, Romans 9. 3.

But if Gods decree cannot be altered, then we may be secure, and not care how
we live?

No more then we may neglect and forsake our meat and drink, because the term
of our life is fore-appointed: the end and the means are joined together of
God, and cannot be separated by any man.

What are the parts of Predestination? Parts of Predestination, Election.
Reprobation. Election.


Election and Reprobation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. Romans 9. 13. 22, 23.

What is Election?

It is the everlasting predestination or fore-appointing of certain Angels and
Men unto everlasting life and blessedness for the praise of his glorious
grace, and goodness, 1 Timothy 5. 21. Joh. 15. 16. Romans 9. 22, 23. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5,
6. 9.

Is there no cause, reason, or inducement of election in the elected themselves?

None at all; it is wholly of free grace, without respect of any goodness that
God foresaw in us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 9. 16. Phil. 2. 13. Ephesians. 1. 9. for
otherwise man should have whereof he might glory in, and of himself, as having
discerned himself from others, and God should not be the cause of all good, nor
should his counsel be incomprehensible.

Is not Christ the cause of our Election?

No; not of Gods decreeing of it, (for that he did of his own free will) but of
the execution of it; that is, our salvation is for and through Christ.

What tokens have we of our Election?

A true faith and a godly life.

What use are we to make of our Election?

First, it is our great comfort, that our salvation stands by Gods eternal
decree that cannot be changed, and not in our selves that daily might lose it.

Secondly, it shows Gods infinite mercy, that before we were, or had done
good or evil, he elected us rather then others as good as we.

Thirdly, it should make us love God all our life to our uttermost, for his
love to us.

Fourthly, it is a help against al temptations of Satan, or our doubting
nature, and also against all afflictions and contempt of the world, Romans 8. 38,
39.

Fifthly, it serves to humble us, that we had nothing of our selves for our
salvation, but it freely came from God.

What is Reprobation? Reprobation.


It is the eternal predestination or fore-appointment of certain Angels and
men unto everlasting dishonor and destruction; God of his own free will
determining to pass them by, refuse or cast them off, and for sin to condemn
and punish them with eternal death, Prove. 16. 4. Exodus 9. 16. Romans 9. 17. 22.
2 Timothy 2. 20. Mat. 25. 41.

Is not sin the cause of Reprobation?

No; for then all men should be reprobate, when God foresaw that all would be
sinners; but sin is the cause of the execution of Reprobation, the damnation
whereunto the wicked are adjudged being for their own sin.

Is there no cause then of Reprobation in the Reprobate?

None at all, in that they rather then others are passed by of God; that is
wholly from the unsearchable depth of Gods own free will and good pleasure.

But is not God unjust in reprobating some men, and electing others, when all
were alike?

No; for he was bound to none, and to show his freedom and power over his
creatures he disposes of them as he will for his glory; as the Potter is not
unjust in making of the same clay sundry vessels, some to honor, and some to
dishonor.

Does Predestination only come within the compass of Gods decree, and not the
means also of accomplishing the same?

Yes; the means also comes within this decree, as the Creation and the fall of
the reasonable creatures.

If God has decreed the works of the wicked, must not he of force be the
author of sin and evil?

God is not the cause of sin and evil which he forbids and condemns,
but Satan and man; yet God in his secret will has justly decreed the evil
works of the wicked (for if it had not so pleased him, they had never been at
all) for most holy ends, both of his glory and their punishment, as may be seen
in the Jews crucifying of Christ, Acts 2. 23. and Joseph's selling into Egypt,
Genesis 45. 7. and 50. 20. For the thing that in it self by reason of Gods
prohibiting of it is sin; in respect of Gods decreeing of it for a holy end,
comes in the place of a good thing, as being some occasion or way to manifest
the glory of God in his justice and mercy; for there is nothing sin as God
decrees it or commands it, neither is there any thing of it self absolutely
evil; (1 Pet. 3. 17.) But because God has forbidden it, therefore it is
evil, and only unto them unto whom God has forbidden it: as Abraham killing
of Isaac being commanded of God was to be obeyed, and sin it were to have
disobeyed it, which otherwise by reason of Gods commandment forbidding to kill
was a sin; for God forbids not things, because they are of themselves, and
first evil, but therefore are they to man evil, because God has forbidden
them; for all sin is a transgression of a law, and God does in heaven and in
earth whatsoever pleases him, neither is there any greater then he to command
him.

So much of the decree or purpose of God; what is the execution of it?
Execution of Gods decree. Creation. Providence.


It is an action of God effectually working all things in their time according
to his decree, Ephesians. 1. 11. Acts 4. 28.

What are the parts of the execution?

Creation, and Providence, Psalm. 33. 6, 7. 9. 10, 11. and 146. 6, 7. Jer. 10.
12.

What is Creation? Creation in general.


It is the execution of Gods decree, whereby of nothing he made all things very
good, Genesis 1. 1. 7. Heb. 11. 3.

How many things in general are you to know concerning the Creation?

The causes, and the adjuncts; in the former whereof we are to consider the
author or efficient cause, the matter, the form or manner, and the end; in the
latter the goodness of the creatures, and the time of their Creation.

Who is the Author of this wonderful work?

God alone.

How does that appear?

Not only by the plain and manifold testimonies of holy Scripture, but also by
light of reason well directed; for reason teaches, that there must needs be a
first cause of all things, from whence they proceed, not only as they are this
or that, but simply as they are; that all perfections which are in other things
by participation should be in it essentially, and that the same must be of
infinite wisdom in that all things are made and ordered unto so good purposes
as they are, none of which things can agree to any but to God alone, whence it
is that the Apostle Paul, Acts 14. 15. and 17. 24. does point out God to the
Heathen by his work above other.

Is not Creation then an article of faith above reason?

Yes; in regard of the time and manner of it, as likewise in respect of a full
and saving assent unto it with comfort.

Is the Father alone to be held the Creator of all things?

No; but together with him the Son also, and the holy Ghost, for so S. John
testifies, that by Christ the eternal Word and Wisdom of God al things were
made, and without him was made nothing, Joh. 1. 3. In like manner S. Paul
teaches, that by him all things were created in heaven and in earth, both
things visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, by him, and for him they were all created, Col. 1.
16. Moses also declares, that the Spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters,
sustaining and holding up, and as it were brooding (for that metaphor he uses)
the unformed matter to bring forth the most comely and beautiful forms of all
things, Genesis 1. 2.

Did not the Angels create some creatures at the beginning? or cannot Man or
the Devils now create creatures?

No; Creation is a work of God which only he is able to do, and therefore
whatsoever the Devil or Judges like the Sorcerers of Egypt, seem to do, it is
nothing but a delusion of the senses, as the Devil himself confesses, Mat. 4.
and the Sorcerers, Exodus 4.

What, was there not something before the Creation, as the first matter of all
things, or space, or the time, in which this world was made?

No; for then there should be something eternal as well as God.

Whereof then were all things made?

Of nothing, that is, of no matter which was before the Creation.

How does that appear?

Because they are said to have been made in the beginning, Genesis 1. 1. that is,
when before there was not any thing but God the Creator, and before which there
was no measure of time by men or Angels.

How and in what manner did God create all things?

By no means or instruments, (which he needs not as man does) but by his
powerful word, that is, by his only will, calling those things that are not as
though they were, Heb. 11. 3. Romans 4. 17. Ps. 148. 5.

Was that Word by which he made all things, Christ his Son?

All things indeed that were made were made by the Son, the second Person of
the Trinity, Joh. 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. Heb. 1. 2. yet that word mentioned in the
1. Genesis where it is written, that the Lord said, Let there be light, etc. was
Gods command, which then had beginning, whereas the Son was from all eternity.

To what end were all things created?

For Gods glory, Prove. 16. 4.

How does the glory of God appear in them?

First, his eternal power and Godhead is seen in raising all things out of
nothing by his word alone, Esaias 40. 12. Romans 1. 20. Jer. 10. 12. and 51. 15.

Secondly, his infinite wisdom is made known by them, Psalm. 104. 24. Jer. 10.
12. and 51. 15.

Thirdly, his goodness unto all his creatures is hereby manifested, which is
very excellently set out by the Prophet in the 104. Psalm.

Fourthly, his infinite authority does appear by them.

What uses then are we to make of the Creation? Uses of the Creation.


First, we are thereby taught to discern the true God from all Heathen and
Idol gods in the world, Esaias 45. 6, 7. Jer. 10. 11, 12. for nothing in heaven
and earth can give a being to a creature but God.

Secondly, we are to weigh them and learn their properties, Eccles. 7. 25.

Thirdly, we should learn to give God glory for them, Rev. 4. 11. Psalm. 92. 5.
where it is made one end of the Sabbath, Ps. 104. throughout.

Fourthly, we are to gather comfort to our selves from hence, That resting upon
this faithful Creator our hope needs not fail us so long as either heaven or
earth have any help for us, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Esa. 37. 16, 17.

What does the Scriptures teach us concerning the goodness of the creatures?

That God made all them in such excellency of perfection for their being,
working, order and use, that himself did fully approve of them, and so
establish them, Genesis 1. 31. which established order is that which is called
Nature.

In how many things does the goodness of the creatures consist?

In three: First, in perfection of their nature.

Secondly, in their properties and qualities, whereby they are able to do
those things for which they were created.

Thirdly, in their uses unto man.

How manifold is that good which men receive by them?

Threefold: First, profitable good. Secondly, pleasant good. Thirdly, honest
and Christian good.

How were all things made good when we see there be diverse kinds of Serpents,
and noisome and hurtful beasts?

That they are hurtful, it comes not by the nature of their creation, in
regard whereof they at the first should only have served for the good of man.

What do you note in the time of their Creation?

The beginning and the continuance thereof.

Might not the world have been before all time even from eternity?

No, for absolute eternity belongs only to God, neither could any thing that
is subject to time be after an infinite succession of other things.

What say you then to Aristotle accounted of so many the Prince of
Philosophers, who labors to prove that the world is eternal?

Wherein he labors to find out a point of wisdom which he had learned of
none other that was before him, he therein bewrays his greatest folly; for
his chiefest reason being grounded upon the eternity of the first mover, is of
no force to prove his most absurd position, seeing God as he is Almighty, and
always able to do what he will, so is he most free, and not bound to do all
that he can, but what, when, and how it pleases him. But seeing Aristotle was
enforced by reason to acknowledge God to be the first mover, even against his
will, (for it seemed that he endeavored as much as he could to quench the light
of divine knowledge shining in his face, or obstinately to close his eyes
against the same) and yet not only spoiled God of the glory of his Creation,
but also assigns him to no higher office then is the moving of the spears,
whereunto he binds him more like to a servant then a Lord, the Judgment of
God uttered by S. Paul, Romans 1. 21. is most notoriously showed upon him, in
that he knowing God, did not glorify him, nor give him thanks, but became vain
in his disputations, and his foolish heart was darkened; while he professed
wisdom, he was made a fool, approving Idolatry, and that wickedness which the
Apostle there shows to be a just punishment of Idolatry, and nature it self
abhors; Arist. Polit. lib. 7. cap. 6. and lib. 2. cap. 8.

How long is it since God did create the world?

Four thousand years before the birth of our Savior Christ, and so about 5614
years before this time.

Why is the order of the years of the world so carefully set down in the
Scripture?







But why was not the world made sooner?

Saving the hidden wisdom and free pleasure of the Maker therein appears the
free power of God to make or not to make, and his absolute sufficiency within
himself, as having no need of any external being, only creating that he might
communicate and manifest his goodness.

How long was God creating the world?

Six days and six nights.

Why was he creating so long, seeing he could have perfected all the creatures
at once and in a moment?

First, to show the variety, distinction and excellency of his several
creatures.

Secondly, to teach us the better to understand their workmanship, even as a
man which will teach a child in the frame of a letter, will first teach him one
line of the letter, and not the whole letter together.

Thirdly, to admonish us, that we are bound to bestow more time in discerning
and knowing them then we do.

Fourthly, that we might also by his example finish our work in six days.

Fifthly, that we might observe, that many of the creatures were made before
those which are ordinarily their causes, and thereby learn, that the Lord is
not bound to any creature, or to any means: thus the sun was not created
before the fourth day, and yet days which now are caused by the rising of the
sun were before that; so trees and plants were created the third day, but the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, by which they are now nourished and made to grow, were
not created till after the third day.

Hitherto of the creation in general, The creation of the particular creatures.
what are the particular creatures?

The world and all things therein, Acts 17. 24. or the heavens, and the earth,
and all the host of them. Genesis 2. 1.

How many heavens are mentioned in the Scriptures? The Heavens.


Three: the first is the air wherein we breathe, the birds do fly, and the
snow, rain, frost, hail and thunder are begotten, Matthew. 6. 26. Genesis 7. 11.

The second is the sky, wherein the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars are placed;
Genesis 1. 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 17. 3.

The third, wherein the Angles, and the souls of the Saints from hence
departed are now in; 2 Cor. 12. 2. Mat. 18. 10. Mark. 12. 25.

What understand you by the earth?

The lowest part of the world, Of the earth.
containing the globe of the land and the waters.

What mean you by the host of them?

All the creatures which the Lord made to have their beginning and being in
them, Psalm. 103. 20, 21. 148. 2. etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 3. Joel 2. 10, 11.

How are the creatures distinguished?

Into visible, and invisible; Col. 1. 16.

What are the things invisible? Of the invisible creatures.


The third heaven, The third heaven and Angels.
and the Angels placed therein.

Why is there no more express mention in the first of Genesis, of the creation
of these, especially being creatures in glory so far passing others?

1. They are not expressly mentioned, because Moses sets forth the things
that are visible; and therefore does not only pass them by, but also minerals
and other things enclosed in the bowels of the earth.

2. Some respect also might be had of the weakness and infancy of the Church
at that time; God did first teach them more plain and sensible things, and as
they grew in knowledge, he afterward revealed other things unto them; but that
they were (in one of the six days) created, it is most evident by Heb. 11. 10.
Psalm. 103. 20. and 148. 2. 5. Col. 1. 16.

In which of the six days were they created?

Though it be not so plainly revealed in Scripture, yet it may be gathered by
Genesis 1. 1. (where under the term of heavens, these glorious creatures may be
also comprehended) and Job 38. 6, 7. that they were created the first day.

Of what nature are the Angels?

They are substances wholly spiritual; Of Angels.
(not in parts as man is) and in respect of their simple essence in the
Scripture, they are called spirits.

How many things conceive you of the Angels, when you say that they are spirits?

Six. 1. That they are living substances. 2. That they are incorruptible. 3.
That they are incorporeall. 4. That they are indivisible. 5. That they are
intangible. 6. That they are invisible.

Have they any matter?

They have their spiritual matter, (as man's soul has) but not any earthly or
corporal matter.

They are not then fantasies, as some do wickedly imagine?

No, but they are substances and beings, for some are said to have fallen,
others to appear unto men.

How many of them were created at the beginning?

They were all created at once, and that in an innumerable multitude.

How did God create them?

He made them all at the first very good and glorious spirits, yet mutable;
Genesis 1. 31. Job 4. 18.

With what other properties are the Angels especially endued?

With greater wisdom, power, swiftness and industry, then any man.

Where is the creation of things visible, Of the creation of visible things.
especially taught?

In the first and second chapters of Genesis, where Moses declares at large,
how God in the beginning created the world and all things therein contained,
every one in their several nature and kinds.

What does Moses note of these creatures generally?







In what order did God create them?

First, the dwelling places were first framed, then the creatures to dwell in
them, and provision was made for the inhabitants of the earth before they were
made, as grass for the beasts, and light for all living and moving creatures,
and all for man. Secondly, God proceeds from the things that are more
imperfect, to those that are perfecter, until he come to the perfectest; as
from the trees, corn, herbs, etc. which have but one life, that is, whereby
they increase and are vegetative, unto the beasts which have both an increasing
and feeling, or sensitive life; as fishes, fowls, beasts, etc. and from them
to man which has besides them a reasonable soul.

What learn you from the first?

Not to be carking for the world and things of this life, nor to surfeit with
the cares thereof, seeing God provided for the necessity and comfort of the
very beasts, ere he would bring them into the world.

What from the second?

That we should therein follow the example of the Lord, to go from good to
better, until we come to be perfect.

What are the visible creatures in particular?

Two: Of the Chaos, or rude mass.
first, the rude mass or matter of the world made the first night, wherein all
things were confounded and mingled one in another. Secondly, the beautiful
frame thereof which were made the rest of the six days and nights.

What are the parts of that rude mass?

Heaven and earth (for so the matter whereof all the bodily creatures were
made, Of the parts of the rude mass.
seems by a Trope, Genesis 1. 1. to be signified) as it were the Center and
circumference. For as the Arch-builders first shadow out in a plot the building
they intend, and as the Painters draw certain gross lineaments of that
picture, which they will after set forth and fill up with orient colors; so
the Lord our God in this stately building, and cunning painting of the frame of
the world, has before the most beautiful frame set out as it were a shadow,
and a common draught thereof.

It seems that the rudeness was in the earth only, containing the water and
the dry land, because the Prophet says, that the earth was void, and without
shape.

It is true that Moses gives this to the earth, rather then the mass of the
heavens; because the confusion and rudeness was greater there then in the
mass of the heavens, for the water and dry land being mingled together, there
was no form or figure of them.

It being without form and void, how was it kept?

Genesis 1. 2. By the holy Ghost, which (as a bird setting over her eggs) kept
and preserved it.

What were the things which were made of this rude mass?

The beautiful frame and fashion of this world, with the furniture thereof.

What do you consider in the frame and fashion of the world? Of the frame of
the world.


Two things: first, the Elements, which are the most simple bodies, by the
uneven mixture whereof all bodies are compounded.

Secondly, and the bodies themselves that are compounded of them.

How many Elements are there? Of the Elements.


There are commonly counted four. The four Elements.


First, the fire, which some think to be comprehended under the term of light,
Genesis 1. verse. 3, 4. because it is a quality of the fire.

The second is the air, which some would have signified by the spirit verse. 2.
others by the Firmament, verse. 6. 7. set between the clouds and the earth, to
distinguish between water and water, and to give breath of life to all things
that breath.

3dly, The waters v. 2. several from the mass called the earth, v. 9. 10.

4thly, The earth, verse. 2. called the dry land, verse. 9, 10. which remains,

What are the mixed or compounded bodies? Of the mixed or compounded bodies.


Such as are made of the four Elements, equally mingled together.

How many kinds be there of them?

The things that have 1. A being without life. 2. A being, and life without
sense. 3. A being, life and sense without reason. 4. A being, life, sense, and
reason, (as man)


What is common to the three last kinds?

That together with life there is power and virtue given unto them to bring
forh the like unto themselves for the continuance of their kind, which blessing
of multiplication is principally in the two last sorts of creatures, (that have
the life of sense, beside the life of increase) and therefore the Lord is
brought in to speak to them in the second person, Genesis 1. 22. 28. which he did
not to the grass, corn, and trees, which are creatures of the second kind.

What learn you from hence?

That the chief and special cause of the continuance of every kind of
creature to the worlds end, is this will and word of God, without the which
they or sundry of them would have perished ere this, by so many means as are to
consume them. The several works of the six days.


Declare now in order the several works of the six days, The first day*
Heaven and earth, and the light.
and show first, what was done the first day?

The rude mass or matter of heaven and earth being made of nothing the first
night of the world, as has been declared; God did afterward create the light,
and called it day. Genesis 13, 4, 5.

What note you hereof?

The wonderful work of God not only in making something of nothing, but
bringing light out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4. 6. which are contrary, and
distinguishing betwixt day and night, before either Sun or Moon were created.
The second day.


What was the work of the second day? The Firmament.


The Firmament was created to divide the waters above, from the waters below.
The third day.


What was done the third day? Grass, corn, trees.


The third night (as it seemed) God caused the waters to retire into their
vessels, and severed them from the dry land, calling the one seas, the other
earth. Then in the third day which followed that night, he clad the earth with
grass for the use of beasts only, corn and trees for the use of man also. Of
the water and earth.


What shape is the water and earth of?

They both together make a round globe.

Whether is the water or the earth bigger?

The water.

Why then do they not overwhelme the earth?

They are restrained and kept in by the mighty power of God.

How many sorts of waters be there?

Two, salt waters (as the sea) and fresh waters, as floods, springs, lakes, etc.

What be the parts of the earth?

First, Hills. Secondly, Valleys, and Plains.

How many benefits do you receive by the earth in general?

Four; First, we are made of the earth. Secondly, we dwell on the earth.
Thirdly, it gives fruits and nourishment to all living creatures. Fourthly, it
is our bed after death.

What benefit receive you by the hills?

They are a shadow against storms and heat, they be fit for grasing of cattle,
they are fit places to set Beacons on, to show that the enemies are at hand,
etc.

What benefits receive you by the Valleys and Plains.

1. They receive water to water the earth. 2. They are most fit places to bring
forth all kind of fruit, and herbs, and grass.

How comes it to pass that God first makes the grass, corn, and trees, ere
he made the heavenly bodies of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; from whose
influence the growth of these proceeds?

To correct our error which tie the increase of these so to the influence of
the heavenly bodies, even to the worshipping of them therein; forgetting the
Lord who thereby shows that all hang upon him, and not on them, forasmuch as
he made them when the heavenly bodies were not.

What do you gather from hence?

That the fruitfulness of the earth stands not so much in the labor of the
husbandman, as in the power which God has given the earth to bring forth
fruit.

Thus much of the works of the 3d. day, The fourth day.
what was made the 4th. day?

Lights, The creation of the lights.
which are as it were certain vessels wherein the Lord did gather the light which
before was scater'd in the whole body of the heavens.

How are these lights distinguished?

Although they be all great in themselves, to the end they might give light to
the dark earth that is far removed from them, yet are they distinguished into
Great Small.
Sun Moon Stars.


Why does Moses call the Sun and Moon the greatest lights, when there are
Stars that exceed the Moon by many degrees?

First, because they are greatest in their use and virtue that they exercise
upon the terrestrial bodies. Secondly, because they seem so to us, it being
the purpose of the Holy Ghost by Moses to apply himself to the capacity of the
unlearned.

What is the use of them?

First, to separate the day from the night. Secondly, to be signs of seasons
and days and years. Thirdly, to send forth their influences upon the whole
earth, and to give light to the inhabitants thereof.

How are they signs of times and seasons?

First, by distinguishing the time, spring, summer, autumn, winter, by their
work and natural effect upon the earthly creatures.

Secondly, by distinguishing the night from the day, the day from month, the
month from the year.

Have they not operation also in the extraordinary events of singular things
and persons for their good and evil estate?

No verily, there is no such use taught of them in the Scriptures.

What creatures were made the fifth day?

Fishes and birds.

What were the fishes made of? The fifth day.


Of all four Elements, Of the creation of fishes, and birds.
but more (it seems) of the water then other living things, Genesis 1. 20.

What were the birds made of?

Of all four Elements, yet have more of the earth; ( Genesis 2. 19.) and
therefore that they are so light, and that their delight is in the air, it is
so much the more mavelous.

What did God make in the sixth and the last day of Creation?

It is probable that he made in the Night thereof the beasts of the earth. The
sixth day.
going creeping
Tame or home-beasts. Wild or field-beasts.
Day, Of the creation of man and woman.
man in both sexes, that is, both man and woman, the history of whose creation
is set down Genesis 1* 26, 27. in the discourse of the sixth days work, and
repeated in cap. 2. v. 7. and more at large after the narration of the Lords
rest in the seventh day, verse. 18, 19, 20, etc.


Why was man last made of all the creatures?

1. Because he was the most excellent of all the works of God in this inferior
world. 2. Because he was the end of all unreasonable creatures, and therefore
that he might glorify God for all the creatures that he saw the world was
furnished with for his sake. 3. Because God would have him first provided for,
ere he brought him into the world; that so he might have this world, for which
God had made him Prince, as it were, his Palace, furnished with all things
convenient: and if he had care of him before he was, how much more now he is?

What note you thereof?

That man has not to boast of his antiquity, all the creatures being made
before him even to the vilest worm.

What is to be observed in his creation?

That here for the excellency of the work, God is brought in, as it were,
deliberating with himself, the Father with the Son and the Holy Ghost, and
they with him; the whole Trinity entering into a solemn counsel to make man
after their Image, ( Genesis 1. 26.) which is not said of any other creature; for
whereas the other creatures were made suddenly, man was (as we shall see) not
so, but with some space of time: hitherto also belongs, that the Holy Ghost
stands longer upon his creation then upon the rest.

What learn you from hence?

That we should mark so much the more the wisdom and power of God in the
creation of him, thereby to imitate God in using most diligence about those
things which are most excellent.

What parts does he consist of?

Of two parts; Of the parts of man, and first of the body.
of a body and a soul, Genesis 2. 7. Job 10. 11, 12.

Whereof was his body made?

Of the very dust of the earth, Genesis 2. 7. in which respect the work of God in
making him is set forth by a similitude of the potter which of his clay makes
his pots; Romans 9. 21. and the name of Adam is from hence in the Hebrew given
unto man, to put him in mind not to be proud, nor to desire to be like God;
which God foresaw he would do, through Satan's temptations.

What learn you from hence?

That seeing it pleased God to make man's body more principally of the basest
Element, that thereby he would give man to understand of what base matter his
body was framed, that so he might have occasion of being lowly and humble in
his own sight; according as the Scripture it self directs us to this
instruction, Genesis 18. 27. Jer. 2. 2. 29.

What else learn you?

The absolute authority that God has over man, as the Potter has over his
pots and much more, Romans 9. 21.

How was the soul made?

His soul was made a spiritual substance, Of the soul of Man.
which God breathed into that frame of the earth to give it a life, whereby man
became a living soul, ( Genesis 2. 7. Mal. 2. 15.)

Why is it called the breath of God?

Because God made it immediately, not of any earthly matter (as he did the
body) nor of any of the elements, (as he did the other creatures) but of a
spiritual matter, whereby is signified the difference of the soul of man which
was made a spiritual and divine, or everlasting substance, from the soul or
life of beasts, which comes of the same matter whereof their bodies are made,
and therefore dies with them; whereas the soul of man comes by Gods creation
from without, (in which respect God is said to be the Father of our spirits,
Heb. 12. 9.) and does not rise as the soul of beasts do, of the temper of the
elements, but is created of God, free from composition, that it might be
immortal and free from the corruption, decay, and death that all other
creatures are subject unto; and therefore as it had life in it self when it was
joined to the body, so it retains life when it is separated from the body and
lives for ever.

What other proofs have you of the immortality of the soul besides the divine
nature thereof? The immortality of the soul.


Eccl. 12. 7. It is said that at death the dust shall return to the earth

Our Savior Christ, Luke 23. 46. and his servant Stephen, Acts 7. 59.

Luke 23. 43. The thieves soul after separation from the body is received

Mat. 10. 28. The soul cannnot be killed by them that kill the body.

Psalm. 49. 14, 15. Mat. 22. 32. Rev. 6. 9. and 7. 9.

The guiltiness of the Conscience, and fear of punishment for

Otherwise all the comfort of Gods children were utterly dashed; Cor. 15. 15.

Why is it said, that God breathed in his face or nostrils, Genesis 2. 7. more
then in any other part?

To put man in mind of his frailty, whose breath is in his nostrils, Esaias 2. 22.

Because the soul shows her faculties most plainly in the countenance,

But is the head the seat of the soul? Of the seat of the soul.


It is thought that in regard of the essence of it, all of it is over all and
every part of the body, as fire is in hot iron; but howsoever the several
faculties thereof appear in the several parts of the body, yet the heart is to
be accounted the special seat of the soul, not only in regard of life being
the first part of man that lives, and the last that dies, but for affections
also and knowledge, as appears by 1 Kings 3. 9. 12. Mat. 15. 18, 19. Romans 2.
15. and 10. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 4.

Is there many or one soul in man?

There is but one, having those faculties in it of vegetation and sense that
are called souls in plants and beasts.

What reason have you for this saying?



Genesis 2. 7. for the diverse lives and faculties.

Mat. 26. 38. Acts. 7. 59.

When may the soul be truly said to come or be in the body of a child?

When in all essential parts it is a perfect body, as Adams was when God gave
him his soul.

What be the faculties of the soul?





What is meant by the image of God, after which man was made? Genesis 1. 26, 27.

Not any bodily shape, What is the Image of God in Man.
(as though God had a body like man) but the divine state wherein his soul was
created.

How many ways is the image of God taken in Scripture?

Either for Christ, as Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. Joh. 12. 45. and 14. 9. or for
the glory of man's lively personage, as Genesis 9. 6. or for his authority over the
woman, as 1 Cor. 11. 7. or for the perfection of his nature, endued with reason
and will, rightly disposed in holiness and righteousness, wisdom and truth,
and accordingly framing all motions and actions both inward and outward, Col.
3. 9, 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.

How is it here then to be taken?

It may be taken either strictly and properly, or more largely and generally.

What is the strictest and most proper acception of it?

When it is taken for that integrity of nature which was lost by Adams fall,
and is contrary to original sin.

Wherein stands that integrity of nature?

In the whole perfections of virtues appearing in the five faculties, as

1. In the understanding, true wisdom and heavenly knowledge of Gods will and
works.

2. In memory, all holy remembrance of things we ought.

3. In will, all cheerfulness to obey Gods command.

4. All moderation and sanctity of affections.

5. All integrity of Conscience.

Is any part of Gods Image in the body?

No, but as original sin in our corrupt estate; so in the state of integrity
these virtues shine and are executed by the body.

But is not man the Image of God in respect of the essential faculties of the
soul, his mind and will, and in the immortatality thereof?

Not in this strict and proper acception of Gods Image, whereof now we speak;
for the essential faculties of the soul are not lost by Adams fall, and the
immortality remains still.

What is the larger acception of Gods Image?

When it is taken for that dignity and excellency given unto man in his
creation; which is partly inward, and partly outward.

Wherein does his inward excellency consist?

Both in his substance and in his qualities.

Wherein stands the excellency of his substance?

In that he only of all the creatures of the visible world has a reasonable
and immortal soul given unto him, (as has been declared) and in respect of
this spiritual nature resembles God who is a Spirit.

What is the excellency of man consisting in qualities?

Knowledge and wisdom in the understanding, Psalm. 51. 6. Col. 3. 10.
Righteousness and holiness in the free will, Ephesians. 4. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
and herein, as has been showed, did man especially resemble his Maker.

Wherein stands the excellency of the understanding?

In knowledge of all duties either concering God, his neighbor, or himself;
unto which knowledge may be referred Wisdom to use knowledge, to discern when,
where, and how every thing should be done: Conscience to accuse or excuse, as
his doings should be good or evil; Memory to retain, Providence to foresee what
is good to do it, what is evil to avoid it; Reason to discuss of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of every particular action of a man's own self;
hitherto refer the knowledge of the natures of the creatures, whereby he was
able to name them according to their nature.

Wherein stands the excellency of man's will?

In holiness (as has been said) and righteousness, or uprightness of
desires and affections; holiness comprehending all the virtues of the first,
and justice or righteousness containing all the virtues of the second Table
imprinted in the soul of man at his Creation.

What were the outward gifts wherein man's excellency did consist?

God gave him a body answerable to his soul, endued with beauty, Cor. 11. 7.

God set such a grace and majesty in the person, especially in the

God gave him dominion and rule over all creatures of the world, Lord over all,
Psalm. 8. 6, 7. Genesis 1. 26. 28. of which dominion the authority to name them was
a sign, Genesis 2. 19. 20.

What are the ends and uses of the making of man according to Gods Image?







How many of mankind did God create at the first?

Adam, Genesis 2. 7.

Evah, Genesis 2. 21, 22. Mal. 2. 15. so made he them male and female, Genesis 1. 27.
and 5. 2.

How does God say, Genesis 2. 18. It is not good for man to be alone; did he make
any thing that was not good?

God forbid; by good it is not meant, that which is set against sin or vice,
but in saying (it is not good for man to be alone) he means it is not so
convenient and comfortable.

What learn you from hence?

Cor. 7. 1. It is not good for man to touch a woman, have gathered, that
marriage is little better then whoredom; Considering that as here, so there, by
good is meant only that which is convenient and commodious.



What is meant by these words in the same place, Genesis 2. 18. [as before him?]

That she should be like unto him, and of the same form, for the perfection of
nature and gifts inward and outward.

What is the end why she was made?

To be a help unto man.

Wherein?

First, in the things of this life by continual society, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
Secondly, in this life, for generation, Genesis 1. 28. Thirdly, in the things of
the life to come, even as they which are heirs together of the grace of life.
And now a fourth use is added, to be a remedy against sin, which was not from
the beginning, 1 Cor. 7. 9.

What reason is there brought to prove that God was to make a woman an help
unto man?

Either he must have an help or companion, but there is none fit among the
creatures, therefore I must create one; the first proposition being evident,
the second is proved by Gods own testimony, and Adams experience, who having
given names to all the creatures truly, and according to their natures, yet
found none fit for his company, Genesis 1. 20.

What learn you from thence, that the Lord would have Adam see whether there
were a helper amongst the other creatures which he knew well to be unfit?

To teach us, that ere we enter into marriage we should have a feeling of our
own infirmity and need of a wife, whereby that benefit may become more sweet,
and we more thankful unto God; which if it be true in a man, it ought to be
much more in a woman, which is weaker, and much more insufficient then he.

What else?

That it is a perverse thing to love any creature so well as mankind, against
those men that make more of their Horses and Hounds then of their wives; and
against those women which make more of a Monky, or of a Parrat, or of a
Spaniel, then of their husbands.

What note you of that, that when Adam was asleep his wife was made?

That the Lord is the giver of the wife without our care, and that besides our
prayers to God for one, the care is to be laid upon the Lord, and upon our
parents, which are to us as God was to Adam, to direct us therein, Prove. 19. 14.

Why was not Evah made of the earth as Adam was, but of a Rib of her husband?

To admonish her of her subjection and humility, as the Apostle Cor. 11. 8.
Which subjection also appears in this, that Adam gave her the name.

To put them in mind of the near conjunction that should be between

Wherefore does God bring the woman to Adam?

To note that how fit soever a woman be, yet she should not be received to wife
until God gave her, and when he gives her by his Ordinance that he has
appointed, that then he should receive her.

Whereof depends this, that a man shall leave father and mother and cleave
to his wife? Genesis 2. 24.

Of this, that she was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and that God
did give her unto man, and he accepted her.

The Creation which is the former part of the execution of Gods Decree being
ended, what is the other?

Providence. Of Gods Providence.


How may it appear that there is a providence?

Partly by the word of God, Matthew. 10. 30. Prove. 16. 33. Partly by reason.

What reasons have you to prove that there is a Providence?

The agreement of things which are most contrary in the world, and

The subjection of may men and women unto one person, both in

The means of our preservation and nourishment; for meat, drink of man and
continue heat in him, unless there were a special providence of God to give
virtue unto them.











Obj. 1. But it seems that the inequality holden in the government of men
should prove, that all things are not governed by the Lord, for the worst are
richest oftentimes, and the best poor?

His government in all things whatsoever, is good; for he is no less good in
his government then in his Creation.

Obj. 2. If God do guide all things, we should have no Serpents and other
noisome and hurtful things; no war, no sickness?

They are the instruments and means of the execution of Gods justice and
vengeance upon men that offend against him, in which respect the Prophet says,
there is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done, Amos 3. 6.

Obj. 3. How comes it then to pass if these be instruments of vengeance for
sin, that they fall upon the good, and rather upon them then upon the wicked?

The most godly having the remnant of sin that dwells in their mortal
bodies, deserve everlasting condemnation, and therefore in this life are
subject to any of the plagues of God; as for that they are sharplier handled
oftentimes then the wicked, it is to make trial of their patience, and to make
show of the graces he has bestowed upon them, which he will have known, and
that it may be assured that there is a Judgment of the world to come, 2 Thessalonians.
1. wherein every one shall receive according to his doing in this life, either
good or evil.

Having showed that there is a Providence; Definition of Gods Providence.
declare now what it is.

It is a temporary action of God, whereby he moves and directs all things
after the counsel of his own will to their proper ends. Or thus, It is the
second part of the execution of Gods decree, whereby he has a continual care
over all his creatures once made, sustaining and directing them with all that,
that belongs unto them, and effectually disposing of them all to good ends,
Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 11. 36. Zach. 4. 10. Prove. 15. 3. Jer. 23. 23. Col. 3. 11.
Psalm. 139. 2. and 119. 91.

Why say you it is an action?

To distinguish it from the essential Attributes of God.

Why say you that it is temporary?

To distinguish it from the eternal decree of God.

Why say you, [whereby he moves and directs all things?]

To show first, that God is not idle in heaven, as Epicures do dream. 2ly.
That nothing can come to pass without the providence of God.

Why say you [after the counsel?]

To show that God does nothing unadvisedly and rashly, but uses, first, his
knowledge, whereby he perfectly understands all things; Secondly, his wisdom,
whereby he does dispose all things being known.

Why say you [of his own free will?]

To show first, that God is not compelled to do any thing, but whatsoever he
does, he does it voluntarily, without compulsion. 2ly, That the Lord in the
dispensation and government of all things, does not follow the advice and
counsel of any other; neither regards any thing without himself.

Why say you [to their proper end?]

To show that the Lord does not only govern things generally, but every thing
particularly together with their properties, qualities, actions, motions, and
inclinations.

Is Gods providence then extended unto all his creatures?

Yea, unto all persons, things, actions, and qualities, and circumstances, how
usual soever they seem to be; God exercising his providence about all things
in general, and every thing in particular; for not one sparrow, whereof two
are sold for a farthing, falls without the providence of our heavenly Father,
not so much as a hair of our heads, Mat. 10. 29, 30. no (it may truly be said)
not the bristle of a swine falls without the providence of God.

But it seems a thing unworthy of Gods great and infinite Majesty to deal
and have a hand in small matters, as for a King to look to the small matters of
his household.

No more then it is a disgrace to the Sun that shines in the foulest places.

How is that to be understood then that the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9. 9. Has
God care for Oxen?

It is spoken only by way of comparison, having regard to the great care he
has of men: for in respect he commanded they should not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that did tread out the corn, by the care he has of Oxen, he would show
that his care is much more for men; especially for the Ministers of his Gospel.

What other things be there from which some do exclude the providence of God?

Things done by 1. Necessity. 2. Art. 3. Nature. 4. Fortune and luck. 5.
Casualty and chance. 6. Destiny. 7. Free Will.


How manifold is Necessity?

Twofold. 1. Absolute necessity, the contrary whereof cannt be.

2. Necessity with a condition, which is such as puts down the cause, the
effect follows; but take away the cause, the effect cease.

How prove you that God has a government in things that come by chance and
casualtie?

Prove. 16. 33. The lots are cast in the bosom, yet the issue of them, and
their event hang upon the Lord. Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19. 13.

Is there not then any fortune or chance of things in the world?

Not in respect of God, by whose appointment the very hairs of our heads are
governed and numbered, but in respect of man that knows not future things, the
Scripture uses such words, to show the suddenness and uncertainty of a thing,
Exodus 21. 13. Eccl. 9. 11. Luke 10. 31.

Do the creatures ever since the first six days continue of themselves being
only governed of God?

No, the creation still is after a manner continued, in that all things are
sustained by the same power whereby they were made: for God is is not like a
builder, that is the cause only of the making, and not of the being of his
building; but he is such a cause of being to all creatures, as the Sun is of
light unto the day, so that without his continual working, all would return to
nothing.

What proof have you of this continual working of God?

Our Savior says, John 5. 17. my Father works until this time, and I also
work; meaning in continuance and preservation of all creatures; For in him we
live, move, and have our being: Acts 17. 25, 26, 27, 28. And the Apostle
testifies, Heb. 1. 3. That our Savior Christ by whom the world were made,
bears up all things, and upholdeth them in their being with the word of his
power, his mighty word. Thus Moses teaches how the Lord established the
continuance and preservation of all the creatures in the world both living and
void of life, Genesis 1. So does the Prophet also in the 104. Psalm. 119. 91.

How does God sustain all creatures?

Partly, by the continuation of particulars, either for the whole time of this
world, as heaven and heavenly bodies, earth and other Elements, etc. 2 Pet. 3.
4. or for the time of life allotted, as all living creatures, Psalm. 36. 6.
Psalm. 104. 27, etc. Partly, by propagation of kind, whereby creatures even of
shortest continuance, do successively abide unto the end of the world, Genesis 7.
3. 8. 21, 22.

Thus God sustaineth and preserves all that he has made: how does he govern
and dispose of them?

God orders all his creatures according to his pleasure, guiding and
employing them and their natures to those several ends and uses whereby they
may best serve unto his glory, Ps. 119. 91. Dan. 4. 34, 35. and the good of
themselves and of their fellow creatures, especially of man; Ps. 8. but he has
one general manner of government belonging to all; and another special, which
is proper to the principal creatures.

How does God work in all the creatures generally?

First, he does move and stir up that power which he has given the creatures
unto working.

Secondly, he does assist, direct, and help it in working of that which is good.

Thirdly, he does work together, and give being unto that which is wrought.

What are the principal creatures you speak of?

The reasonable creatures, Angels, and Men, which were created like unto God in
a high estate of holiness and happiness, Psalm. 8. 4, 5. and 103. 20. and 104.
4. Luke 2. 13. Mat. 25. 31.

How comes it to pass that there is a particular kind of government for the
reasonable creatures above others?

Because that they are creatures of another nature then the rest, being not
only acted and moved in one course as the other are, but having a power of
understanding what does concern them, and of moving themselves accordingly.

What government does follow hereupon?

That which is by teaching, and answerable fulfilling of that which is taught.

How by teaching?

By instructing, commanding, praising, forbidding, promising, threatening, and
permitting.

How by fulfilling?

Especially, by blessing and cursing.

What is the manner of Gods working in his providence?

It is sometimes ordinary, other times extraordinary.

What is the ordinary course of Gods providence?

When he brings things to pass by ordinary means, and that course which he
has settled in nature. Esa. 55. 10.

What is the extraordinary?

When he brings things to pass either without means, or by means of
themselves too weak, or beside the course of such means, and course of nature;
which works are usually called Miracles.

May we indifferently expect Gods extraordinary working, as we may his ordinary?

No, where ordinary means be had, we cannot look for an extraordinary work.

What do they that run unto the immediate and extraordinary providence of God,
without necessary occasions?

They do tempt God.

How many ways is God tempted?

First, by distrust: Secondly, by presumption.

When is God tempted by Distrust?

When men think that God either cannot, or will not fulfill his promises.

When is God tempted with Presumption?

When men depend upon the immediate providence of God without any warrant of
the word so to do.

How many sorts of men do thus tempt God?

First, they that do wastfully mis-spend their goods.

Secondly, they that having received gifts of mind and strength of body, do
not use them in some lawful calling for the maintenance of them, but do live
idly.

Thirdly, they that make an occupation of dicing and carding, and such like.

Fourthly, they that thrust themselves upon unnecessary dangers.

Fifthly, they which take pains for the maintenance of their bodies in this
life, but have no care of those things which belong to the salvation of their
souls in the life to come.

What are the means by which God does use to exercise his providence?

Two, the first passive, the second active.

What call you passive means?

Those which although the Lord does use them, yet have no knowledge nor
understanding to move or direct themselves, but are wholly moved and directed
by God.

What call you active means?

Those which although God uses, yet have reason, knowledge, and understanding
in themselves how to move or direct themselves, such are men and Angels,
whether they be good or evil.

Does God work after the same manner by the wicked, that he does by the godly?

No, for God works by the wicked, but not in them; as for the godly, he
works not only by them, but also in them: whereby it comes to pass, that the
work of the godly is acceptable unto God, but the work of the wicked is not
acceptable unto God, although they do the same thing, which the godly does.

How can it be showed out of the Scriptures, that God has a hand whereby he
governs even the transgressor against his holy will?

Genesis 45. 8. Is is expressly said that God did send Joseph before into Egypt,
and that his brethren did not send him, wherein God is said to have had a
further and a stronger hand in his sending into Egypt then his brethren, and
therefore it is manifest that God did that well, which the Patriarchs did
sinfully, Genesis 50. 20.

God hardened Pharaohs heart.

Sam. 16. 10. It is said that God had commanded Shimei to curse David.

Sam. 24. 1. God moved David to number the people.

Chron. 10. 15. It is said that it was of God that Rehoboam harkened not to the
people.

Kings 22. 19. 20. 23. It is said that the Devil was bidden of God sitting in
the seat of his righteous judgment to be a lying spirit in the mouths of the
false Prophets, 1 Kings 22.

Esa. 19. 14. God mingled amongst them the spirit of error.

Esa. 42. 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did not
the Lord?

Esa. 63. 17. Why have thou made us to err out of thy way, and hardened our
heart from thy fear?

Romans 1. 26. God gave them up to vile affections.

These. 2. 11. God sent them strong delusions.

the face of the earth, the Lord God is said to have wrought most holily: for
as Judas, the Jews and Pilate are all said to have given Christ to death; so
the Father and Christ are said to have done the same, and that in the same
words, though the manner and purpose are diverse, Acts 2. 23. and 4. 28. Romans
8. 32.

Does not God then suffer such things to be done?

He suffers indeed, yet this is not an idle permission, as some imagine, but
joined with a very and active doing or work of God, as in the crucifying of
Christ, it is said that they did nothing but that which the hand of God had
determined before; Acts 2. 23. and 3. 18. and 4. 28. for God is not only a bare
permitter of the evil works, but a powerful governor of them to his glory,
and an effecter also of it so far as it has any good in it.

But does not this draw God to some stain of sin from which he is most free, as
being that which he punishes?

In no wise, for that which is evil, has some respect of goodness with God.
First, as it is a mere action, God being the Author of every action; Acts 17.
28. but the Devil and our concupiscence, of the evil in it: as he that rides
upon a lame horse causes him to stir, but is not the cause of his halting.

Secondly, as it is the punishment of sin, for punishment is counted a moral
good, in that it is the part of a just Judge to punish sin; and thus God
wills the sin of the wicked, for their punishment, without sin in himself;
Romans 2. 26. and 3. ult.

Thirdly, as it is a chastisement, a trial of our faith, as martyrdom; or
propitiation for sin, as the death and passion of Christ, Acts 2. 23. and 4.
27, 28. where although the giving of Christ to the death of the Cross be
attributed in the same words to God and Christ, to Judas, Pilate, and the
Jews; yet diversely, and in several respects, they are declared to meet in one
and the same action, whereby there appears no less difference between God
and Christ's purpose, and theirs, then between light and darkness.

Declare how God can have a hand in these things, and yet be free from sin.

He is a cunning workman which with an ill tool will work cunningly, and as a
most excellent Apothecary makes a medicine of the mixture of poison in it,
which is not yet poysenous, but rather medicinal; so the Lord in guiding and
managing the poison of sin, draws treacle from the sins of men, as it were
the poison, in such sort as they turn to his glory, and good of his Church; and
cannot be charged with sin no more then the Apothecary with poisoning, in so
ordering the poison, as it does the contrary, by his skill, unto that which by
nature it would do: and as in painting, the black color gives grace to other
beautiful colors in making them show better; so it is in this work of God, in
which the sin and untruth of men (as by a black and dark color) causes the
truth and righteousness of God (as the white) to be more commended and to
appear better.

But how are these actions of the wicked discerned from the work of God in them?

First, by the cause from whence the action comes: for Joseph's brethren of
envy sent him into Egypt, but God in mercy. Shimei cursed David of malice, but
God of justice against David's murder and adultery. Rehoboam out of the
unadvisednesse of his heart refused the request of his people; but God by his
wise Counsel did so dispose of it. The Devil from hate to Ahab was a laying
spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets, but God in justice against his
idolatry. Pilate of ambition and fear, the Jews of malicious envy, and
ignorance, Judas of covetousness, but God of love gave Christ; and Christ
himself in obedience to his Father; and therefore that action as it was from
God and Christ was most just and righteous, as from the other, most wretched
and abominable.

Secondly, by the end whither they tend: for Joseph's brethren sent him to the
end he should not come to the honor foretold out of his dream, but God sent
him to provide for his Church, and to fulfill that that was foretold. Shimei
cursed to drive David to despair, but God directed him for exercise of David's
patience. The Devil lied in the false Prophets to ruin Ahab, but God justly
to punish him for his idolatry. Rehoboam to satisfy the desire of his young
beardlesse Counselors, but God to perform the word that he had spoken by his
Prophets. Pilate to please the people, and to keep his credit with Caesar,
Judas for obtaining of the money he desired, and the Jews that our Savior
Christ should not reign over them: but God and Christ to save his people.

But were it not better to say that these things were done by Gods permission
rather then by his providence and government, thereby to avoid an absurdity in
Divinity, that God is the Author of evil?

It is most truly said, that God is not the Author of sin, whereof he is the
revenger; and also that it is done by Gods permission: but it is not an idle
permission separated from the providence and government of God, and therefore a
distinction of Gods permission separated from his government of sin is not
good; especially considering that the distinction of such a permission does not
defend the justice of God, for the which it is devised.

How may that appear?

It he permit sin, he does it against or with his will; if he do it against
his will, then is he not Almighty; as one that cannot let that he would not
have done; if with his will, how can his justice be defended, if they were not
some good things for which he does willingly permit it? For if a Captain
should willingly suffer his soldiers to be murdered when he might hinder the
slaughter of them, although he put no hand to the murder, he is not therefore
excusable, and free from the blood of his soldiers.

What else can be alleged against the permission that is separated from the
government of the providence?

For that by this means God should be spoiled of the greatest part of the
government of the world, seeing the greatest part and most of the world are
wicked, all whose actions are (as they themselves are) wicked.

Is there yet any other matter against this distinction?

If in that God does permit sin he should have no hand in guiding and governing
it, then he should have no hand in guiding and governing of good things; for as
it is said that he permits sin, so it is also said that he permits the
good, The uses of the doctrine of Gods Providence.
Heb. 6. 3.

What use is to be made of the doctrine of Gods Providence?

First, as in the Creation, so in the continuation, preservation and government
of all things, the power, wisdom, and goodness of the Romans 11. 36. yea even
in the sins of men for the good things he draws forth from their evil.

Secondly, the consideration of this, that nothing can come to pass Eccl. 3.
11. 14. would conclude that then a man may give himself liberty to do any
thing, considering that it must needs be executed, that God has decreed.

Thirdly, we must banish all slavish fear out of our hearts, knowing

Fourthly, this should breed thankfulness to God in prosperity, and Romans 11.
36. not sacrifice to our own nets, Hab. 1. 16. or stay our minds in the
instruments thereof, without looking upto him by whose special providence and
government we obtain our desires.

Fifthly, this should cause humility under the hand of God when

Sixthly, in adversity we should patiently suffer whatsoever affliction Sam. 3.
18.

Seventhly, we must mark and observe the providence of God in

Having thus spoken generally of the Providence of God; we are now to descend
unto the special consideration of that which does concern the principal
creatures, upon whom God has declared the glory of his mercy and justice: Of
Gods special providence over Angels.
and first to begin with Angels: Show how they are upheld in their being.

They are all sustained by the power of God, so that they shall never die, or
return to nothing, Luke 20. 36.

How does God dispose of them?

First, concerning their everlasting condition, they had a law given them in
their Creation, which the elect observe, and are established in their
perfection: but the reprobates sinning against it have lost their first estate,
and are reserved unto further Judgment: for all being by God created good at
the first, Genesis 1. 31. some continued in humility and obedience according to
that dignity in which they were created: others continued not in the truth,
Joh. 8. 44. and so kept not their being or excellency in which they were
created of God, (by whom nothing could be made but good) but trangressed and
fell from it by their sin and wickedness becoming Devils, Jude ver. 6.

Secondly, for their employment God uses them all, both good and evil Angels,
as his servants and ministers for the accomplishment of his will and work, Job
1. 6.

How are the good Angels called in the Scripture? Good Angels.


1. Elohim, or gods, for their excellency and power, Psalm. 8. 5. compared with
Heb. 2. 7. Psalm. 97. 7. with Heb. 1. 6.

2. Sons of God, Job 1. 6.

3. Angels of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14.

4. Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21.

5. Heavenly Soldiers, Luke 2. 13.

6. Men of God for their Office.

7. Principalities, and Powers, and Dominions.

8. Seraphims and a flame of fire for their swift zeal to do Gods will.

9. Cherubims from the form of young men, wherein they appeared.

Have they any proper names?

Some for our capacity have names given unto them, as Gabriel, etc.

How many are there of them?

They be innumerable, Mat. 22. 30. Heb. 12. 22. Dan. 7. 10. Psalm. 61. 15. 17.

Are there diverse degrees of Angels?

Yes; for some are Principalities, and Powers, and Dominions, and Thrones, Col.
1. 16. which shows not so much a difference in nature as in diverse
employment in office: But what those degrees are, it is not observed out of
Scripture, and therefore to us is unknown.

With what properties are these Angels specially endued?

They are endued with wisdom, holiness, willingness to put in execution the
will of God; power, swiftness, industry, glory, etc. far above any man.

What measure of knowledge have they?

Very great in comparison of man, both by Creation and otherwise.

How many sorts be there of their knowledge?

Three: first, natural, which God endued them with at there Creation, far above
any man, as their nature is more heavenly.

Secondly, experimental, which they do mark and observe far more carefully
then man, in Gods government of the world, and out of all creatures, Ephesians. 3.
10. Luke 15. 10.

Thirdly, Divine, of which God informs them according to the several matters
that he sends them about, and hereby they know things to come, as Dan. 9. the
Angel tells before to Daniel the time of Christ's death, and Matthew. 1. God
tells the Angel Joseph's thoughts.

Do not Angels of themselvess know the thoughts of men?

No; for that is Gods property only, 1 Kings 8. 39. 2 Chro. 6. 30. But in some
messages, as that in the first of Matthew, God is pleased to manifest it unto
them.

Have they not knowledge then of all things done here upon earth?

No; for all things are only known to God alone, Heb. 4. 13. yet they know the
matters of those men and places where God appoints them a message, as
Cornelius his alms, Acts 10. 4. and the uncomlinesse of women in the
Congregation where they are, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

Can the good Angels fall at any time?

No; God has confirmed them in their well being that they might never fall by
sin from their first blessed estate, Matthew. 18. 18.

Whence comes this?

Not from their own nature (which was subject to mutability) but from Gods
mercy: for seeing those Angels are elect of God, 1 Timothy 5. 21. it followe^h of
necessity that they are kept and upholden only by his grace and mercy,
whereupon his election is grounded.

Now for the employment of these Angels, what are you to note therein?

Their apparitions, and the offices which they perform.

In how many sorts have Angels appeared?

In as diverse as it pleased God to send them, but specially in two; namely, in
visions, and true bodies.

What mean you by Visions?

Their appearing in some extraordinary sort to the mind and inward senses,
either in the night by dreams, as to Joseph, Matthew. 2. 13. or in the day by
some strange shows, as they did to the Prophets, Zach. 2. 3.

How manifold was their apparition in body?

In the true bodies, either of men, or of other creatures.

What examples have you of their apparition in the bodies of men?

Genesis 19. 2. two Angels (beside Christ) appeared to Abraham; so did two
likewise to the Apostles, Act. 1. 10. and Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.
26.

Were these bodies of living men, who had souls: or bodies created upon
occasion?

They were bodies extraordinarily created upon that occasion by God having no
souls, but the Angels to give them motions; and after were dissolved by God to
nothing, having neither birth nor burial.

Did they move from place to place in these bodies?

Yes; and did many other actions proper to man: the Angels appearing to Abraham
did truly eat and drink, though without need; the Angels did truly speak and
touch Lot, pulling him: but these actions were done by them in an extraordinary
speediness and manner, more then any man can do.

Have Angels ever appeared in the bodies of other creatures?

Yes; for therefore are they called Cherubims of creatures that have wings,
Satan spoke in the body of a serpent to Evah, and so to the Heathen in sundry
other creatures.

With what feeling did the godly find the apparition of the Angels?

Many times with great fear and terror (as may be seen in Daniel 7. 7, 8, 9,
10, etc.) which was caused by the small glimpse of glory that God vouchsafed to
them, which man for his sin could not bear.

What learn we by that?

To know our misery and corruption, and that in comparison of Gods appearing,
we should be ready to turn to dust.

How many are the Offices the good Angels perform?

Twofold: First, in respect of God. Secondly, in respect of the creatures.

How many are their duties concerning God?

Three: 1. They do continually praise and glorify God in Heaven.

2. They do always wait upon the Lord their God in heaven, to expect what he
would have them do.

3. They knowing his will do put it in execution.

How manifold are their duties concerning the creatures?

Twofold: either general, in respect of all the creatures; or special, in
respect of man.

What is the general duty?

That they are the Instruments and Ministers of God for the administration and
government of the whole world.

What are the Offices which they perform toward Man?

They are either in this life, or in the life to come.

How manifold are the Offices which they perform toward man in this life?

Twofold: either such as respect the godly, the procuring of whose good is
their special calling, Heb. 1. 14. Mat. 4. 11. Ps. 104. 4. or such as respect
the wicked.

How many good Angels has every one attending upon him in this life? has he
one alone, or has he many?

That is as the glory of God and the necessity of the Saints requires;
sometimes there do many attend upon one, sometimes one upon many.

What are the good offices which the Angels perform toward the godly in this
life?

They are used as Instruments, 1. To bestow good things upon them. 2. To keep
them from evil.

How manifold are those good things which by the ministry of the Angels are
bestowed upon the godly?

They partly concern the body, partly the soul.

What are the good things that concern the body?

1. They are used as Instruments to bestow things needful for the preservation
of it, and to bring necessary helps to men in their distress, as to Elias and
Hagar.

2. They are appointed of God to be as a guard and garrison unto his children
to comfort and defend them walking in their lawful callings, Psalm. 34. 7. and
91. 11.

3. They give an happy success to them in the good things they go about, Genesis
24. 7. 40. ver.

4. They are appointed as watchmen over the Saints, that by their presence they
might keep their bodies in shamefastness, holiness and purity, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

What are the good things of the soul which the Lord does bestow upon the
Saints by the ministry of the good Angels?

1. To reveal the will of God to them, and to inform them in things which he
would have done, Act. 10. 5.

2. To stir up good motions in their hearts.

3. To comfort them in sorrow, as Christ was comforted being distressed in
soul, Luke 22. 43, 44. and Paul, Acts 27. 23, 24.

4. To rejoice at the conversion of the Saints, Luke 15. 10.

How manifold are the evil things from which the good Angels do keep the
godly?

They likewise do partly concern the body, partly the soul.

What are the evils of the body?

They are either without, or within us.

From what evils without us are we preserved by the ministry of the Angels?

1. From those dangers that one man brings upon another.

2. From those that they are subject unto by reason of wild beasts.

3. From those evils whereunto we are subject by reason of other creatures
without life.

4. They do not only preserve the bodies of the Saints, but also all things
that are theirs as their goods, wife, children and families.

What are the evils within us from which the Angels do keep us?

First, sickness. Secondly, famine. Thirdly, death.

What are the evils of the soul from which the Angels do keep us?

From sin, and that two ways, 1. By their continual presence. 2. By their power.

What are the actions which the good Angels perform toward wicked men in this
life?

1. They restrain and hinder them from many wicked things which they would
bring to pass.

2. They execute judgments upon the wicked, and punish them for their sins
committed, 2 Kings 19. 35. Genesis 19. 11.

What are the offices which the good Angels are to perform toward man after
this life?

First, they carry the souls of the godly, being separated from the body, with
comfort into heaven, (as Lazarus, Luke 16. 22.) and thrust the wicked into hell.

Secondly, they wait upon Christ at the day of Judgment, to gather all the
faithful unto him, and to separate the wicked from among them, ( Matthew. 24.
31. and 51.) and to rejoice at the sentence which he shall give.

Are we not to worship the blessed Angels for the good offices which they
perform toward man, and to unto them?

Not in any case; for,

1. They themselves refuse it, Rev. 19. 10.

2. They are but Gods messengers and our fellow brethren.

3. God is only to be worshipped, Jud. 13. 16. Mat. 4. 10. Col. 2. 18.

Thus much concerning the good Angels; Of the evil Angels.
what are you to know concerning the evil ones?

First, their sin or fall. Secondly, the evil offices they perform.

How many things are we to consider in their fall?

Two: 1. The manner. 2. The backsliding it self.

What must be considered in the manner?

Four things.

1. They were created, though good, yet mutable, so as they might fall.

2. Being created mutable, they were tried whether they would fall or not.

3. Being tried, they were forsaken of God, and left to themselves.

4. Being left to themselves, they committed all sin even with greediness.

How many things must be considered in the fall it self?

Three: 1. From whence they fell. 2. Whereunto they fell. 3. The punishment God
laid upon them for their fall.

From whence fell they?

First, from their innocence and estate which God had set them in, Job 4. 18.
Joh. 8. 44. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude ver. 6.

Secondly, from God, and thereby from fullness of joy and perfection of
happiness.

Whereunto fell they?

God suffered them voluntarily and maliciously without any outward temptation
to fall into that unpardonable sin of Apostasy, and into the most grievous
sins that could be committed.

What was the principal sin that the Angels committed?

Howsoever some think it was pride, abusing the place of Isaiah, 14. 13, 14.
which is meant of the King of Babylon; others envy toward man, as in the book
of Wisdom, 2. 24. others lying, out of John 8. 44. yet it comprehended all
these and more too, being an utter falling away from God, and that holy
standing God placed them in, especially to minister for man's good.

How comes it to pass that the fall of Angels is without hope of
restitution, since Man is recovered after his fall?

The Devil committed the sin against the holy Ghost, Matthew. 12. 31. 1 John 5.
16. sinning wilfully and maliciously, which is proved by his continual dealing
against God, and therefore he shall never be restored.

Were there many Angels that did thus fall?

Yes, as appears by Rev. 12. 7. and Mat. 8. 30, 31. where a legion possessed
one man.

What punishments were laid upon the Angels for their fall?

First, the fearful corruption of their nature from their first integrity, and
loss of Gods image, so that they can never repent.

Secondly, the casting of them out from the glory of heaven, and the want of
the comfortable presence of God for evermore, 2 Pet. 2. 4.

Thirdly, a grief and vexation at the prosperity of the Saints.

Fourthly, a limitation of their power that they cannot do what hurt they
would.

Fifthly, horror and fear of the judgment of the great day; whereunto they
are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude, verse. 6.

Sixthly, a more heavy torment after the day of judgment in hell fire, where
they are to feel the infinite wrath of God world without end. Mat. 8. 29. Luke
8. 31. Mat. 25. 41. Apoc. 20. 10.

Can the Devil work miracles, and tell things to come?

No, but God only; Mat. 4. 3. Esaias 41. 23.

What power have they to hurt man?

They have no more power then is under nature, (for above nature they cannot
work) and yet they can do nothing by that power, but what God appoints; not
so much as the entering into hogs. Matthew. 8. 31.

How are they affected toward man?

Very maliciously, as their several names given them do declare.

What be those names?

First, Satan, because they mortally hate men.

Secondly, Devil, because they slanderously accuse them to God and man, Job 1.
11. and 2. 5. Rev. 12. 8, 9, 10.

Thirdly, the old Serpent, for their subtle temptation.

Fourthly, the great Dragon, for their destroying of many, Rev. 12. 8, 9

How many of them do attend upon every man?

Sometimes many upon one, and one upon many.

What be the evil offices they perform against man?

Some are common to the godly with the wicked, others are proper to the wicked
alone.

Have they a like power over the godly and the wicked?

No, for though God permits them often to try and exercise the godly, 2 Samuel
1. compared with 1 Chronicles. 1. Ephesians. 6. 12. both in body and in mind, (as Satan
afflicted Job both outwardly with grievous sores, and inwardly with dreams and
visions; and sometimes buffeted Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. sometimes hindered him from
his journey, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18.) yet he limiteth them, and turns their malice to
the good of his children, Luke 22. 31.

How manifold are the evil offices which they perform in common against the
godly and the wicked?

Twofold; either such as respect the body, and the things belonging thereunto,
or such as respect the soul.

How do they hurt the body or the things belonging to the body?

They are permitted by God for man's sin: First, to hurt the creature, that
should serve for our comfort, as the Air, Sea, Trees, etc. Rev. 7. 2, 3.
Secondly, to abuse the bodies both of men and beasts, for the effecting of
their wicked purposes. Thirdly, to delude the senses, making men to believe
things to be such as they are not, as the Devil did by Jannes and Jambres in
Egypt, and by the witch of Endor. Fourthly, to inflict sickness and evils
upon the bodies of men, and to torment and pain them, as in Job, and the
Egyptians. Fifthly, to strike some dumb. Sixthly, to enter into, and really to
possess the bodies of men, using them in most fearful sort, as Matthew. 8. 16.
and 12. 28. Seventhly, to inflict death upon the bodies both of men and beasts.

How do they hurt the soul?

First, by depriving some of the use of their reason by frenzy and madness.
Secondly, by troubling and tormenting some with grief and vexation of soul.
Thirdly, by abusing some with passions and melancholy fits, as Saul, 1 Samuel 16.
14. Fourthly, by seducing others, 1 King. 22. 21, 22. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Fifthly, by
manifold and fearful temptations to sin and wickedness. Sixthly, by
prevailing in such temptations. Seventhly, by accusing before God those with
whom they have so prevailed. Eighthly, by hindering men from doing good things.

What are the offices of the evil Angels that respect the wicked alone?

First, to rule and reign in them without controlment, and to finish his work
in them. Secondly, to murder and destroy them in this world, and in the world
to come to torment soul and body in hell for ever.

What use are we to make of this doctrine, Uses of the doctrine concerning
evil Angels.
concerning the evil Angels?

First, to tremble at the Lords severity toward them, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and to be
thankful for his bounty and mercies toward our selves, Psalm. 8. 1. 4, 5. Ephesians.
1. 3, 4.

Secondly, to remember that if God spared not those spiritual creatures
sinning against him, neither will he spare us rebelling against his Majesty, 2
Pet. 2. 4.

Thirdly, to fear to offend God, that has such messengers to send at his
command.

Fourthly, to learn to arm our selves with the shield of faith and fear of God,
since we have such great enemies to fight against, Ephesians. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 5. 9.

Fifthly, to be comforted, that though the Devil be powerful and most
malicious against us, yet Christ has broken his head, Genesis 3. 15. and at last
will tread Satan under our feet, Romans 16. ^0.

Thus much of the providence that concerns Angels. Of Gods particular
providence over man.


Show now how God does deal with man.

As with that creature in whom above all other, he intends to set forth the
glory of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, and Mercy; Prove. 8. 31. Psalm. 8. 3. etc.
1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. and therefore the Scriptures do most plentifully declare the
dealing of God with man, both in the time of this world, and for ever hereafter.

How is man upheld in his being?

Two ways.

First, as all other bodily creatures: partly by maintenance of every man's life
here on earth, for the time allotted by God himself. Acts 17. 28. Ps. 36. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Partly, by propagation of kind unto the end of the world, through
the blessing of procreation. Genesis 1. 28. Eccl. 1. 4.

Secondly, as Angels after a sort; God so providing, that though the body of
man returns to the earth from whence it was taken, yet the soul perishes
not, but returns to God that gave it; Eccl. 12. 7. yea, that the same body
also and every part thereof is preserved in the grave, and shall be joined
entire to the soul at the last day, so to continue for ever. Job 19. 26, 27.

How manifold is the state wherein man is to be considered?

Threefold: first, the state of innocence, commonly had and lost of Eccl. 7.

Secondly, the state of corruption and misery seizing on all men naturally,
Romans 3. 23.

Thirdly, the state of Redemption proper to the elect, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Psalm. 130.
8. All which do make way unto that final and everlasting estate of honor or
dishonor fore-appointed unto all men, beginning at the end of this life,
perfected at the day of judgment, and continuing for ever in the world to
come. And thus touching this part of Gods providence the Scriptures do teach
us, both the benefits of God bestowed upon man before his fall; and likewise
his justice and mercy toward him after his fall: his justice upon the
Reprobate, who are left without hope of restitution, and reserved together with
the Devils unto everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. 41. Rev. 20. 10. 15. His
mercy upon the elect who notwithstanding their fall, are restored again by
grace, Genesis 3. 15.

Is it not likely that all the visible world together with man, is fallen
without hope of restitution by mercy?

Yes, for it stands well with the justice of God, that seeing the visible
world was made for the use of man, Genesis 2. 9. that with the fall of man it
should be punished, Genesis 3. 17, 18. and with his raising up be restored, Romans
8. 20, 21, 22.

What is that special order of government which God uses toward mankind in
this world, Of Gods providence toward mankind.
and in the world to come?

In this world he orders them according to the tenor of a twofold Covenant,
in the world to come according to the sentence of a twofold judgment.

What understand you by a Covenant? Of the Covenant between God and man.


An agreement which it pleases Almighty God to enter into with man concerning
his everlasting condition.

What be the parts of this agreement?

Two: the one is the Covenant that God makes with us; the other is the
Covenant that we make with God: the sum of the former is, that he will be our
God, of the latter, that we will be his people. Jer. 31. 33.

What gather you from the former?

The surname of God, as it is in diverse places of Scripture, and namely, Exodus
3. 15. where it is said, The Lord God of your Fathers, the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, has sent me unto you; this is my name for
ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations: from whence we may observe
the singular glory and privilege of Gods people, in that God is content to
take his surname of them, Heb. 11. 16.

Why is this surname added?

For that it is a fearful thing to think of the proper name of God alone,
unless this be added to it, whereby he declares his love and kindness to us.

What gather you from the latter?

That man stands bound by these Covenants of agreement, to perform that duty
which God requires at his hands.

How many such Covenants be there? 1. Covenant of works.


Two: First, the Law and Covenant of works; Secondly, the free promise or
Covenant of grace, which from the coming of Christ is called the Gospel. Romans
10. 5, 6. Gal. 3. 11, 12.

Which of them was first?

The Law, for it was given to Adam in his integrity, when the promise of grace
was hidden in God.

How so, since it is said that the Law was first given to Moses?

That is to be understood of the written Law, as it was written by Moses, and
engraven in tables of stone by the finger of God, otherwise the same was
imprinted in the beginning in the hearts of our first parents, and therefore it
is called the Law of nature, Romans 2. 14.

How was this Law given unto Adam in the beginning?

It was chiefly written in his heart at his creation, and partly also uttered
in his ear in Paradise; for unto him was given a will both to good and also to
evil, and also to be inclined thereto with ability to perform it. There was
something likewise outwardly revealed, as his duty to God in the
sanctification of the Sabbath, to his neighbor in the institution of marriage,
and to himself in his daily working about the garden.

How does it appear that the substance of the Moral Law was written in the
hearts of Adam and Eve?

First, by the effect of it in them both, who immediately after their fall were
forced by the only guilt of conscience (not yet otherwise charged) to hide
themselves from Gods presence. Genesis 3. 8.

Secondly, by the remainders thereof in all mankind, who even without the Law,
are by light of nature a Law unto themselves. Genesis 4. 6. Romans 2. 14, 15.

How has the Moral Law been delivered since the fall?

The sum thereof was comprised in ten words, Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
commonly called the Decalogue or ten Commandments, solemnly published and
engraved in tables of stone by God himself, Deuteronomy. 10. 4. Afterward the same
was more fully delivered in the books of holy Scripture, and so committed to
the Church for all ages, as the Royal Law for direction of obedience to God
our King; Jam. 2. 8. and for the discovery of sin and punishment due thereto.
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Romans 1. 31. and 3. 20.

What then does the Law now require of us?

All such duties as were required of Adam in his innocence, Levit. 18. 5. and
all such as are required since by reason of his fall; Deuteronomy. 27. 26. binding us
to eternal death for our least defect therein.

Declare now out of that which has been said what the Covenant of works is.

It is a conditional Covenant between God and man, whereby on the one side God
commands the perfection of godliness and righteousness, and promises that
he will be our God if we keep all his Commandments: and on the other side man
binds himself to perform entire and perfect obedience to Gods Law, by that
strength wherewith God has endued him by the nature of his first creation.

What was done in this Covenant on Gods part?

There was his Law backed with promises, and threatenings, and unto them were
added outward seals.

What was the sum of this Law?

Do this, and thou shall live; if thou do it not, thou shall dye the death.

What is meant by Do this?

Keep all my Commandments in thought, word, and deed.

What is meant by life promised to those that should keep all the Commandments?

The reward of blessedness and everlasting life, Levit. 18. 5. Luke 10. 28.

What is meant by death threatened to those that should transgress?

In this world the curse of God and death with manifold miseries both of body
and soul, and (where this curse is not taken away) everlasting death both of
body and soul in the world to come, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and 29. 19. 20. and 32. 22.
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.

What were the outward seals added hereunto?

The two trees planted by God for that purpose in the midst of the garden, Genesis
2. 9. 3. 3. that Adam before and in the sight of them might resort to some
special places to serve God in, and might by the sight of them be put in mind
of those things whereof they were signs and seals.

What did the tree of life serve for?

It sealed up happiness, life, and glory unto man, upon condition of
obedience; that by tasting thereof (which no doubt, according to the manner of
Sacramental signs, was a tree of mavelous comfort and restoring) he might
be assured he should live in Paradise for ever, if he stood obedient to Gods
Commandments, Genesis 2. 9. Prove. 3. 18. Revel. 2. 7.

Was this tree able to give everlasting life to man, or otherwise, why did God
after the fall shut man from it?

It was no more able to give everlasting life, then the bodily eating of any
other Sacrament; but Adam having by sin lost that which was signified hereby,
God would have him debarred from the use of the Sacrament.

What did the tree of the knowledge of good and evil serve for?

Both for trial of obedience, and also for a warning of their mutability, and
of what would follow upon sin; so sealing death and damnation in case of
disobedience, not as though the tree was able to give any knowledge, but that
by tasting of it contrary to Gods command they should have experimental
knowledge of evil in themselves, which before they had of good only, and by
woeful experience should learn what difference there was between knowing and
serving God in their integrity and being ignorant of him by their sin, Genesis 2.
17.

What was done in this Covenant on man's part?

Man did promise by that power which he had received, to keep the whole law,
binding himself over to punishment in case he did not obey.

In what state is man to be considered under this Covenant? The state of man in
the time of his Innocence.


In a twofold estate. 1. Of Innocence. 2. Of Corruption and misery.

What things are you to note in the innocent estate of man?

First, the place where he was seated. Secondly, the happy and glorious estate
he there enjoyed both in soul and body.

Where did God place man when he created him?

In a most glorious, pleasant and comfortable Garden, which is called Paradise,
or the Garden of Eden for pleasantness, Genesis 2. 8.

What does the Scripture teach concerning it?

The place where it was; and the commodities thereof.

Where, and in what part of the world was it?

In Asia near the meeting of Euphrates and Tygris, those two famous Rivers.

What commodities had it?

All the principal creatures of God did adorn it, and therefore it is said to
be more extraordinarily then the rest of the world planted by God: There are
set down also the precious stones thereof under the Sardonyx; pure metals under
the gold; precious woods under the Bdelium, and so all other living things and
growing creatures, that it might be as it were a shop furnished for man to see
in, and learn by it Gods Wisdom, Power and Majesty.

Does this place now continue?

The place remains, but the beauty and commodities be partly by the Flood,
partly by man's sin (for which the whole earth is cursed) almost abolished,
though (as may be observed out of good Authors) it is a very fruitful place
still.

What happiness did man enjoy, thus placed in Paradise?

It was partly inward, partly outward.

Wherein did the inward appear?

First, in his wonderful knowledge, whereby he made use of all the creatures
of God, as the greatest Philosopher that ever was.

Secondly, in that holy and heavenly image of God, of which Adam had the use
and comfort before his fall, it shining in him without tainture or blemish, and
he thereby being without all sin or punishment of sin.

Thirdly, in the full fruition and assurance of the favorable and blissful
presence of his Creator, Matthew. 5. 8. Psalm. 17. 15. and his heavenly company
and conference with God, without all fear, as a subject with his Prince, Genesis
3. 8.

Fourthly, in his joyful serving God, together with absolute contentment in
himself, Genesis 2. 25.

Wherein did the outward appear?

First, in having so comely, perfect and glorious a body, in which there was no
infirmity, pain nor shame, though naked, Genesis 2. 25.

Secondly, in his dominion over all the creatures, that submitted themselves
and did service unto him, to whom also as their Lord he gave their original
names, Genesis 2. 19, 20.

Thirdly, in the comfortable state and sense, not of Paradise alone, but of all
the world round about him, having neither storm, winter, nor extremity in any
creature.

What employment had man in this estate?

A twofold employment; the first outward, to till and dress the Garden, Genesis
2. 15. the other spiritual, to worship and serve God his Creator, and to
procure his own everlasting blessedness, whereto he was fitted with freedom
of will and ability for perfect obedience unto God according to the tenor of
the Covenant of works.

What use are we to make of the knowledge of man's happiness before his fall?

First, to admire and praise the great goodness and favor of God in so
dealing with man, a clod of the earth.

Secondly, to bewail the loss of that happy estate, with blaming our selves
for our sin in Adam.

Thirdly, to learn how grievous a thing sin is in Gods sight, that procured
man this doleful change.

Fourthly, to labor and gasp to be heirs of the heavenly Paradise purchased
for the elect by Christ; by which we shall eat of the Tree of life, Rev. 2. 7.

Thus far of the state of innocence; Of man in the state of corruption, and of
his fall.
what is the state of corruption and misery?

The fearful condition whereinto in Adam all mankind fell, Eccles. 7. 29. by
transgressing and violating that Covenant of works which God made with him at
the beginning: For man continued not in his integrity, but presently
transgressed that holy law which was given unto him, willingly revolting from
Gods command through Satan's temptation into many sins by eating the forbidden
fruit, and so by the disobedience of one, sin reigned unto death, and death
went over all, Romans 5. 12. 18.

What are we then to consider herein?

First, Adams fall; Secondly, the wretched estate he threw all his posterity
into.

In what place of Scripture is the History of Adams fall handled?

In the third Chapter of Genesis, the six former verses whereof sets out the
transgression of our first parents, (which was the original of all other
transgressions) the rest of the Chapter declares at large the things that
followed immediately upon this transgression.

How was the way made unto this fall of man?

By Gods permission, Satan's temptation, man's carelessness and infirmity in
yielding thereunto.

What action had God in this business?

He permitted the fall of man, not by instilling into him any evil, Jam. 1.
13. 1 John 2. 16. or taking from him any ability unto good; But first suffering
Satan to assail him (2 Samuel 24. 1. with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.)

Secondly, leaving man to the liberty and mutability of his own will, and not
hindering his fall by supply of further grace, 2 Chro. 32. 31.

Was then God no cause of the fall of our first Parents?

None at all; but as has been said, having created them holy he left them to
themselves to fall if they would, or stand if they would in respect of their
ability; as a staff put on an end right, does fall without the furtherance of
the man that sets it right; yet came it to pass not only by the permission
of God, but also by his secret Decree, thereby to make way for the
manifestation of his Power, Justice and Mercy: for being able to bring good out
of evil, as light out of darkness, he orders in his great Wisdom the fall
of man to the setting out of the glory, both of his mercy in those that shall
be saved in Christ, and of his Justice in those that shall perish for their
sins, Romans 11. 32. yet without wrong to any, being not bound to his creature to
uphold him by his grace from falling, Romans 11. 35.

What hand had Satan in procuring the fall of man?

Being himself fallen, upon a proud, envious and murtherous mind, he deceived
our first parents by tempting them to sin, to the end he might bring them
into the like estate with himself; and as in this respect he is said to have
been a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44. so does he ever since seek to
do what hurt he can to mankind, moving them still to sin against God, and
laboring to bring them to damnation.

What do you observe herein?

His envy of Gods glory and man's happiness, together with his hatred and
malice against mankind, whom (as a murderer does his enemy) he hates and
labors to destroy.

What gather you from this attempt of his against our first parents in the
state of Innocence?

That Satan is most busy to assail them in whom the image of God in knowledge
and holiness does appear; not laboring much about those which either lie in
ignorance, or have no conscience of walking according to knowledge, as those
that are his already.

What Instrument did Satan use in tempting man?

He used the Serpent as an Instrument to deceive the woman, and the woman for
an Instrument to tempt the man, Genesis 3. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 14.

Why did he use those outward Instruments, and not rather tempt their fancy and
affection inwardly?

It seems that in their integrity he could not have that advantage against
them in those things whereunto they were made subject by their fall.

Why did he choose rather to speak by a Serpent then by any other Beast?

Because it was the fittest that God permitted him, and wisest of all the
beasts of the earth, especially possessed by him to deceive man, Genesis 3. 1. It
was of all other beasts the subtillest and fittest to creep into the Garden
unseen of Adam, (who was to keep the beasts out of it) and to remain there
without being espied of him, and creep out again when he had done his feat.

If there were craft before the fall, then it seems there was sin?

Craft in beasts is not sin, although the word here used signifies a
nimblenesse and slinesse to turn and wind it self any way, in which respect it
seems the Devil chose this beast before any other.

What learn you from thence?

That the Devil to work his mischief is exceedingly cunning to make his choice
of his Instruments, according to the kind of evil he will solicit unto,
Matthew. 7. 15. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 2. 14.

But we do not see that he comes any more in the body of Serpents?

He may, and in the body of any other beast which the Lord will permit him to
come in: Howbeit our case in this is more dangerous then that of our first
parents; for now he uses commonly for Instruments men like unto us and
familiar with us, which he could not do before the fall, Ephesians. 6. 12. Rev. 2.
10.

Why did Satan assail the woman rather then the man?

Because she was the weaker vessel, which is his continual practice, where the
hedge is low there to go over, ( Luke 5. 30. Mar. 2. 16. Mat. 9. 11. 2 Timothy 3.
6.) and might afterward be a fitter means to deceive and draw on her husband.

What are we to consider in his tempting of the woman?

First, the time which he chose to set upon her. Secondly, the manner of the
temptation.

What note you of the time?

First, that it was immediately, or not long after the placing of them in that
happy estate: which teaches how malicious the wicked one is, who if he could
let, would not suffer us to enjoy any comfort either of this life or of that to
come, so much as one poor day.

Secondly, that he came unto her when she was some space removed from her
husband, that he that should have helped her from and against his wiles might
not be present to hear their conference: whence we learn, that the absence of
wives from their husbands, who should be a strength unto them, is dangerous,
especially that we absent not our selves from the means of spiritual strength,
the hearing of the Word, the receiving of the Sacraments, and Prayer.

Thirdly, that she was near to the Tree of knowledge at the time he set on
her: which shows his watchfulness in taking advantage of all opportunities
that might further his temptations.

What was the manner of the temptation?

First, he subtly addressed himself to the woman, and entered into conference
with her. Secondly, he made her doubt whether the Word of God was true or not.
Thirdly, he offered her an object. Fourthly, he used all the means he could to
make her forsake God, and yield unto him, pretending greater love and care of
man's well doing, then was in God, and bearing them in hand that they should be
like unto God himself if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. 5.

What was the Devils speech to the woman?

Is it even so, that God has said, Ye shall not eat of all the fruit in the
Garden? Genesis 3. 1.

What do you note in this?

That it is likely there had been some communication before between the Serpent
and the woman, that Satan had asked why they did not eat of the forbidden
fruit, seeing it was so goodly and pleasant to behold, and that the woman had
answered that they were forbidden, whereupon he infers this that Moses
sets down, wherein we may observe,

First, the Devils sophistry, who at first does not flat contrary Gods command,
but to bring her to doubting and conference with him asks this question,
whether God has forbidden to eat of all the trees in the Garden.

Secondly, the wicked spirits malicious and subtle suggestion, in that passing
by the great bountifulness of the Lord in the grant of the free use of all the
fruits in the Garden, he seeks to quarrel with the Lords liberality.

Thirdly, we learn from hence to take heed lest for want of some one thing
which God withholdeth from us, which we gladly would have, we be not
unthankful to the Lord for his great kindness and liberality, and enter
further into a mislike of him for that one want, then into the love and liking
of him for his innumerable benefits we enjoy, especially it being for our good
that he withholdeth it, and that being not good which we desire.

What did follow upon this question of Satan?

The woman answering thereunto, not as God had spoken, that surely they should
die if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, but by a term of doubting, lest ye
die; Satan by this conference and doubting, takes advantage and assures them
that they shall not die, but have their eyes open and receive knowledge.

What observe you in this reply of the Devil?

First, his craft in applying himself to the woman, whom he seeing to be in
doubt of the punishment, contents himself with it, and abstaineth from a
precise denial, whither he would willingly draw her, because he deemed that
the woman would not come so far, and that in a flat denial he should have
been bewrayed, which notwithstanding in the latter end of this sentence he does
by implication flatly do: whence we learn, that the Devil proceeds by
degrees, and will not at the first move to the grossest: as in Idolatry he
labors to draw man first to be present, after to kneel only with the knee,
keeping his conscience to himself; lastly, to the greatest worship: In
whoredom, first to look, then to dally, etc. and therefore we must resist the
evil in the beginning.

Secondly, that he is a calumniator or caviller, whereof he has his name
Diabolus Devil, and an Interpreter of all things to the worst; and it is no
marvel though he deprave the best actions of good men, seeing he deals so
with God, surmising that God had forbidden to eat of the fruits, lest they
should know as much as he.

Thirdly, that knowing how desirous the nature of man (especially they of best
spirits) is of knowledge, he promises unto them a great increase thereof;
whereas we ought to remember that which Moses says, that the secrets of the
Lord are to himself, and that the things that he has revealed are to us and to
our children, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Hitherto of Satan's temptation, the cause of the fall without man: What were
the causes arising from our first parents themselves?

Not any of Gods creation, but their carelessness to keep themselves entire to
Gods command: for though they were created good, yet being left by God to the
mutability of their own will, they voluntarily inclined and yielded unto that
evil, whereunto (...) were tempted, and so from one degree unto another were
^rought unto plain rebellion, Genesis 3. 6. Eccl. 7. 29.

What was their first and main sin?

In general it was disobedience, the degrees whereof were first infidelity,
then pride, and lastly, the dis^vowing of subjection by eating the forbidden
fruit, which they imagined to be the means whereby they should attain to an
higher degree of blessedness, but proved to be the sin that procured their
fall, Genesis 2. 16, 17. and 3. 6, 7.

Did not Adam confer with Satan, and take the fruit from the tree?

No; he received it from his wife, and by her was deceived, and she by Satan,
Genesis 3. 4. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 14.

Satan indeed was the outward cause of Eves fall, but what are the causes
arising from her self?

They are either outward things of the body, or the inward affections of the
mind moved by them.

What are the outward things of the body?

They are the abuse of the tongue, of the ears, of the eyes, and of the taste:
for in that she entertained conference with the Devil, the tongue and ears; in
that it is said that the fruit was delectable to look on, the eyes: and in that
it was said it was good to eat, the taste is made to be an instrument of this
sin.

What learn you from hence?

That which the Apostle warns, Romans 6. 13. that we beware that we make not
the parts of our bodies weapons of iniquity: for if without a circumspect use
of them they were instruments of evil before there was any corruption or any
inclination at all to sin; how much more dangerous will they be now after the
corruption, unless they be well looked unto?

What do you observe in Eves conference with the Devil?

First, her folly to enter into any conference with Satan, for she might have
been amazed that a beast should speak unto her in a man's voice, but her
carelessness and curiosity moved her to it.

Secondly, her boldness in daring to venture on such an adversary without her
husbands help or advice.

Thirdly, her wretchedness in daring once to call in question the truth of
Gods command, or to dispute thereof, or then to doubt of it.

What instruction gather you from her entertaining conference with Satan?

That it is dangerous to talk with the Devil, so much as to bid him to depart,
if the Lord to try us, should suffer him to tempt us visibly as he did Eve,
unless we have a special calling of God thereunto. 1. Because he is too
subtle for us, we being simple in regard of him. 2. Because he is so
desperately malicious, that he will give place to no good thing we can allege
to make him leave off his malicious purpose.

What shall we then do?

We must turn our selves unto God, and desire him to command him away, at whose
only Commandment he must depart.

Is there any thing blameworthy in Eves answer to the question of the Serpent?

Notwithstanding that so far she answered truly, that God had forbidden them to
eat of the fruit of that tree, and tells also the punishment truly that would
follow thereof, yet began she to slip in the delivery both of the charge and of
the punishment: for where she says they were forbidden to touch it, it is more
then the Lord made mention of, and she thereby seems to insinuate some rigor
of the Lord forbidding even the touch of the fruit; and where the Lord had most
certainly pronounced, that they should die if they eat of the forbidden fruit,
she speaks doubtfully of it, as if they should not certainly die.

What learn you from this latter Observation?

That albeit men are often persuaded they sin, yet that they are not persuaded of
the Justice of God against it, whereby the door is opened to sin, which is to
make God an Idol, in spoiling him of his Justice, as if he were so all mercy,
as he had forgotten to be just, when as he is as well justice as mercy, as
infinite in the one as in the other, which corrects sharply the sins of such
as he will save.

What learn you of the abuse of the tongue in this conference?

That as the tongue is a singular blessing of God, whereby man excels all
the creatures upon the earth, so the abuse of it is most dangerous, because it
sets on fire the whole course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell, Jam.
3. 6.

What observe you of that it is said, that Eve saw the fruit was delectable to
look on?

Her lustful and wicked eye in suffering her mind to be allured to look on the
beauty of the fruit with a purpose to affect the eating of it.

How is it said, that she saw it was good to eat, when she had never tasted of
it?

She knew by the beautiful color it was so; for if we are able in this
darkness (we are fallen into) to discern commonly by the sight of the fruit
whether it be good, and the skillful in Physic by the color only of the
herb, to tell whether it be hot or cold, sweet or sour, how much more were
Adam and Eve, who had the perfection of the knowledge of those things, more
then ever Solomon himself?

What learn you by the abuse of these outward senses?

That they are, as it were, windows whereby sin entered into the heart, when
there was no sin, and therefore will much more now, the heart being corrupted.

What instructions gather you from thence?

First, that we must shut them against all evil and unlawful use of their
objects, and open them to the use of good things, make a Covenant with them as
Job did with his eyes, Job 31. 1. by a strong and painful resistance of the
evil that comes by the abuse of them, as it were, and cut them off, and
throw them away, as our Savior gives counsel, Mat. 5. 29, 30.

Secondly, that as the senses are more noble, as the hearing and sight, called
the senses of learning, so there should be a stronger watch set upon them;
those being the senses that Adam and Eve were especially so deceived by.

What observe you of that it is said, she saw that it was desirable for
knowledge?

That was only her error, which she having begun to sip of by communication
with the Devil, did after drink a full draught of, by beholding the beauty of
the fruit, and receiving the delicate taste thereof; and withal observe how we
can heap reasons true and false to move us to follow our pleasures.

What learn you from thence?

That the heart inclining to error, does draw the senses to an unlawful use
of them, and that the abuse of the senses does strengthen the heart in error.

What gather you hereof?

That before the heart was corrupted, there was no abuse of these outward
senses. But that being corrupt, the abuse thereof does settle the heart deeper
in error.

What was the effect of all these outward and inward means?

First, Eve yielded to Satan, and put his will in execution in eating of the
fruit that was forbidden. Secondly, she gave it also to Adam to eat.

What force has the word also here used by the holy Ghost?

Thereby as by a special word of amplification the sin is aggravated against
her, to show her naughtines; not only in committing the sin her self, but also
in alluring the husband to do as she had done.

What learn you from thence?

1. The nature of sinners to draw others to the condemnation they are in, as
Satan Eve, and Eve her Husband, even those that are nearest them; whose good
they should procure.

2. That we should take heed of that the Apostle warns us, not to be
partakers of other men's sins, as if we had not enough of our own to answer for;
which especially belongs unto those in charge, 1 Timothy 5. 22.

3. How dangerous an instrument is an evil and deceived wife, which the Lord
commands men should beware to make choice of, and if the man which is strong,
much more the woman.

What learn you of that Adam eat forthwith?

First, that which has been before noted, that the Devil by one of us
tempts more dangerously then in his own person; so that Satan knew he could
not so easily have deceived Adam by himself, as by Eve.

Secondly, for that in excess of love he yielded; it teaches husbands to love
their wives, but it must be in the Lord, as the wives must do their husbands.

How does it agree with the goodness, or with the very justice of God, to punish
mankind so fearfully for eating of a little fruit?

Very well, for first, the heynousnesse of an offense is not to be measured by
the thing that is done, but by the worthiness of the person against whom it is
committed. And how much more the Commandment our first parents brake was easy
to be kept, (as to abstain from one only fruit in so great variety and plenty)
so much more grievous was their sin by breaking it.

Secondly, though God tried their obedience in that fruit especially, yet were
there many other most grievous sins, which in desiring and doing of this they
did commit: Insomuch that we may observe therein, the grounds of the breach in
a manner of every one of the ten Commandments. For the transgression was
horrible, and the breach of the whole Law of God; yea, an Apostasy whereby
they withdrew themselves from under the power of God, nay, rejected and denied
him; and not so little an offense as most men think it to be.

What breaches of the first Commandment may be observed in this transgression?
That the breach of all the Commandments concurred in Adams and Eves sin.


First, infidelity, whereby they doubted of Gods love toward them, and of the
truth of his word.

Secondly, contempt of God, in disregarding his threatenings, and crediting the
word of Satan, Gods enemy, and theirs.

Thirdly, heinous ingratitude and unthankfulness against God for all his
benefits, in that they would not be beholding unto him for that excellent
condition of their creation (in respect whereof they ought unto him all fealty)
but would needs be his equal.

Fourthly, curiosity in affecting greater wisdom then God had endued them
withal by virtue of their creation, and a greater measure of knowledge then
he thought fit to reveal unto them.

Fifthly, intolerable pride and ambition, not only desiring to be better then
God made them, but also to be equal in knowledge to God himself, and aspiring
to the highest estate due to their Creator.

How did our first parents break the second Commandment?

Eve, by embracing the word of the Devil, and preferring it before the word of
God; Adam, by harkening to the voice of his wife, rather then to the voice of
the Almighty. Genesis 3. 17.

What were the breach of the third?

First, presumption in venturing to dispute of Gods truth, and to enter in
communication with Gods enemy, or a beast who appeared unto them, touching the
word of God, with whom no such conference ought to have been entertained.

Secondly, reproachful blasphemy, by subscribing to the sayings of the Devil,
in which he charged God with lying, and envying their good estate.

Thirdly, superstitious conceit of the fruit of the tree, imagining it to have
that virtue which God never put into it, as if by the eating thereof, such
knowledge might be gotten as Satan persuaded.

Fourthly, want of that zeal in Adam for the glory of God which he ought to
have showed against his wife, when he understood she had transgressed Gods
Commandments.

How was the fourth Commandment broken?

In that the Sabbath was made a time to confer with Satan in matters tending
to the high dishonor of God. If it be true that on that day man fell into this
transgression, as some not improbably have conjectured; for at the conclusion
of the sixth day, all things remained yet very good, Genesis 1. 31. and God
blessed the seventh day, Genesis 2. 3.

Now it is very likely Satan would take the first advantage that possibly he
could to entrap them, before they were strengthened by longer experience, and
by partaking of the Sacrament of the tree of life, (whereof it appears by
Genesis 3. 22. that they had not yet eaten) and so from the very beginning of man,
became a manslayer. John 8. 44.

Show briefly the grounds of the breach of the Commandments of the second
table in the transgression of our first parents.

The fifth was broken, Eve giving too little to her husband in attempting a
matter of so great weight without his privity, and Adam giving too much to his
wife in obeying her voice rather then the Commandment of God, and for pleasing
of her, not caring to displease God. Genesis 3. 17.

The sixth, by this act they threw themselves and all their posterity into
condemnation and death, both of body and soul.

The seventh, though nothing direct against this Commandment, yet herein
appeared the root of those evil affections which are here condemned, as not
bridling the lust, and wandering desire of the eyes, as also the inordinate
appetite of the taste, Genesis 3. 6. in lusting for and eating that only fruit
which God forbad, not being satisfied with all the other fruits in the garden.

The eighth; first, laying hands upon that which was none of their own, but by
a special reservation kept from them. Secondly, discontent with their present
estate, and covetous desire of that which they had not.

The ninth, judging otherwise then the truth was of the virtue of the tree,
Genesis 3. 6. and receiving a false accusation against God himself.

The tenth, by entertaining in their minds Satan's suggestions, and evil
concupiscence appearing in the first motions leading to the forenamed sins.

Thus much of our first parents sin, and the causes thereof.

Now let us come to the effects of the same; show therefore what followed in
them immediately upon this transgression.

Three fruits were most manifest: The effects of the fall.
namely, guiltiness of conscience, shame of face, and fear of Gods presence.

Did any punishment follow upon this sin?

Sin, Sin, guiltiness, punishment.
guiltiness, and punishment do naturally follow one upon another; otherwise
the threatening, that at what time soever they did transgress Gods
Commandment, they should certainly dye, should not have taken effect.

Declare how that threatening took effect.

They were dead in sin, which is more fearful then the death of the body, as
that which is a separation from the favor of God: for there came upon them the
decay of Gods glorious image in all the faculties of their soul, and also a
corruption of the powers of their body, from being so fit instruments to serve
the soul as God made them; and this in them is signified by nakedness; Genesis 3.
7. And in their children called original sin. Then there issued from thence a
stream of actual sins in the whole course of their life; which appeared in
Adam even upon his fall, by his flying from Gods presence, and affirming that
it was his nakedness that made him fly, his excusing of his sin, and laying
it on the woman, etc. By sin an entry being made for death, Romans 5. 12. they
became subject to the separating of the soul from the body, which is bodily
death; and of both from God, which is spiritual death, signified by expelling
them out of Paradise, and debarring them of the sacramental tree of life, Genesis
3. 22. etc. And thus by the just sentence of God being for their sin delivered
into the power both of corporal and of eternal death; they were already
entered upon death and hell, to which they should have proceeded until it had
been accomplished both in body and soul in hell, with the Devil and his
Angels for ever, if the Lord had not looked upon them in the blessed Seed.

For the fuller understanding of the things that immediately followed the
transgression of our first parents; let us consider more particularly what is
recorded in the 3d. chapter of Genesis And first show what is meant by that in v. 7.
that their eyes were opened, and they saw themselves naked. were they not naked
before, and having the eye sharper then after the fall, must they not needs see
they were naked?

It is true; Of our first parents nakedness.
howbeit their nakedness before the fall was comely, yea more comely then the
comeliest apparel we can put on; being clad with the robe of innocence, from
the top of the head unto the sole of the foot: wherefore by nakedness he
means a shameful nakedness both of soul and body, as the Scripture
speaks elsewhere; Rev. 3. 17, 18. Exodus 32. 25.

What gather you from hence?

That the loathsomenesse of sin is hidden from our eyes until it be committed,
and then it flasheth in the faces of our conscience, and appears in its
proper colors.

Was that well done that they sewed fig tree leaves to hide their nakedness?

In some respect: forasmuch as they sought not remedy for the nakedness
inward, it was not well; but that they were ashamed to behold their own
nakedness of the body, it was well: for in this corrupt and sinful estate,
there is left this honesty and shamefastness, that neither we can abide to
look on our own nakedness, and shameful parts, much less upon the shameful
parts of others; although it be of those that are nearest joined unto us.

What gather you from thence?

First, that those that can delight in the beholding either of their own
nakedness, or the nakedness of any other, have lost even the honesty that the
sinful nature of man naturally retains.

Secondly, that such as for customs sake have covered their nakedness with
clothes, do notwithstanding with filthy words, as it were, lay themselves
naked, are yet more wretched, and deeplier poisoned with the poison of the
unclean spirit, and have drunk more deeply of his cup.

Seeing our nakedness comes by sin, and is a fruit thereof, it may seem that
little infants have no sin, because they are not ashamed.

So indeed do the Pelagian heretics reason; but they consider not that the
want of that feeling is for the want of the use of reason; and because they do
not discern between being naked and clothed.

What follows?

That at the noise of the Lord in a wind, Of their hiding themselves.
they fled from the presence of God, and hid themselves where the trees were
most thick.

What gather you from thence?

First, that the guilt of an evil conscience strikes horror into a man; and
therefore it is said, that terrors terrify him round about, and cast him
down, following him at the heels, and leave him not till they have brought him
before the terrible King: Job 18. 11. 14. Thereof it is, that the feast of a
good conscience is so extolled, as to be a continual feast. Prove. 15. 15.

Secondly, the fruit of the sin coming from the fear, which is to fly from
God as from an enemy, whereof it is that the Apostle affirms, That having
peace of conscience, we have access and approach to God. Romans 5. 2. Their
blindness, which esteemed that the shadow or thickness of trees would hide
them from the face of God, whereas if we go up into heaven he is there; if
into the deep, he is there also, Psalm. 139. 7. 13. he being not so hidden in
the trees, but that a man might find him out.

What follows?

That God asks where he is, which knew well where he was.

What learn you from hence?

First, that we would never leave off running from God, until we come to the
depth of hell, if God did not seek us, and follow us, to fetch us as the good
shepherd the lost sheep. Esa. 65. 1. Luke 15. 4.

Secondly, that the means of calling us home, is by the word of his mouth.

What follows?

That Adam being asked, assigns for causes things that were not the causes,
as namely, the voice of the Lord, his fear, and his nakedness, which were not
the true causes, considering that he had heard the voice of God, and was naked
when he fled not; dissembling that which his heart knew to be the true cause.
viz. his sin.

What learn you from thence?

That it is the property of a man unregenerate to hide and cloak sin, and
therefore, that the more we hide and cloak our sins, when we are dealt with
for them, the more we approve our selves the children of the old man, the
cursed Adam. Job 31. 33.

What follows?

The Lord asks how it should come that he felt his nakedness as a
punishment, and whether he had eaten of the forbidden fruit.

What note you from thence?

That before that our sins be known in such sort as the denial of them is
in vain and without color, we will not confess our sins.

What learn you out of Adams second answer unto God?

That the man unregenerate dealt with for his sins, goes from evil to
worse; for the sin that he did before, and now cannot hide, he excuses, and
for excusing it, accuses the Lord; as those do which when they hear the
doctrine of predestination and providence, thereupon would make God party in
their sins.

What learn you further?

That howsoever Adam alleges it for an excuse, because he did it by
persuasion of another, yet God holds him guilty, yea deals with him as
with the principal, because his gifts were greater then his wife's.

What learn you from the answer of Eve, to the Lords question; why she did so?

The same which before, that the unregenerate man does go about to excuse the
sin he cannot deny; for she casts her sin upon the Serpent, and said
that which was true, but kept back the confession of her Concupiscence, without
which the Serpent could not have hurt her.

How comes it to pass that the old Serpent the Author of all is not called
to be examined?

Because that the Lord would show no mercy to him, wherefore he only
pronounces Judgment against him.

What learn you from thence?

That it is a mercy of God when we have sinned to be called to account, and to
be examined either by the Father of the household, or by the Magistrate, or by
the Governor of the Church; and a token of Gods fearful Judgment when we are
suffered to rest in our sins without being drawn to question for them.

What observe you in the sentence against the Serpent?

That the first part contained in the 14. ver. is against the Instrument of the
Devil; and that the other part contained in the 15 ver. is against the Devil.

What learn you of this proceeding to sentence?

That after the cause well known, Judgment should not be slacked.

Why does God use a speech to the Serpent that understands it not?

It is for man's sake, and not for the beasts sake.

Why for man's sake?

To show his love to mankind by his displeasure against any thing that shall
give any help to do hurt unto him; in which respect he commands that the Ox
that kills a man should be slain, and that the flesh thereof should not be
eaten; ( Exodus 21. 28.) like a kind Father that cannot abide the sight of the
knife that has maimed or killed his child, but breaks it in pieces.

What manner of curse is this, when there is nothing laid upon the Serpent, but
that he was appointed to at the beginning, before he became the Devils
Instrument to tempt Eve?

It is true, that he crept upon his belly before, and eat dust before, as
appears in the Prophet, Esaias 65. 25. but his meaning is, that he shall creep
with more pain, and lurk in his hole for fear, and eat the dust with less
delight and more necessity.

What learn you from thence?

Not to suffer our selves to be instruments of evil to any in the least sort,
if we will escape the curse of God; for if God did punish a poor worm, which
had no reason or will to choose or refuse sin, how much less will he spare us
which have both?

What is the sentence against the Devil?

The Ordinance of God, That there shall be always enmity between the Devil and
his seed on the one side, and the woman and her seed on the other, together
with the effect of this enmity.

What do you understand by the seed of the Devil, seeing there is no
generation of the Devils, for that there is no male nor female among them,
neither have they bodies to engender?

The seed of the Devil are all both wicked men and Angels, Joh. 8. 44. which
are corrupt and carry his image, 1 John 3. 8. In which respect the wicked are
called the children of the Devil, and every where the sons of Belial, Act. 13.
10.

What learn you from thence?

That the war of mankind with the Devil is a lawful war proclaimed of God,
which is also perpetual and without any truce, and therefore that herein it is
wherein we must show our choler, our hate, our valor, our strength, not
faintly and in show only, but in truth, whereas we being continually assaulted
with our enemy, leave our fight with him to fight against our brethren, yea
against our own souls; he continually and without ceasing fighting with us,
and not against his own, as the blasphemous Pharisees said, Mat. 12. 24.

What is the sentence against the Woman?

First, in the pain of conception and bearing child.

Secondly, in the pain of bringing forth; wherein is contained the pain of
nursing and bringing them up.

Thirdly, in a desire to her husband.

Fourthly, in her subjection to her husband.

Was she not before desirous and subject to her husband?

Yes; but her desire was not so great, through conscience of her infirmity, nor
her subjection so painful, and the yoke thereof so heavy.

What is the sentence against Adam?

First, his sin is put in the sentence, and then his punishment.

What is his sin?

One, that he obeyed his wife whom he should have commanded; then, that he
disobeyed God, whom he ought to have obeyed; the first being proper to him, the
other common to his wife with him.

What was the punishment?

A punishment, which although it be more heavy upon Adam, yet it is also common
to the woman; namely, the curse of the earth for his sake, from whence came
barrenness by Thistles and Thorns, etc. whereof, first, the effect should be
sorrow and grief of mind. Secondly, labor to the sweat of his brows, to draw
necessary food from it, and that as long as he lived. Lastly, the expulsion out
of Paradise, to live with the beasts of the earth, and to eat of the herb
which they did eat of?

What learn you from thence?

That all men, from him that sits on the Throne, to him that draws water,
are bound to painful labor, either of the body, or of the mind, what wealth
or patrimony soever is left them, although they had wherewith otherwise
plentifully to live.

What observe you else?

I observe further out of this Verse and out of the two next, that in the midst
of Gods anger he remembers mercy: Hab. 3. 2.
for it is a benefit to Adam, that he may live of the sweat of his brows; to
Eve, that she should bring forth, and not be in continual travel; unto them
both, that he taught them wisdom to make leather Coats.

What learn you from that it was said, God made them Coats?

That in every profitable invention for the life of man, God is to be
acknowledged the Author of it, and have the honor of it, and not the wit of
man that invented it, as is the manner of men in such cases to sacrifice to
their nets, Hab. 1. 16.

When there were better means of clothing, why did they wear Leather?

It seems that thereby they should draw themselves the rather to repentance
and humiliation by that course clothing.

What learn you from thence?

That howsoever our condition and state of calling afford us better array; yet
we learn even in the best of our clothes to be humbled by them, as those that
are given us to cover our shame, and carry always the mark and badge of our
sins; especially when these which were, even after the fall, the goodliest
creatures that ever lived, learned that lesson by them.

What follows?

A sharp taunt that the Lord gives Adam, ver. 22. further to humble him, as if
he should say, Now Adam do thou not see and feel how greatly thou art
deceived in thinking to be like God in eating of the forbidden fruit?

What learn you from it?

That by the things we think to be most esteemed contrary to the will of God,
we are most subject to derision; and that it must not be a plain and common
speech, but a labored speech that must bring us to repentance.

Why does God banish him out of Paradise, lest he should live if he should eat
of the tree of Life, seeing there is no corporal thing able to give life to
any that sin has killed?

It is true that the eating of the fruit of the Tree of life would not have
recovered him, but the Lord therefore would have him banished from it, lest he
should fall into a vain confidence thereof, to the end to make him seek for
grace.

Wherefore are the Angels set with a glittering sword to keep them from the
Tree of life?

To increase their care to seek to Christ, being banished from it, without hope
of coming so much as to the sign of life.

What learn you from hence?

The necessary use of keeping obstinate sinners from the Sacraments and other
holy things in the Church.

Thus much of the miserable and unhappy condition which our first parents
brought upon themselves.

Did this estate determine in their persons, or was it derived from them to all
their posterity?

It was; Of sin.
for their sin in eating the forbidden fruit was the sin of all men, and we
therein became sinners and guilty of eternal Condemnation: So that they by
this first transgression did not only lose for themselves the Image and favor
of God, but withal all deprived their posterity of that blessed estate, Romans
3. 23. and plunged them into the contrary, Romans 3. 12. bringing damnation upon
themselves and us all: wherefore this cursed estate of mankind is called in the
scriptures the image of Adam, Genesis 5. 3. the old man, Ephesians. 4. 22. the flesh,
Genesis 6. 3. John 3. 6. etc. And the Apostle teaches expressly, Romans 5. 12. That
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death went
over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned.

How does the Apostle here call this the sin of one man, seeing both Adam and
Eve sinned which are two, and that Eve sinned before Adam?

In the name of Adam was comprehended the man and the woman, for by marriage two
are made one; and Moses calls both the man and the woman Adam, Genesis 5. 2. and
last of all, the Apostle used the word here signifying both man and woman.

What reason is there that all their posterity should take part with them both
in their fall and in the woeful effect thereof? Why all Adams posterity are
partakers of his sin and misery.
It seems not to stand with the Justice of God to punish us for the sin that
we never did.

Our first parents by Gods appointment were to stand or fall in that trial,
not as singular persons only, but also as the head and root of all mankind,
representing the persons of all that should descend from them by natural
generation; and therefore for the understanding of the ground of our
participation with Adams fall, two things must be considered.

First, that Adam was not a private man in this business, but sustained the
person of all mankind, as he who had received grace and strength for himself
and all his posterity, and so lost the same for all: For Adam received the
promise of life for himself and us with this condition, if he had stood, but
seeing he stood not, he lost the promise of life both from himself and from us;
and as his felicity should have been ours if he had stood in it, so was his
transgression and misery ours: So that as in the second Covenant, the
righteousness of the second Adam (Christ Jesus the Mediator) is reckoned to
those that are begotten of him by spiritual regeneration (even those that
believe in his name) although they never did it: so in the first Covenant, the
sin of the first Adam (who herein sustained a common person) is reckoned to
all the posterity that descend from him by carnal generation, because they
were in him, and of him, and one with him, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Secondly, that we all who are descended from Adam by natural generation, were
in his loins and a part of him when he fell, and so by the law of propagation
and generation sinned in him, and in him deserved eternal condemnation;
therefore as two Nations are said to be in the womb of Rebekah, Genesis 25. 23.
and Levi to have paid tithes to Melchisedec in the loins of Abraham, Heb. 7. 9,
10. who was not born some hundred years after, so is it here. Thus we see that
as by the act of generation in leprous parents, the parents Leprosy made the
childrens, and the slavish and villainous estate of the parents is communicated
unto all the offspring, (for a man being a slave, his progeny unto the hundred
generation, unless they be manumitted shall be slaves) even so the natural
man howsoever he thinks himself free, yet in truth he is sold under sin, and
is the very servant of corruption, and in that state shall for ever remain,
unless the Son do make him free, Joh. 8. 33, 34. 36. Romans 6. 17. 19, 20. and
7. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 19. We see also that great Parsonages rebelling against the
King, do not only thereby hurt and disgrace themselves, but also stain their
whole blood, and lose their honor and Inheritance from themselves and from
their children; for by our Law a man being attainted of High treason, the
attaint of blood reaches to his posterity, and his children as well as he lose
the benefit of his Lands and Living for ever, unless the King in favor
restore them again, as God in his mercy has done unto us.

Then it appears, that by propagation from our last parents we are become
partakers of the sin of our first parents?

Even so, and for the same transgression of our first parents, by the most
righteous Judgment of God, we are conceived in sin, and born in iniquity, and
unto misery, Ps. 51. 5. for men are not now born as Adam was created, but death
does reign over them also that sinned not after the like manner of the
transgression of Adam, Romans 5. 14. that is, over infants, who are born in sin,
and not by imitation, but by an inherent corruption of sin, even as we see the
young Serpents and Wolves that never stung men or devoured sheep, are
notwithstanding worthy to die, because there are principles of hurtfulnesse and
poysonsomnesse in them.

How is it shown, that babes new born into the world have sin?

In that they are afflicted sundrily, which they bewray by their bitter cries,
and in that they coming out of the mothers womb go straight into the grave.

What is then the natural estate of man?

Every man is by nature dead in sin as a loathsome carrion, or as a dead corpse,
and lies rotting and stinking in the grave, having in him the seed of all
sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 6.

For the fuller understanding of the state of sin and the consequents thereof,
declare first what sin is.

It is defined in one word, What sin is.
1 John 3. 4. to be the transgression of the law; namely, a swerving from the
law of God, making the sinner guilty before God, and liable to the curse of the
law, Genesis 4. 7.

Seeing by the law sin is, and the law was not before Moses, Romans 5. 13. it
seems there is no sin until Moses?

When it is said the law was not before Moses, it is to be understood of the
law written in the Tables of stone by the finger of God, and other laws
Ceremonial and Political written by Moses at the commandment of God: for
otherwise the law (the Ceremonial law excepted) was written in the heart of
man, and for the decay thereof through sin taught by those to whom that belonged
from the fall unto Moses.

Is every breach of the Law of God sin?

Yea, if it be no more but the least want of that God requires, Romans 7. 7.
Gal. 3. 10.

And does every sin, the very least, deserve the curse of God and everlasting
death?

Yes verily, because God is of infinite Majesty and dignity, and therefore what
so touches him deserves endless wrath: wherefore Purgatory, and our own
satisfaction for small sins is vain.

How many sorts of sins are there?

Sin is either imputed, or inherent; the one without us, and the other within
us.

What is the sin Imputed?

Our sin in Adam, Imputed sin.
in whom as we lived, so also we sinned; for in our first parents (as has been
showed) every one of us did commit that first sin which was the cause of all
other, and so we all are become subject to the imputation of Adams fall, both
for the trasgression and guiltiness, Romans 5. 12. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 15. 22.

What sins are Inherent in us?

They do either defile our nature, Inherent sin.
or our actions, the one called Original sin, the other Actual, Col. 3. 9.
For every one naturally descending from Adam, beside the guilt of that first
sin committed in Paradise; first, is conceived and born in original corruption,
Ps. 51. 5. Secondly, living in this world sins also actually, Genesis 6. 5.
Esaias 48. 8. yea, of himself he can do nothing but sin, Jer. 13. 23. neither is
there any thing pure unto him, Tit. 1. 15.

What is Original sin?

It is a sin wherewith all that naturally descend from Adam are defiled even
from their first conception, Original sin.
infecting all the powers of their souls and bodies, and thereby making them
drudges and slaves of sin, for it is the immediate effect of Adams first sin,
and the principal cause of all other sins.

How is this sin noted out unto us?

In that other sins have their special names, whereas this is properly
called sin, because it is the puddle and sink of other sins, and for that
also the more it is pressed, the more it bursteth forth, as mighty streams are,
that cannot be stopped, till God by his holy Spirit restrain it.

Wherein does it specially consist?

Not only in the deprivation of justice, and absence of good, but also in a
continual presence of an evil principle and wicked property, whereby we are
naturally inclined to unrighteousness, and made prone unto all evil, Jam. 1.
14. Romans 7. 21. 23. For it is the defacing of Gods Image consisting chiefly in
wisdom and holiness, whereof we are now deprived, and the impression of the
contrary image of Satan, John 8. 41, etc. called Concupiscence, Romans 7. 7. Jam.
1. 14. consisting, first, in an utter disability and enmity unto that which is
good, Romans 7. 18. and 8. 7. Secondly, in pronenesse to all manner of evil,
Romans 7. 14. which also every man has at the first minute and moment of his
conception, contrary to the opinion of the Pelagians, who teach that sin
comes by imitation.

Is the Image of God wholly defaced in man?

No, if we take it in a large acception: For man remains still a reasonable
creature, and capable of grace, having the same parts and faculties he had
before; and in them some relics of Gods Image, Genesis 9. 6. Jam. 3. 9. As in
the understanding some light, John 1. 9. in the conscience sometimes right
judgment, Romans 2. 15. in the will some liberty to good and evil in natural
and civil actions: Romans 2. 14. and freedom in all things from compulsion, etc.

Is there not a power left in man, whereby he may recover his former happiness?

Man has still power to perform all outward actions, but not to change
himself, until he be changed by the grace of God.

Is man then able to perform the Law of God perfectly?

They that are not born again of God, Gal. 3. 22. Romans 8. 3.
cannot keep it all, Phil. 3. 9. Tit. 3. 5.
nor in any one point as pleasing to God thereby, in respect of themselves. For
except a man be borne of God, he cannot see the Kingdom of heaven, nor enter
therein; neither can he keep the Commandments of God. Moreover, all men by
nature being conceived and born in sin, are not only insufficient to every
good thing, but also disposed to all vice and wickedness.

Can man in this estate do no good thing to please God, to deserve at least
something of his favor?

We have lost by this sin all the righteousness we had in our creation, so
as now if God should say to us, Think but a good thought of thy self, and thou
shall be saved; we cannot: but our nature is as a stinking puddle, which within
it self is loathsome, and being moved is worse.

But does not God wrong to man, to require of him that he is not able to
perform?

No; for God made man so, that he might have performed it, but he by his sins
spoiled himself, and his posterity of those good gifts.

Is this corruption of nature in all the children of Adam?

Yea, in all and every one that are mere men, none excepted; Romans 3. 10. and 5.
15. All children since Adams fall being begotten in it, Ps. 51. 5.

How then does the Apostle say, that holy parents beget holy children?

Parents beget children as they are by nature, not as they are by grace.

How is original sin propagated and derived from the Father to the Son? The
propagation of original sin.


We are not to be so curious in seeking the manner how, as to mark the
matter to be in us: even as when a house is on fire, men should not be so
busy to enquire how it came, as seeing it there, to quench it: But this we may
safely say, that what effect the committing of the first sin wrought in the
soul of Adam, the same it does by the imputation of it work in the souls of
his posterity; as therefore the committall of that sin left a stain behind it
in his nature, being like a drop of poison that being once taken in, presently
infecteth the soundest parts; or like the dead fly that marreth the most
precious ointment of the Apothecary: so in the creation and infusion of our
souls into our bodies, God justly imputed the same transgression unto us, the
same corruption of nature (as the just punishment of that sin) must ensue in
the like manner.

Has this inbred sin, wherein every one is conceived, equally polluted all men?

Yes, though not altogether alike for disposition and motion to evil; for
experience teaches us that some are by nature more mild, courteous, and
gentle then others, which difference notwithstanding is not so much in the
natures of men, as in the Lord who represseth these sins in some, which he
suffers to rise up in others.

In what part of our nature does this our corruption abide?

In the whole man from the top to the toe, and every part both of body and
soul, Genesis 6. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Like unto a leprosy that runs from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot: but chiefly it is the corruption of
the five faculties of the soul, which are thereby deprived of that holiness
wherein God created them in Adam.

Is not the substance of the soul corrupted by this sin?

No, but the faculties only depraved and deprived of original holiness.

For first, the soul should otherwise be mortal and corruptible. Secondly,
our Savior took our nature upon him without this corruption.

To come then to the special corruptions of the five faculties of the soul.
Then first how this sin is discerned in the Understanding.

The mind of man is become subject to blindness in heavenly matters. The mind
corrupted.
First, Darkness and ignorance of God, of his will, and of his creatures; 1
Cor. 2. 14. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. Romans 8. 5.

Secondly, uncapablenesse, unablenesse, and unwillingnesse to learn though a
man be taught, Romans 8. 7. Luke 24. 45.

Thirdly, unbeleefe and doubting of the truth of God, taught and conceived by
us.

Fourthly, vanity, falsehood and error; to the embracing whereof, man's nature
has great pronenesse: Esa. 44. 20. Jer. 4. 22. Prove. 14. 12. and 16. 25.

What use make you of this corruption of the understanding?

That the original and seeds of all heresies and errors are in man's heart
naturally without a teacher, and therefore we should distrust our own
knowledge, to lead us in the matters of God and Religion; and only be directed
by Gods holy word.

How is the Memory corrupted?

First, The corruption of the memory.
with dullness and forgetfulness of all good things that we should remember,
notwithstanding we have learned them often.

Secondly, with readiness to remember that we should not, and to retain errors
and vanities (as tales and plays) much more then godly matters.

What use make you hereof?

As, first, to bewail the defects of our understanding, so to lament our
forgetfulness of good things.

Secondly, to distrust the faithfulness or strength of our memories in hearing
and learning good things, and to use all good helps we can, as often repeating
them, writing, and meditating on them.

Thirdly, not to clogge our memories with vanities, for which we should rather
desire the art of forgetfulness.

How is the Will corrupted?

First, The corruption of the will.
with a disablenesse and impotency to will any thing that is good in it self,
Romans 5. 6. Phil. 2. 13.

Secondly, with slavery to sin and Satan, the will being so enthralled, Romans 6.
20. and 7. 23. and hardened, Ephesians. 4. 18. that it only desires and lusts
after that which is evil, Genesis 6. 5. Job 15. 16.

Thirdly, with rebellion against God and any thing that is good. Romans 8. 7.

What use are we to make hereof?

First, that we have no free will left in us since Adams fall for heavenly
matters. Secondly, that for the conversion either of our selves or any other,
we must not look for it from man, but pray to God to convert man, who works
in us both the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 13. Heb. 2. 5. as the Prophet says,
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Lam. 5. 21.

How are the affections corrupted?

The affections of the heart which are many, The corruption of the affections.
as love and hatred, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, anger, desire, etc. are
subject to corruption and disturbance. Gal. 5. 24. James 4. 15. Job 15. 16.
First, by being set upon unmeet objects, in affecting and being inclined to the
things they should not be, and not to those they should; thus we hate good and
love evil, 1 Kings 22. 8. And in a word, our affections naturally are moved
and stirred to that which is evil to embrace it, and are never stirred up to
that which is good, unless it be to eschew it. Secondly, by disorder and
excess, even when we do affect naturally good things; as for our own
injuries, we are more angry then for Gods dishonor; when we are merry, we are
too merry; when sad, too sad, etc.

What use make you of the disorder of the affections?

First, to keep our selves from all occasions to incense them to sin,
whereunto they are as prone as the tinder to the fire. Secondly, to labor to
mortify them in our selves, that we may be in regard thereof pure Nazarites
before God, Gal. 5. 24. Col. 3. 5.

How is the conscience corrupted? The corruption of the conscience.


It is distempered and defiled, Tit. 1. 15. both in giving direction in things
to be done, and in giving judgment upon things done.

How in the former?

It sometime gives not direction at all, and thereupon makes a man to sin in
doing of an action otherwise good and lawful, Romans 14. 23. sometime it gives
direction, but a wrong one; and so becomes a blind guide, forbidding to do a
thing which God allows, and commanding to do things which God hates. 1 Cor.
8. 7. Col. 2. 21. John 16. 2.

How in the latter?

When it either gives no Judgment at all; being left without feeling; or when
it has an evil feeling and sense.

How is it left without feeling?

When it is so senseless and benumbed with sin, that it never checketh a man
for any sin, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. called a cauterized conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2. which
reseth from the custom of sinning, Heb. 3. 13.

How does it fail, when it has a feeling, but a naughty one?

Sometimes in excusing, sometimes in accusing.

How in excusing?

First, when it excuses for things sinful, making them no sins, or small
sins, and so feeding the mind with vain comforts. Mark. 10. 20. Genesis 3. 10. 12.
Secondly, when as it excuses us for having a good intent without any warrant
of Gods word, 1 Chronicles. 13. 9.

How in accusing?

First, when for want of time, direction, and lightening, it condemns for
doing good, (as a Papist for going to Sermons) condemning where it should
excuse, and so filling the mind with false fears.

Secondly, when accusing for sin it does it excessively, turmoyling a man with
inward accusations and terrors, Esa. 57. 20. and drawing him to despair by such
excessive terror, as may be seen in Cain and Judas.

What use are we to make of this confusion of the conscience?

First, seeing it does thus abuse us, we are never to make it a warrant of our
actions, unless it be directed by Gods word.

Secondly, we are to fear the terror of the great Judge of heaven and earth,
when we are so often, and so grievously terrified with our little Judge that is
in our soul.

What corruption has the body received by original sin?

It is become a ready instrument to serve the sinful soul, Of the corruption
of the body.
having both a pronenesse to any sin the soul affects, and likewise an
eagernes to commit it and continue in it, Romans 6. 12. 19. whereby it is come to
pass, that the bodily senses and members are, 1. As Porters to let in sin, Job
31. 1. Psalm. 119. 37. Matthew. 5. 29, 30. 2. The instruments and tools of the
mind for the execution of sin, Romans 3. 13, 14, 15, and 6. 13.

What use are we to make of this doctrine of original sin?

First, the due knowledge thereof serves to humble the pride of man remembering
that he is conceived in so sinful a sort, that howsoever the branches of his
actions may seem green, yet is he rotten at the root.

Secondly, it should move him with all speed to seek for regeneraon by Christ,
seeing he has so corrupt a generation by Adam.

What is actual sin?

It is a violation of Gods Commandments done by us after the manner of Adams
transgression, Actual sin.
Romans 5. 14. to wit, a particular breach of Gods Law in the course of our life,
which proceeds as an evil fruit from our natural corruption, and leaves a
stain in the soul behind it, Jer. 13. 23. which polluteth the sinner, and
disposes him to further evil.

How is such sin committed?

Either inwardly, or outwardly.

How inwardly?

First, by evil thoughts in the mind, which come either by a man's own
conceiving, Genesis 6. 5. Matthew. 15. 19. or by the suggestion of the Devil. John
13. 2. Acts 5. 3. 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.

Secondly, by evil motions and lusts stirring in the heart against the
righteousness of the Law, which condemns the very first motions of evil
that arise from our corrupt nature.

How outwardly?

By evil words and deeds, Esa. 3. 8. which arise from the corrupt thoughts and
motions of the heart when any occasion is given, Matthew. 15. 19. So that the
imagination of man's heart, the words of his mouth, and works of his hands, are
all stained with sin.

Be not outward sins more grievous then inward?

Some be, and some be not; for if they be against the same Commandment, and
the same branch thereof, they are much more wicked and evil; because, first,
God is more dishonored outwardly; Secondly, other men are offended, if godly,
or enticed by their example, if wicked; Thirdly, a man does more ingrosse
himself in sin outward, then in a bare thought, that he restrains from
outward action.

But how may some thoughts be more evil then actions?

If they be of more wicked matters: as the denying of God in heart, is worse
then an idle word.

What use are we to make thereof?

It serves, first, to condemn the common sort, that say, and hold that
thoughts are free, which are often so sinful; Secondly, to assure us that many
though they lead an outward civil life in actions, yet if their hearts be not
cleansed by faith, may be more odious in Gods sight that knows their
thoughts, then a godly person that may be left to some outward weaknesses in
his life.

What be the degrees by which men do proceed in the committing of actual sin?

Out of James 1. 14, 15. these four degrees may be observed.

First, temptation to sin, James 1. 14. 2 Samuel 11. 12. which then only is sin
to us, when it either arises from our own corruption, or from outward
occasions to which we have offered our selves carelessly. For if every
temptation to sin offered unto us should be sin simply, then our Savior that
was tempted should have sinned. Therefore the outward or inward temptations
that Satan may offer be not sins to us, till they get some hold in us, which
is, when we are the occasion of them our selves, by inward corruption or
outward carelessness in venturing upon temptations.

Secondly, concupiscence bringing sin to conception, James 1. 15. which is
done by these degrees: First, entertaining the sin whereunto we are tempted,
and suffering it to have abode in the mind or thought. Secondly, withdrawing
the heart from God (whom we ought to fear with all our hearts) and his
Commandments, Jam. 1. 14. Thirdly, consulting whether that sin which we
ought to hate may be done or no.

3. Consent of the mind to commit sin, whereupon ensues the birth of sin,
Jam. 1. 15. by which it is brought forth into act against God or man.

4. Often repetition of sin, by custom and continuance, wherein the heart
finally is hardened, Heb. 3. 13. and sin is come to a perfection or
ripeness, Jam. 1. 15. which is the strength that sin gets over man, whom it
rules, as a Master does a slave; in which estate who so continues must look
for eternal death, Jam. 1. 15. for sin then reigns, which it never does in
the godly.

Are these actual transgressions all of one sort?

No, for they are diversely considered, in respect of the Commandment broken,
the object offended, the disposition followed, and the degrees attained.

How for the Commandment?

The breach of a Commandment that bids, is a sin of omission, but of one
that forbids, is a sin of conversion; the one is an omission of duty
required, the other a Commission of evil forbidden; by the one we offend in
omitting those things which we should do, by the other in committing those
things which we should not do.

Which be the inward sins of omission?

The not thinking so often or religiously of heavenly things, (respecting the
first table) or of good duties to man as we should, but suffering our minds to
be a through-fare for vain or wicked thoughts to pass through more then good:
which sin, if it were thought of well, would make men more humble before God,
and to make more conscience of their hours, days, and nights, to mark how
their mind is occupied.

What be inward sins of Commission?

All actual sins of the mind and thoughts, whether we be awake dealing with
God or man, or asleep dreaming. Examples of the first against God, are to think
there is no God, Psalm. 10. 45. or to have vile and base conceits of him or his
government, Psalm. 10. 41. 1 Cor. 2. 14. And toward man, every inward breach of
the second table.

But does man commit sin in the night when he dreameth?

Yes surely, the soul is never idle, but when it thinks not of good, it
thinks of evil: and the godly may mark that after they have had any dreams
of things unlawful, their heart is in a measure wounded, till they obtain
peace and pardon from God.

What use are we to make thereof?

To pray earnestly that God would sanctify our corrupt hearts, that it may be
a fountain of holy and not sinful thoughts; and in the night, 1. To commit
our selves specially to God, that because we having our Senses and Judgment
bound and silent, are less able to resist and judge our sinful thoughts, God
would preserve us from them by his grace; And, 2. That we avoid all occasions
thereof in the day.

What be the outward sins of Commission?

Such as to the committing of them beside the thought of our mind any part of
our body does concur; as our tongue to words, and other parts to deeds.

How are sins distinguished in regard of the object offended?

Some sins are more directly against God, some against men, either public or
private, and others against a man's self.

How in regard of the disposition followed?

Either as we partake with others sins, Esa. 6. 5. or as we commit the sin in
our own person.

What be the differences of partaking with others sins?

First, when we conceal and wink at other men's sins which we ought to reveal
and rebuke, as Magistrates and Ministers often do. 1 Samuel 3 13. Secondly, when
we further it by our consent, presence, or counsel, Act. 7. 58. and 8. 1. and
22. 20. and 23. 14, 15. Romans 1. 32. Thirdly, when we provoke others to sin,
Mark 6. 25.

What difference of disposition is there in those sins which a man does commit
in his own person?

Some sins are committed of Ignorance, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Ps. 19. 12. or of an
erring conscience, 1 Cor. 8. 7. which a man does either not know, or not mark:
others are done of knowledge.

Does not Ignorance excuse?

Affected Ignorance does rather increase then diminish a fault.

What be the differences of sins of knowledge?

1. Some are of infirmity and temptation, for fear of evil or hope of good,
Romans 7. 19. Mat. 26. 69, 70. 2. Some of presumption, obstinacy, and
stubbornness in sinning, against which David earnestly prayed, Ps. 19. 13. and
50. 21. Eccles. 8. 11. and this may proceed (if men have not the grace of God)
to obstinate and wilful malice against God and his truth, and to the
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10. 29. Mark 3
29, 30.

What is the sin against the holy Ghost, the highest of all sins?

It is a wilful and malicious falling from, Of the sin against the holy Ghost.
and resisting of the Gospel, after a man has been enlightened with it, and
felt a taste thereof; manifested in outward action by some blasphemous
oppugning the truth of set hatred, because it is the truth.

What are you to consider in this sin?

The nature thereof, and the deadliness of the same.

What note you in the nature?

The reason why it is so called, and the quality thereof.

Why is it called the sin against the holy Ghost?

Not because it is committed against the third Person only, (for it is
committed against all three) but because it is committed against the light of
knowledge with which the holy Ghost has enlightened the heart of him that
committed it, and that of set malice: for every one that sins against his
knowledge may be said to sin against the holy Ghost, as Ananias and Sapphira
were said to do, Act. 5. 3. But that is not this great sin of malice,
resisting the truth, because it is the truth, but of infirmity.

What qualities and properties has this great sin?

First, it must be in him that has known the truth, and after falls away,
Heb. 6. 5. therefore Infidels and Heathens do not sin this sin; neither any
that are ignorant, though maliciously they blaspheme the truth. Secondly, it
must be done of set malice, because it is the truth, as the Pharisees did, Mat.
12. 31. Heb. 6. 6. Therefore Peter that cursed himself, and denied that he knew
Christ, to save his life, did not sin this sin; nor Paul that did persecute
him doing it of ignorance. Thirdly, it must be against God himself directly and
his Son Christ Jesus, Mat. 12. 31. Heb. 6. 6. Therefore it is not any
particular breach of the second Table, nor a slip against any special sin of
the first.

Can these qualities at any time befall the elect or children of God?

No: and therefore they that feel in themselves the testimony of their
election, need not fear their falling into this sin, nor despair.

What is the deadliness of this sin above other sins?

First, God has pronounced it shall never be pardoned; not because God is not
able to pardon it, but because he has said he will not forgive it. Secondly,
this sin is commanded not to be prayed for, when persons are known to be guilty
of it, 1 John 5. 16. whereas we are bound to pray for all other persons.
Thirdly, this is the ordinary and first sin of the Devil, and therefore is he
never received into mercy, no more then those that are guilty of it.

Thus much of the sin against the holy Ghost: Show now the differences of
actual sins in regard of the degrees attained.

Some are only sins, Of the diverse differences of actual sins.
but others are wickednesses, and some beastlinesses, or devilishnesses; for
though original sin be equal in all Adams children, yet actual sins be not
equal, but one much greater then another.

Are not sins well divided into Venial, and Mortal?

None are Venial of their own nature, but only to the faithful they are so
made by the mercy of God in Christ.

Do all natural men alike commit all these kinds of sin?

No: for though all are alike disposed unto all manner of evil, Romans 7. 14.
having in their corrupt nature the seeds of every sin; yet does God for the
good of humane society restrain many from notorious crimes, by fear of shame
and punishment, desire of honor and reward, etc. Romans 13. 3, 4, 5.

How does God employ men in this state of sin?

First, he guides them partly by the light of nature, Romans 2. 14, 15. Joh. 1.
9. and partly by common graces of the Spirit, Esa. 44. 28. unto many actions
profitable for humane society, and for the outward service of God.

Secondly, he over-ruleth their evil and sinful actions, so that thereby they
bring to pass nothing but what his hand and counsel had before determined for
his own glory, Act. 3. 16. and 4. 27, 28.

What are the things that generally follow sin?

They are two: Guilt and punishment; both which do most duly wait upon sin to
enter with it, and cannot by any force or cunning of man or Angel be holden
from entering upon the person that sin has already entered upon; both likewise
do increase as the sin increases.

What is the guilt of sin?

It is the merit and desert of sin, Guilt of sin.
which is as it were an obligation to the punishment and wrath of God, whereby
we become subject to Gods debt or danger; that is, to condemnation, Romans 2. 15.
and 3. 9. and 10. 19. For every man by reason of his sin is continually subject
to the curse of God, Gal. 3. 10. and is in as great danger of everlasting
damnation, as the Traitor apprehended is in danger of hanging, drawing and
quartering.

Is there any evil in the guilt before the punishment be executed?

Very much; for it works unquietness in the mind, as when a man is bound in
an obligation upon a great forfeiture, that very obligation it self disquieteth
him; especially if he be not able to pay it (as we are not.) And yet more,
because where other debts have a day set for payment, we know not whether the
Lord will demand by punishment his debt this day before to morrow.

What learn you from this?

That since men do shun by all means to be in other men's debt or danger (as
also the Apostle exhorts, Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing to any man; and Solomon
also counsels in the matter of suretiship, Prove. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) we
should more warily take heed that we plunge not ourselves over head and ears in
the Lords debt; for if it be a terrible thing to be bound to any man in stature
Staple, or Merchant, or recognizance, much more to God who will be paid to the
uttermost farthing.

How else may the hurt and evil of the guilt of sin be set forth unto us?

It is compared to a stroke that lights upon the heart and soul of a man,
where the wound is more dangerous then when it is in the body, Genesis 44. 16. 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5, 6. and so it is also a sting or a bite worse then of a viper, as
that which brings death.

Have you yet wherewith to set forth the evil of the guilt?

It seems when the Lord said to Cain, if he sin against his brother, his sin
lies at the door, Genesis 4. 7. that he compares the guilt to a dog that is
always snarling and barking against us; which is confirmed by the Apostle, who
attributes a mouth to his desert of sin to accuse us, Romans 2. 15.

What is the effect of this guilt of Conscience?

It causes a man to fly when none pursues, and to be afraid of the fall of a
leaf, Prove. 28. 1. Levit. 26. 36.

When a man does not know whether he does sin or no, how can he be smitten, or
bitten, or barked at, or fly for fear? therefore against all this evil
ignorance seems to be a safe remedy?

No verily; for whether we know it or no, his guilt remains: as a debt is a
debt, though a man knows it not; and it is by so much the more dangerous, as
not knowing it, he will never be careful to discharge it, till the Lords
arrest be upon his back, when his knowledge will do him no good.

We may see many which heap sin upon sin, and know also that they sin,
and yet for all that cease not to make good cheer, and make their hearts merry.

The countenance does not always speak truth, so that sometimes under a
countenance in show merry there are stings and pricks in the Conscience, Romans
2. 15. which yet is oftentimes benumbed, and sometimes through hypocrisy it is
seared, as it were with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. but the Lord will find a time
to awaken and revive it, by laying all his sins before his face, Psalm. 50. 21.

When it is known what is the remedy of it?

It were wisdom not to suffer our guilt to run long on the score, but reckon
with our selves every night ere we lie down to sleep, and look back to the
doings of the day, that in those things which are well done we may be
thankful and comfort our own hearts, and in that which passes otherwise from
us, we may call for mercy, and have the sweeter sleep; for if Solomon wills
us in that case of debt by suretyship to humble our selves to our Creditor, and
not to take rest until we have freed our selves, Prove. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
much more ought we to haste the humbling our selves unto God, since the blood of
Christ is the only sacrifice for sin.

Is the guilt of sin in all men alike?

No: for as the sin increases, so does the guilt, both in regard of the
greatness and of the number of our sins, as appears out of Ezra 9. 6. where as
sin is said to be gone above their heads, so the guilt to reach up to the
heavens.

When the sin is gone and past, is not the guilt also gone and past?

Christ takes away both the guilt and the sin of the godly, (except original
sin which continues during life) but in the wicked when the act of sin is
gone, the guilt remains always; as the strong savor of garlic, when the
garlic is eaten, or as the scarre of a wound, or the mark of a burning, when
the wound or burning is past.

What is contrary to the guilt of sin?

The testimony of a good Conscience, which is a perpetual joy and comfort, yea
and a heaven to him that has walked carefully in Gods obedience, as the other
is a torment of hell.

So much of the guilt, what is the punishment?

It is the wages of sin sent for the guilt, Punishment of sin.
Romans 6. 23. namely, the wrath and curse of God, by whose just sentence man for
his sin is delivered into the power both of bodily and spiritual death,
begun here, and to be accomplished in the life to come, Genesis 2. 17. John 3. 18,
19. and 5. 24. and 28. 29. Lamen. 3. 36. Esa. 64. 5, 6. Romans 6. 12. Gal. 3. 10.

What do you understand by bodily and spiritual death?

By the one I understand the separation of the soul from the body, with all
personal miseries and evils that attend thereon, or make way thereto; by the
other the final separation of both from God, together with present spiritual
bondage, and all forerunners of damnation.

Are all the particular punishments expressed in the word which shall come for
sin?

They cannot wholly be laid down, they be so manifold and so diverse, and
therefore it is said they shall come written and unwritten, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. and
28. 61.

Against whom are these punishments addressed?

Against the whole estate of him that sins: For whereas executions upon
obligations unto men are so directed as they can charge either the person
alone, or his goods and lands alone, so as if the Creditor fall upon the one he
freeth the other, as if he fall upon the person he cannot proceed further then
unto his body: the execution which goes out from God for the obligation of sin
is extended to the whole estate of the sinner, both to the things belonging
unto him, and likewise to his own person.

What be the punishments that extend to the things belonging to him?

Calamities upon his family, wife, children, servants, friends, goods and good
name, the loss and curse of all these, and unhappy and miserable posterity, (
Matthew. 15. 22. Psalm 109. 12.) hindrances in goods, Deuter. 28. in name,
ignominy and reproach, Matthew. 7. 12. Job 18. 17. Prove. 10. 7. loss of friends,
acquaintance, etc.

What are the judgments executed upon his person?

They are executed either in this life, or in the life to come.

What punishments are inflicted in this life?

They be partly outward, partly inward.

What be the outward punishments?

1. His want of dominion over the creatures, and the enmity of the creatures
against him, calamities by fire, water, beasts, or other means, disorder in the
world, in summer, winter, heaven, earth, and all creatures.

2. Shame for the nakedness of body.

3. All hunger in extremity, thirst, nakedness, penury, poverty of estate, and
want of bodily necessaries.

4. Weariness in following his calling with sweat of his brows, with trouble
and irksomeness, Genesis 3. 19.

5. Outward shame and infamy.

6. Servitude.

7. Loss of limbs, or of the use of his senses, deformities in body.

8. Weakness of being, want of sleep, pains of body, aches, soars, sicknesses
and diseases of all sorts, Deuteronomy. 28. Mat. 9. 2. even to the itch, which few
make account of; thereby to feel the anger of God and punishment of sin: hither
is to be referred pain in Childbearing, Genesis 3. 16.

What be the inward punishments in this life?

1. Sorrow and anguish of soul for these plagues and the like.

2. Madness, frenzy, and foolishness.

3. Blindness and distemper of the soul, when God strikes it with an ignorant
spirit, with want of judgment to discern between good and bad, with
forgetfulness of holy things, or hardness of heart, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. which
although for the time they be least felt, yet are they more fearful and
dangerous, then those whereof the sense is presently sharp.

4. Terror and vexation of spirit, driving into hell, guiltiness and horror
of Conscience, the fury of a despairing soul, beginning even in this life to
feel hell torments, Deuteronomy. 28. 28. Heb. 10. 27. Esa. 33. 14.

5. Strangeness and alienation from God.

6. Spiritual bondage, whereby sinful man is become subject to the lust of
the flesh, the curse of the Law, the rule of Satan, and the custom of the
world; yea, even blessings are cursed, Malac. 2. 2. and prosperity causes
ruin, Psalm. 69. 22.

In what sort is man in bondage unto Satan?

Both soul and body is under the power of the Prince of darkness, whereby man
becomes the slave of the Devil, and has him to reign in his heart as his
God, till Christ deliver him, Col. 1. 13. Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 26. 2 Cor. 4.
4. Heb. 2. 14. Luke 11. 21, 22.

How may a man know whether Satan be his God or no?

He may know it by this, if he give obedience to him in his heart, and express
it in his conversation.

And how shall a man perceive this obedience?

If he take delight in the evil motions that Satan puts into his heart, and
does fulfill the lusts of the Devil, Joh. 8. 44. 1 John 3. 8.

What is that slavery whereby a man is in bondage to the flesh?

A necessity of sinning (but without constraint) until he be born again by the
grace of God, Mat. 12. 33, 34, 35.

If we sin necessarily, and cannot but sin, then it seems we are not to be
blamed?

Yes, the necessity of sin does not exempt us from sin, but only constraint.

What punishments are inflicted upon sinful man after this life?

A twofold death.

Which is the first death?

Bodily death in the several kinds; namely, the separation of the soul from
the body, Genesis 3. 19. Eccl. 12. 7. Romans 5. 12.

Wherein consists the second death?

1. In an everlasting separation of the whole man from the favorable presence
and comfortable fellowship of Gods most glorious Majesty, in whose countenance
is fullness of joy.

2. Perpetual imprisonment in the company of the Devil and Reprobates damned
in hell.

3. The most heavy wrath of God and unspeakable torments to be endured in hell
fire world without end, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.

How does this death seize upon man?

1. After this life is ended, the soul of the wicked immediately is sent unto
hell, there to be tormented unto the day of Judgment, Luke 16. 22, 23.

2. At the day of Judgment the body being joined to the soul again, both
shall be tormented in hell everlastingly, Matthew. 10. 28. so much also the more
as they have had more freedom from pain of body, and anguish of soul, and
loss of outward things in this life.

Is the punishment of all sins alike?

No; for as the guilt increases, so does the punishment; and as the smallest
sin cannot escape Gods hand, so as we heap sins, he will heap his judgments,
John 19. 11. Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

But God is merciful?

He is indeed full of mercy, but he is also full of righteousness, which must
fully be discharged, or else we cannot be partakers of his mercy.

Cannot we by our own power make satisfaction for our sins, and deliver our
selves from the wrath of God?

We cannot by any means, but rather from day to day increase our debt; for we
are all by nature the sons of wrath, and not able so much as to think a good
thought; therefore unable to appease the infinite wrath of God conceived
against our sins.

Could any other creature in heaven or earth (which is only a creature)
perform this for us?

No, none at all; for first God will not punish that in another creature, which
is due to be paid by man.

Secondly, none that is only a creature can abide the wrath of God against
sin, and deliver others from the same.

Thirdly, none can be our Savior but God.

Could man by his own wisdom devise any thing whereby he might be saved?

No; for the wisdom of man can devise nothing but that which may make a further
separation betwixt God and him.

What then shall become of mankind? is there no hope of salvation, shall all
perish? then surely is a man of all creatures most miserable; when a dog or a
toad die, all their misery is ended, but when a man dies, there is the
beginning of his woe.

It were so indeed if there were no means of deliverance, but God in his
infinite wisdom and mercy has found out that which the wisdom of man could
not, and provided a Savior for mankind.

How then is man delivered from this sinful miserable estate?

Sin is repressed, Of Gods Covenants with man.
and misery assuaged, by many means natural and civil, but they are not
removed, nor man restored, but only by a new Covenant; the old being not now
able to give life unto any, by reason of the infirmity of our flesh.

Why is the former Covenant of works called the old?

Because we not only cannot do it, but through the perverseness of our
nature (and not by the fault of the Law) it makes our old man of sin elder,
and we more hasting to destruction.

How are they convinced that seek righteousness by this Covenant?

Because thereby they make God unjust, and that he should thus give the
Kingdom of heaven to wicked men, as to those that cannot fulfill the Law.

Seeing the nature of a Covenant is to reconcile and join those together that
are at variance (as we see in the example of Abraham and Abimelech, Laban and
Jacob) why is this called a Covenant, that can make no reconciliation betwixt
God and us?

Although it be not able to reconcile us, yet does it make way for
reconciliation by another Covenant: neither is it meet strictly to bind Gods
Covenant with men to the same Laws, that the Covenants of one man with another
are bound unto: For amongst men the weaker seeks reconciliation at the hand
of the mightier, Luke 14. 31, 32. But God neither able to be hurt, or
benefitted by us, seeks unto us for peace, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Whether of these two Covenants must be first in use?

The Law; to show us, first, our duty what we should do.

Secondly, our sin, and the punishment due thereunto.

How is that other Covenant called whereby we are reconciled unto God, and
recovered out of the state of sin and death?

The new Covenant, Of the Covenant of grace.
(so called, because by it we are renewed) the Covenant of grace, of promise, of
life and salvation; the new Testament, the Gospel, etc. Ier. 31. 31, 32. Romans
3. 23, 24.

What is the Covenant of grace?

Gods second contract with mankind after the fall, for restoring of him into
his favor, and to the estate of happiness by the means of a Mediator, Gal.
3. 21, 22. and it contains the free promises of God made unto us in Jesus
Christ, without any respect of our deservings.

Who made this Covenant?

God alone: for properly man has no more power to make a spiritual Covenant
in his natural estate, then before his creation he had to promise obedience.

How are they convinced by the giving of this second Covenant, which seek
righteousness in the Law or old Covenant?

Because thereby they make God unwise that would enter into a new and second
Covenant, if the former had been sufficient. Heb. 8. 7.

When was this Covenant of Grace first plighted between God and man?

Immediately after his fall in Paradise, in that promise given concerning the
woman's seed, Genesis 3. 15. God in unspeakeable mercy propounding the remedy
before he pronounced sentence of Judgment.

Was it once only published?

It was sundry ways declared in all ages, partly by ordinary means, and partly
by Prophets extraordinarily sent and directed by God.

What is the foundation of this Covenant?

The mere mercy of God in Christ, whereby grace reigns unto life through the
obedience of one, which is Jesus Christ. Romans 5. 21. For there being three
persons of the Trinity, the Father sent his Son to accomplish the work of our
Redemption, and both of them send the Holy Ghost to work saving grace in our
hearts, and apply unto our souls the holiness purchased by the Son of God.

What is promised therein?

The favor of God and everlasting salvation, with the means thereof, as
Christ, and in him Conversion, Justification and Sanctification.

What is the condition on man's part?

The gift being most free on Gods part, nothing is required on man's part but
the receiving of grace offered; which is done in those that are of capacity by
Faith in Christ: John 1. 12. 14, 15. Acts 16. 31. whence follows new
obedience, whereby the faithful walk worthy of the grace received; and this
also is by Gods grace.

What then is the sum of the Covenant of grace?

That God will be our God and give us life everlasting in Christ, if we receive
him; being freely by his Father offered unto us. Jer. 31. 33. Acts. 16. 30, 31.
John 1. 12.

How does this Covenant differ from that of works?

Much every way; The differences between the Covenant of works, and and the
Covenant of grace.
for, first, in many points the Law may be conceived by reason; but the Gospel
in all points is far above the reach of man's reason. Secondly, the Law
commands to do good, and gives no strength, but the Gospel enableth us to
do good, the Holy Ghost writing the Law in our hearts; Jer. 31. 33. and
assuring us of the promise that reveals this gift. Thirdly, the Law promised
life only; the Gospel righteousness also. Fourthly, the Law required perfect
obedience, the Gospel the righteousness of Faith. Romans 3. 21. Fifthly, the
Law reveals sin, rebukes us for it, and leaves us in it: but the Gospel
does reveal unto us the remission of sins, and freeth us from the punishment
belonging thereunto. Sixthly, the Law is the ministry of wrath, condemnation,
and death: the Gospel is the ministry of grace, Justification and life.
Seventhly, the Law was grounded on man's own righteousness, requiring of every
man in his own person perfect obedience; Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and in default for
satisfaction everlasting punishment, Ezekiel. 18. 14. Gal. 3. 10. 12. but the
Gospel is grounded on the righteousness of Christ, admitting payment and
performance by another in behalf of so many as receive it, Gal. 3. 13, 14. And
thus this Covenant abolisheth not, but is the accomplishment and establishment
of the former, Romans 3. 31. 10. 4.

Wherein do they agree?

They agree in this, Wherein they agree.
that they be both of God, and declare one kind of righteousness, though they
differ in offering it unto us.

What is that one kind of righteousness?

It is the perfect love of God, and of our neighbor.

What thing does follow upon this?

That the severe Law pronounces all the faithful righteous, forasmuch as they
have in Christ all that the Law does ask.

But yet those remain transgressors of the Law?

They are transgressors in themselves, and yet righteous in Christ, and in
their inward man they love righteousness and hate sin.

What are we to consider in the Covenant of Grace?

The condition, Of Jesus the Mediator of this Covenant. The foundation of it.
1. Of the Mediator. 2. And then of the rest of mankind. In the former
consists the foundation of this Covenant. The performance whereof depends
on Christ Jesus, Acts 10. 43. and 3. 24. Romans 1. 3. 4. To the latter belongs
the application thereof for salvation, unto all that will receive it, 2 Cor. 5.
20. Mat. 6. 33.

When was the Mediator given?

1. If we regard Gods decree, from all eternity, Ephesians. 1. 4.

2. If the virtue and efficacy of his Mediation, as soon as need was, even
from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13. 8.

3. If his manifestation in the flesh, in fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4. 1 Timothy
2. 6. from whence we reckon now, 1643. years.

Who is this Mediator between God and man?

Jesus, Luke 2. 11. Mat. 1. 21. 1 Timothy 2. 5. the Son of the Virgin Mary, the
promised Messiah, or Christ, whom the Fathers expected, the Prophets foretold,
John 1. 45. and 8. 56. Whose life, death, Resurrection, and Ascension the
Evangelists describe, Joh. 1. 1. Act. 1. 1. Whose word preached unto this day
subdueth the world, 1 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. Finally, whom we look for
from heaven to be the Judge of quick and dead. Acts 10. 42.

What do the Scriptures teach us touching Christ our Mediator?

Two things, first his person, Joh. 1. 14. and 3. 33. Secondly, his office.
Esa. 61. 1, 2. Luke 4. 18.

What is his Person?

The second Person in the Godhead, Of the person of Christ.
made man. John 1. 14.

What have we to consider herein?

First the distinction of the two natures. The natures of Christ.
Secondly the hypostaticall or personal union of both into one Immanuell.
Divine.


What be those two natures thus wonderfully united in one person? Humane.


First, his divine nature or Godhead, which makes the person.

Secondly his humane nature or Manhood, which subsisteth and has his existence
in the person of the Godhead, and so we believe our Savior to be both the Son
of God, and the son of man. Gal. 4. 4. Luke 1. 31, 32. Romans 1. 3, 4. and 9. 5.
1 Timothy 3. 16. Mat. 26. 24.

What say you of him touching his Godhead?

I believe that he is the only begotten Son of the most high and eternal God
his Father: Of the divine nature of Christ.
His Word, Wisdom, Character, and Image; begotten of his substance before all
worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God: begotten, not made:
finally God, coessentiall, coeternall, and coequall with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost.

Why call you him the only begotten Son of God?

Because he is the alone Son of God by nature, even the only begotten of the
Father full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. and 3. 18. For though others be the
Sons of God by Creation, as Adam was and the Angels. Job. 1. 6. Others by
Adoption and Regeneration, as the Saints, and the man Christ Jesus in another
respect by hypostaticall union; yet none is his Son by natural generation, but
the same Christ Jesus; and that in regard of his Godhead, not of his Manhood;
according to the Apostle, who says, that he is without Father according to his
Manhood, and without Mother according to his Godhead. Heb. 7. 3.

But it seems that he is called the Son of God in respect of the generation
of his humane nature, wherein it is said that the Holy Ghost did that which
Fathers do in the natural generation; especially seeing he is therefore said
to be the Son of the Highest, Luke 1. 35.

He is the natural Son of God only in regard of the eternal generation,
otherwise there should be two Sons, one of the Father, and another of the
Holy Ghost; but he is therefore called the Son of the Highest, for that none
could be so conceived by the Holy Ghost, but he that is the natural Son of God.

How is he said to be conceived by the Holy Ghost?

Because the holy Ghost by his incomprehensible power wrought his conception
supernaturally, which Fathers do naturally in the begetting of their children;
not that any of the substance of the Holy Ghost, which is indivisible, came to
his generation in the womb of the Virgin.

Why is he called the Word? John 1. 1.

As for other reasons declared in the doctrine of the Trinity, so also because
he is he whom the Father promised to Adam, Abraham, and all the holy
Patriarchs, to make his promises of salvation sure unto them, as a man that
has ones word, thinks himself sure of the matter that is promised.

Why is the Word said to have been in the beginning? Joh. 1. 1.

Not because he began then to be, but that then he was, and therefore is from
all eternity.

What gather you of this that he is the Wisdom of God?

That our Savior is from everlasting as well as his Father: for it were an
horrible thing to think that there were a time when God wanted Wisdom.

Why is he called the Character or Image of his Father?

Because God by him has made himself manifest to the world in the Creation,
and especially in the Redemption of it.

What learn you from hence?

That whosoever seeks to come to the knowledge of God, must come to it by
Christ.

How is the Godhead of Christ proved?

Not only by abundant testimonies of Scripture, Esa. 7. 14. and 9. 6. and 25.
9. John. 1. 1. and 20. 28. Romans 9. 5. 1 John 5. 20. But also by his miracles,
especially in the raising of himself from death, Romans 1. 4. together with the
continuance and conquest of the Gospel, Acts 5. 39. and that not by carnal
power or policy, but only by the power of his Spirit, Zach. 4. 6. and patient
suffering of his Saints, Rev. 12. 11.

Why was it requisite that our Savior should be God?

Because, Why it was requisite that Christ should be God.
first, none can satisfy for sin, nor be a Savior of souls, but God alone;
Psalm. 49. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. For no creature though never so good, is worthy
to redeem another man's sin, which deserves everlasting punishment.

Secondly, the satisfaction for our sins must be infinitely meritorious,
otherwise it cannot satisfy the infinite wrath of God that was offended;
therefore that the work of our Redemption might be such, it was necessary our
Savior should be God, to the end his obedience and sufferings might be of an
infinite price and worth, Acts 20. 28. Heb. 9. 14.

Thirdly, No finite creature was able to abide and overcome the infinite wrath
of God, and the sufferings due unto us for our sins; Therefore must our Savior
be God, that he might abide the burden of Gods wrath, in his flesh, sustaining
and upholding the manhood by his divine power, and so might get again, and
restore to us the righteousness and life which we have lost.

Fourthly, our Savior must vanquish all the enemies of our salvation, and
overcome Satan, Hell, Death, and Damnation, which no creature could ever do.
Romans 1. 4. Heb. 2. 14.

Fifthly, he must also give efficacy to his satisfaction, raising us up from
the death of sin, and putting us in possession of eternal life.

Sixthly, he must give us his Spirit, and by it seal these graces to our
souls, and renew our corrupt nature, which only God can do.

What comfort have we then by this that Christ is God?

Hereby we are sure that he is able to save by reconciling us to the Father.

And what by this that he is the Son?

That uniting us unto himself, he may make us children unto his heavenly
Father. Heb. 2. 10.

Being God before all worlds, how became he man?

He took to himself a true body and a reasonable soul, Of the humane nature
of Christ.
being conceived in time by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin MARY. Heb.
1. 6. Joh. 1. 14. Matthew. 1. 18. 20. Luke 1. 31, 32. and 2. 7. and so became
very man, like unto us in all things; even in our infirmities (sin only
excepted.) Heb. 5. 7.

In which respect he has the name of the Son of man given unto him, Matthew.
26. 24. because he was of the nature of man according to the flesh, and the
Son of David, Mat. 9. 27. because he sprang of the lineage and stock of David.

How does it appear that he was true man?

Besides manifold predictions and clear testimonies of Scripture, Genesis 3. 15.
Heb. 2. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 5, etc. it is abundantly proved by plentiful
experiments, especially by his partaking of humane infirmities, his Conception,
Birth, Life, and Death; 1 Pet. 3. 18. Joh. 4. 6, 7. Luke 1. 31. and 2. 7. Heb.
2. 9. 14, 15.

How by his Conception?

Because according to the flesh he was made of a woman, and formed of her only
substance (she continuing still a pure Virgin) by the power of the most High.
Romans 1. 3. Gal. 4. 4. Luke 1. 34, 35.

Why is he said to be born? Mat. 2. 1.

To assure us of his true humanity, even by his infancy and infirmity. Luke
2. 7.

Why was he born of a Virgin? Luke 1. 27.

That he might be holy and without sin, the natural course of original
corruption being prevented, because he came not by natural propagation.

What learn you from hence?

That God is faithful as well as merciful, ever making good his word by his
work in due season, Luke 1. 20. 45. Act. 3. 18. 24.

Why is there mention of the Virgin by her name Mary? Luc. 1. 27.

For more certainty of his birth and lineage, Mat. 1. 16. Heb. 7. 14. 2 Timothy 2.
8. as also to acquaint us with his great humility in so great poverty, Luke 2.
24. compared with Lev. 12. 8.

What gather you from hence?

The mavelous grace of Christ, who being rich, for our sakes became poor,
that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9.

Did he not pass through the Virgin Mary (as some say) like as saffron passes
through a bag, and water through a Pipe or Conduit?

God forbid: he was made of the seed of David, and was a plant of the root of
Jesse, for he took humane nature of the Virgin, and so the Word was made flesh.

If he was only made flesh, it would seem that the Godhead served instead of a
soul unto him?

Flesh is here taken according to the use of Scripture for the whole man, both
body and soul, otherwise our Savior should not have been a perfect man, and
our souls must have perished everlastingly, except his soul had satisfied for
them.

Was not the Godhead turned into flesh, seeing it is said he was made flesh?

In no wise, no more then he was turned into sin, or into a curse, because it
is said, He was made sin, and made a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13.

If the Godhead be not changed into the Manhood, is it not at least mingled
with it?

Nothing less, for then he should be neither God nor man; for things mingled
together cannot retain the name of one of the simples, as honey and oil being
mingled together, cannot be called honey, or oil. 2. The properties of the
Godhead cannot agree to the properties of the Manhood, nor the properties of
the Manhood to the Godhead: For, as the Godhead cannot thirst, no more can the
Manhood be in all or many place at once; therefore the Godhead was neither
turned nor transfused into the Manhood, but both the divine nature keeps
entire all his essential properties to it self; so that the humanity is
neither omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, etc. and the humane keeps also
his properties and actions, though often that which is proper to the one nature
is spoken of the person denominated from the other (which is by reason of the
union of both natures into one person.)

The glory of the Godhead being more plentifully communicated with the Manhood
after his resurrection, did it not then swallow up the truth thereof, as a
whole sea one drop of oil?

No, for these two natures continued still distinct, in substance, properties
and actions, and still remained one and the same Christ.

Why did he not take the nature of Angels upon him? Heb. 2. 16.

Because he had no meaning to save Angels, for that they had committed the sin
against the holy Ghost, falling maliciously into rebellion against God without
temptation.

Are not the elect Angels any way benefited by the humane nature of Christ?

No, his humanity only reaches to sinful mankind, for if he had meant to have
benefited Angels by taking another nature, he would have taken their nature
upon him.

How is it then said, Ephesians. 1. 10. and Col. 1. 20. that he reconciled things in
heaven?

That is to be understood of the Saints then in heaven, and not any way of the
Angels, although by the second Person of the Trinity the Angels were elected,
and are by him confirmed, so that they shall stand for evermore.

Why was it requisite that our Mediator should be Man? Why it was requisire
that Christ should be Man.
was it not sufficient that he was God?

No, it was further requisite that he should be man also; because 1. Our
Savior must suffer and die for our sins, which the Godhead could not do.

2. Our Savior also must perform obedience to the law, which in his Godhead he
could not do.

3. He must be man of kin to our nature offending, that he might satisfy the
justice of God in the same nature wherein it was offended, Romans 8. 3. 1 Cor.
15. 21. Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16. For the righteousness of God did require, that the
same nature which had committed the sin, should also pay and make amends for
sin, and consequently that only nature should be punished which did offend in
Adam: Man therefore having sinned, it was requisite for the appeasing of Gods
wrath, that man himself should die for sin; the Man Christ Jesus offering up
himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God for us, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Heb. 2. 9, 10. and 14. 15. Romans 5. 12. 15. Ephesians. 5. 2.

4. It is for our comfort, that thereby we might have free access to the
throne of Grace, and might find help in our necessities, having such an high
Priest as was in all things tempted like unto our selves, and was acquainted
with our infirmities in his own person, Heb. 4. 15, 16, and 5. 2.

5. As we must be saved, so likewise must we be sanctified by one of our own
nature; that as in the first Adam there was a spring of humane nature
corrupted, derived unto us by natural generation: so in the second Adam there
might be a fountain of the same nature restored, which might be derived unto us
by spiritual regeneration.

What comfort then have you by this, that Christ is man?

Hereby I am assured that Christ is fit to suffer the punishment of my sin, and
being man himself is also meet to be more pitiful and merciful unto men.

What by this, that he is both God and man?

By this I am most certainly assured that he is able most fully to finish the
work of my salvation; seeing that as he is man, he is meet to suffer for sin;
as he is God, he is able to bear the punishment of sin and to overcome the
suffering; being by the one fit, and by the other able to discharge the office
of a Mediator: Man's nature can suffer death, but not overcome it; the divine
nature cannot suffer, but can overcome all things; our Mediator therefore
being partaker of both natures, is by the one made fit to suffer, by the other
able to overcome whatsoever was to be laid upon him for the making of our peace.

Are these his natures separated?

No verily, Of the union of the two natures of Christ.
for though they be still distinguished (as has been said) in substance,
properties and actions, yet were they inseparably joined together in the first
moment the holy Virgin conceived, and made not two, but one person of a
Mediator, 2 Cor. 13. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 27, 28. The holy Ghost
sanctifying the seed of the woman (which otherwise could not be joined to the
Godhead) and uniting two natures in one person, God and man in one Christ, Luc.
1. 35. 42. Romans 9. 5. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Joh. 1. 14. a mystery that no Angel, much
less man is able to comprehend.

Why so?

For that the manhood of our Savior Christ is personally united unto the
Godhead; whereas the Angels of much greater glory then men, are not able to
abide the presence of God, Esa. 6. 2.

Was this union of the body and soul with the Godhead, by taking of the manhood
to the Godhead, or by infusing the Godhead into the manhood?

By a divine and miraculous assuming of the humane nature (which before had no
subsistence in it self) to have his being and subsistence in the divine;
leaving of it one natural personship which otherwise in ordinary men makes a
perfect person; for otherwise there should be two Persons and two Sons, one of
the holy Virgin Mary, and another of God, which were most prejudicial to our
salvation.

What then is the personal union of the two natures in Christ?

The assuming of the humane nature (having no subsistency in it self) into the
person of the Son of God, Joh. 1. 14. Heb. 2. 16. and in that person uniting it
to the Godhead, so making one Christ God and man, Mat. 1. 23.

Can you shadow out this conjunction of two natures in one person by some
earthly resemblance?

We see one tree may be set into another, and it grows in the stock thereof,
and becomes one and the same tree though there be two natures or kind of
fruit still remaining: So in the Son of God made man though there be two
natures, yet both being united into one person there is but one Son of God and
one Christ.

What was the cause that the person of the Son of God did not join it self to
a perfect person of man?

1. Because that then there would not be a personal union of both to make but
one perfect Mediator.

2. Then there should be four persons in the Trinity.

3. The works of each of the natures could not be counted the works of the
whole person, whereas now by this union of both natures in one person, the
obedience of Christ performed in the manhood is become of infinite merit, as
being the obedience of God: and thereupon, Act. 20. 28. God is said to have
purchased his Church with his own blood.

What gather you hence?

That his name is wonderful, Esa. 9. 6. and his sacrifice most effectual,
offering himself without spot unto God for us, Heb. 9. 14. 26.

What further fruit have we by this conjunction?

That whereas God has no shape comprehensible either to the eye of the body or
of the soul, and the mind of man cannot rest but in a representation of
something, that his mind and understanding can in some sort reach unto;
considering God in the second person in the Trinity, which has taken our
nature, whereby God is after a sort revealed in the flesh, he has whereupon to
stay his mind.

How did the Jews then before his coming which could not do so?

They might propose to themselves the second Person that should take our
nature, and the same also that had appeared sundry times in the shape of a man,
Genesis 18. 1, 2. and 19. 1, 2. Albeit our privilege is greater then theirs, as
they that behold him as he is; where they did behold as he should be.

Hitherto of the Person of Christ, what is his Office?

To be a Mediator betwixt God and man, Of Christ's office of Mediatorship.
and so to discharge all that is requisite for the reconciling of us unto God,
and the working of our salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 9. 15. Joh. 14. 6. whence
also he is called an Intercessor and an Advocate, because he prays for us to
the Father, and pleads our cause before his Judgment seat.

What a one must he be that should undertake this mediation?

One which is in very deed a man, Heb. 2. 14, 15. and perfectly righteous
without exception, 1 John 3. 5. and more mighty then all creatures; that is, he
which also is the very true God, Act. 20. 28.

Can no bare man be Mediator betwixt God and Man?

No verily, for Eli says, 1 Samuel 2. 25. that a man offending a man it may be
accorded by the Judges, but if he offend against God there is no man can make
his peace.

Is there then any other Mediator to be acknowledged besides our Lord Jesus
Christ? That there is but one Mediator.


None but he; because, 1. There is but one God, and therefore but one Mediator
between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

2. He only is fit, as he only that partaketh both the natures of God and man,
which is necessary for him that should come between both.

3. That is declared by the Types of Moses, who alone was in the Mountain, of
Aaron or the high Priest, who only might enter into the ( Sanctum Sanctorum)
holy place of holy places.

4. The same appears by the similitudes wherewith he is set forth: Joh. 10.
9. I am the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, etc. and Joh.
14. 6. I am the way, no man comes to the Father but by me.

5. He alone has found sufficient salvation for all those that come unto him,
Heb. 7. 9. Joh. 10.

How comes it then to pass that this office is given to Moses and unto
others? Gal. 4. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 31.

They are only Ministers of the Word, not authors of the work of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Job 33. 23.

But is there no need of any other Mediator for us unto Christ?

No: for he is the next of kin, Joh. 19. 25, 26. most merciful, most
faithful, Heb. 2. 17. and able perfectly to save all those that come to God
through him?

How is our Savior graced by God and commended unto us in his office of
Mediation?

First, in that he came not to it but being called of God his Father in a
special sort, Esa. 42. 1, 2, etc. Heb. 5. 4, 5.

Secondly, in that being called he discharged it most faithfully, in which
respect he is compared to Moses, faithful in all the house of God, and
preferred before him as the Master before the servant, Heb. 3. 2, 3. 5, 6.

What use are we to make of his calling by God?

1. Hereby we learn that none should presume to take a charge in Gods Church
without a calling since he did it not, Heb. 5. 4, 5. Esa. 42. 1. 2.

2. There arises hereby great comfort unto us, in that he thrust not himself
in, but came in by the will of God and his appointment. For hereby we are more
assured of the good will of God to save us, seeing he has called his Son unto
it, and that he will accept of all that he shall do for us as that which
himself has ordained.

What learn you from his faithfulness?

That he has left nothing undone of things that belong to our reconciliation.

What names are given him in regard of his office of Mediation? Of his names,
Jesus Christ.


The name of Jesus and of Christ, Luke 2. 21. 26. Matthew. 16. 16.

Why is he called Jesus?

He is called Jesus, that is, a Savior, because he came to save his people
from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. and there is no other means whereby we may in part
or in whole be delivered from them.

What comfort have you by this?

1. My comfort is even the same which I have said, and the rather, because God
from heaven gave him his name, and the Church on earth has subscribed
thereunto.

2. That nothing can hurt me so long as my faith does not fail me. Mar. 9. 23.


Why is he called Christ?

He is called Christ, that is, Anointed, because he was anointed of God to be a
Prophet, Priest, and King, for all his people, and so for me, Esa. 61. 1, 2, 3,
4. Act. 4. 26, 27. Luke 4. 18. Ps. 45. 7. and 110. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 1. 9. and
7. 1, etc.

Who was he that was thus anointed?

Christ, God and man; though the outward anointing together with the name of
Christ appertained to all those that represented any part of the office of his
Mediatorship; namely, to Prophets, Priests and Kings which were figures of him.

Was Christ anointed with material oil as they were?

No: but he was anointed with all gifts and graces of the Spirit of God
needful for a Mediator, Luke 4. 18.
and that without measure, Joh. 3. 34.
Esaias 61. 1.

What learn you from hence?

That all fullness of grace dwelling in Christ, all true Christians shall
receive of his fullness, grace for grace, 1 John 1. 14. 16.

Whereunto was Christ anointed?

Unto the office of his Mediation, by discharging whereof he might be made an
all-sufficient Savior.

Wherein stands his Mediation, and what are the parts thereof?

Being to be a Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. the first part of
his mediation must be exercised in things concerning God, wherein consists
his Priestly office; Heb. 2. 17. and 5. 1. and 7. 24. The second in things
concerning man, wherein he exercises his Prophetical and Kingly function.

Why must he be a Priest?

To offer sacrifice for his Church and to reconcile us unto God, Psa. 110. 4.
Heb. 3. 1. and 4. 14. and 5. 5, 6. etc. and 7. 3. 17. and 8. 2, 3. and 9. 11.
14. otherwise we should never have been justified, nor sanctified, and so not
have been at peace with God.

Why must he be a Prophet, Doctor or Apostle?

To teach his Church, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. 18. Act. 3. 22. and 7. 37. Luke 4. 18.
otherwise we should never have known God nor the things that belong unto him,
Joh. 1. 18.

Why must he be a King or Prince?

To rule and govern his Church, Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3. Luke 1. 33. otherwise we
should never have been delivered from the captivity of sin and Satan, nor be
put in possession of eternal life.

What is his Priesthood?

It is the first part of his mediation, Of Christ's Priesthood.
whereby he works the means of salvation in the behalf of mankind, and so
appeaseth and reconcileth God to his elect, Heb. 5. 5, etc. and 7. 1. and 3.
13. 17, etc. and 13. 11, 12.

Where is the doctrine of Christ's Priesthood especially handled?

In the Epistle to the Hebrews, and namely in the 7 Chapter, from the 13. ver.
to the end, wherein is contained a declaration of his office of Priesthood,
being compared with the Priesthood of Aaron; the Apostle showing, 1. What
manner of one he ought to be that has this office. 2. How he executes it.

Wherein stands the manner of him that shall have this office?

Partly without him, and partly within himself; without him, as first that he
was chosen of the Tribe of Judah, and not of Levi; to show that he was not
successor of Aaron, but rather was to abolish all those Ceremonial services
and offices.

Secondly, that the Priests of Levi were appointed by the law of the fleshly
commandment, whereas Christ was appointed by the law of the power of life.

Thirdly, that he was installed in it by his Father, and appointed by an oath
for ever, to be a Priest after a new order of Melchisedec.

What benefit arises to us in that this was confirmed by an oath?

It gives unto us comfortable assurance, that all the parts of his Priesthood
be performed unto us, and that he paid the ransom for our sins.

Was not the Word of God sufficient for the performance of this promise,
without the binding of it with an oath?

Yes, doubtless, but the Lord in this promise having to deal with weak man,
and willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the stablenesse
of his Counsel, bound himself by an oath, Heb. 6. 17.

Whereby is the perpetuity thereof confirmed?

In that it did not proceed by succession, as from Aaron to Eleazar, from
Eleazar to Phinehas, and so by descent; but is everlasting, always abiding in
him; which is another difference of their Priestly office.

What profit comes to us by the perpetuity of his Priesthood?

That he continually makes intercession for us to God, and of himself alone is
able to save us coming to the Father through him.

So much of the quality of him that is to be Priest, which is without him; what
is the part that is within him?

1. That in himself he is holy. 2. To others harmless and innocent. 3.
Undefiled of others, or of any thing; and to speak in a word, he is separated
from sinners: in all which, he differs from that of Aaron; for they are
neither holy in themselves, nor innocent; neither undefiled, but polluting and
being polluted by others.

What is the fruit we gather of this his holiness, innocence and
undefilednesse?

That he being holy, innocent, undefiled, and so consequently separated from
sinners, the same is attributed to the faithful, and these his properties
imputed for theirs; and therefore he freeth them both from original and
actual sins: Contrary to their doctrine, who say, that he delivers us from
original sin only, and that we must make satisfaction for actual.

What is the difference touching the execution of this office?

1. That they offered first for themselves, he for the people only; for himself
he needed not.

2. He but once, they many times.

3. He offered himself, they something else then themselves.

What is the use of this?

To prove the absoluteness, perfection and excellency of this his Priesthood.

May not the Priesthood of the Papists be overthrown by all these arguments,
and proved to be a false Priesthood?

Yes verily; The Popish Priesthood overthrown.
for 1. They are not of the Title of Judah, and so cannot succeed our Savior.
2. They are not confirmed by an oath from God, and therefore not perpetual. 3.
They are not (as he was) holy in themselves, but unholy; neither innocent, nor
undefiled, but defiling others, and being defiled of them; and so not separated
from sinners, but altogether sinful and set in sin. 4. They offer first for
themselves, then for the people, likewise many times. 5. They offer sacrifices
which are not themselves. 6. They bring a great disgrace to the Priesthood of
Christ, by preferring themselves to him as the sacrificer to the sacrifice,
whom they say they offer. 7. Christ has a Priest hood that passes not away.

What comfort have we by the Priesthood of Christ?

Hereby we are assured that he is our Mediator, and that we also are made
Priests.

What need was there of such a Mediator?

Between parties so disagreeing, the one of finite nature offending, the other
of infinite nature offended; the one utterly disabled to do any the least good,
2 Cor. 3. 5. or satisfy for the least sin, Job 9. 3. the other requiring
perfect obedience, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and satisfaction, Mat. 18. 34. what agreement
could there be without a Mediator? 1 Samuel 2. 25.


In this case what was this Mediator to do?

He was to work the means of our salvation and reconciliation to God. 1. By
making satisfaction for the sin of man. 2. By making intercession, Mat. 20. 18.
Joh. 17. 19, 20. Heb. 7. 24, 25, 26, 27. therefore Jesus Christ our high Priest
became obedient even unto the death, offering up himself a sacrifice once for
all, to make a full satisfaction for all our sins, and makes continual
intercession to the Father in our name, whereby the wrath of God is appeased,
his Justice is satisfied, and we are reconciled.

Wherein then stands his satisfaction to Gods Justice, Of Christ's Satisfaction.
which is the first part of his Priesthood?

In yielding that perfect obedience whereupon depends the whole merit of our
salvation, Dan. 9. 24. Ephesians. 1. 2. 14, 15, 16.

What is the effect thereof toward us?

Redemption, Luc. 1. 69. Heb. 9. 24, 25. which is a deliverance of us from sin,
and the punishment thereof, and a restoring of us to a better life then ever
Adam had, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 15. 45. For our Savior Christ has first
redeemed us from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. namely, that woeful and
cursed estate which we had justly brought upon our selves by reason of our
sins. Secondly, translated us into his own kingdom and glory, Col. 1. 12, 13.
1 Cor. 2. 9. a far more glorious and excellent estate then ever our first
parents had in Paradise.

How has Christ wrought this Redemption?

Having taken our nature upon him, he has in the same as a surety in our stead
made full satisfaction to God his Father, by paying all our debts, and so has
set us free, Heb. 7. 22.

What is this debt which we owe to God, that he has paid for us?

This debt is twofold: one is that perfect obedience which we owe unto God in
regard of that excellent estate in which we were created, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. The
other is the punishment due unto us for our sins in transgressing and breaking
Gods Covenants, which is the curse of God and everlasting death. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Romans 6. 23. Mat. 5. 17. Gal. 3. 13. and 4. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21. All which is
contained in the law of God, which is the handwriting between God and us
concerning the old Covenant, Col. 2. 15.

How was our Savior to make satisfaction for this our debt?

1. By performing that perfect obedience which we did owe. 2. By suffering that
punishment due unto us for our sins, that so he might put out the handwriting
between God and us, and set us free.

What then be the parts of Christ's obedience and satisfaction? Of Christ's
sufferings.


His sufferings, and his righteousness, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 2. 24. for
it was requisite that he should first pay all our debt, and satisfy Gods
justice, Esa. 53. 5, 6. Job 33. 24. by a price of infinite value, 1 Timothy 2. 6.
2ly. Purchase and merit for us Gods favor, Ephesians 1. 6. and kingdom by a most
absolute and perfect obedience, Romans 5. 19. By his suffering he was to merit
unto us the forgiveness of our sins, and by his fulfilling the law he was to
merit unto us righteousness, both which are necessarily required for our
Justification.

But how can one save so many?

Because the Manhood being joined to the Godhead, it makes the passion and
righteousness of Christ of infinite merit, and so we are justified by a Man
that is God.

How has Christ made satisfaction for our sins by his suffering?

He endured most grievous torments, both of body and soul, offering up himself
unto God his Father as a Sacrifice propitiatory for all our sins, 2 Cor. 5.
21.

In this oblation who was the Priest or Sacrificer?

None but Christ, Heb. 5. 5, 6. and that as he was both God and man.

Who was the sacrifice?

Christ himself as he was man, Esa. 53. 10.
consisting of body and soul.

What was the Altar upon which he was offered?

Christ as he was God, was the Altar on which he sacrificed himself, Heb. 9.
14. and 13. 10. Rev. 8. 3.

How often was he offered?

Never but once, Heb. 9. 28.

Whereunto was he offered?

Unto the shame, pain, torment, and all miseries which are due unto us for our
sins; he suffering whatsoever we should have suffered, and by those grievous
sufferings making payment for our sins, Esa. chapter 53. Mat. 26. 28.

What profit comes by this sacrifice?

By his most painful sufferings he has satisfied for the sins of the whole
world of his elect, Esa. 53. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 1 John 2. 2. and appeased the
wrath of his Father: so that hereby we receive at onement and reconciliation
with God, our sins are taken away, and we are freed from all those punishments
of body and soul, which our sins have deserved, Heb. 9. 26.

How comes it then that Christ having borne the punishment of our sins, the
godly are yet in this world so often afflicted for them with grievous torments
both of body and soul, and that for the most part more then the ungodly?

The sufferings of the godly are not by desert any satisfaction for their sins
in any part, but being sanctified in the most holy sufferings of Christ they
are medicines against sin; neither is their affliction properly a punishment,
but a fatherly correction, and chastisement in the world that they should not
perish with the world, whereas the wicked the longer they are spared and the
less they are punished in this life, their danger is the greater, for God
reserveth their punishment for the life to come.

What gather you of this?

That we should not grudge at the prosperity of the wicked, when we are in
trouble: for as the sheep and kine are put in full pastures to be prepared to
the Shambles; so they, the more they receive in this life, the nearer and the
heavier is their destruction in the life which is to come, Jer. 12. 3.

What are the more general things which he suffered in this life?

Infirmities in his flesh, indignities from the world, and temptations from the
Devil ( Mat. 4. 2. Joh. 4. 6, 7. and 8. 48. 52. Luc. 4. 2.) Hitherto belong
those manifold calamities which he did undergo, poverty, hunger, thirst,
weariness, reproach, etc.

What benefits do the godly reap hereby?

All the calamities and crosses that befall them in this life are sanctified
and sweetened to them, so that now they are not punishments of sin, but
chastisements of a merciful Father.

What are the more special things which he suffered at or upon his death?

The weight of Gods wrath, the terrors of death, sorrows of his soul, and
torments of his body, Esa. 53. 4. 10. Mat. 26. 37, 38. Luc. 22. 44. Mat. 26. 67.

What learn you hence?

To admire and imitate the love of Christ, who being the Son of God, became a
man of sorrows even for the good of his utter enemies, Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 John 3. 16.
Romans 5. 7, 8.

What did our Savior Christ suffer in soul?

He drank the full cup of Gods wrath filled unto him for our sakes, Christ's
sufferings in his soul.
the whole wrath of God due to the sin of man being poured forth upon him (
Mat. 26. 27, 28. Luc. 22. 44. Rev. 19. 15. Joh. 12. 2. Esa 53. 5.) and
therefore in soul he did abide most unspeakable vexations, horrible griefs,
painful troubles, fear of mind, feeling as it were the very pangs of hell;
into which both before, and most of all when he hanged upon the Cross, he was
cast; which caused him before his bodily passion so grievously to complain.

What benefit and comfort receive you by this?

Hereby we have our souls everlastingly freed from Gods eternal wrath, and
herein are comforted, because in all our grievous temptations and assaults we
may stay and make sure our selves by this, that Christ has delivered us from
the sorrowful griefs and pains of hell.

Now for our Saviors bodily sufferings, Christ's sufferings in his body.
why is it said that he suffered under Pontius Pilate? 1 Timothy 6. 13.

For the truth of the story, and fulfilling of his own prophecy, foretelling
his suffering under a forain jurisdiction and authority, Mat. 20. 19. Joh. 18.
31, 32. as likewise to teach us that he appeared willingly and of his own
accord before a mortal Judge, of whom he was pronounced innocent, and yet by
the same he was condemned.

What comfort have you hereof?

That my Savior thus suffering, not any whit for his own sins, but wholly for
mine and for other men's sins, before an earthly Judge, I shall be discharged
before the heavenly Judgment seat.

What did he chiefly suffer under Pontius Pilate?

He was apprehended, accused, arraigned, mocked, scourged, condemned and
crucified ( Mat. 26. 27. and 28. chapters.)

What learn you here?

That he that knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 24.

Did Christ suffer these things willingly, as he suffered them innocently?

Yes; he laid down his life meekly as the sheep does his fleece before the
shearer, being obedient even unto the death, Luc. 23. 41. 1 Pet. 2. 22. Esa.
53. 7. Phil. 2. 8. Heb. 5. 8.

Unto what death was he so obedient?

Even unto the most reproachful, painful and dreadful death, the death of
the Cross, Mat. 27. 30. 38. Phil. 2. 8.

Why was Christ put unto this death of the Cross?

Because it was not a common death, but such a death as was accursed both of
God and man, that so he being made a curse for us, he might redeem us from a
curse due unto us, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Gal. 3. 13.

What comfort have you by this?

I am comforted in this, because I am delivered from the curse which I have
deserved by the breach of the law, and shall obtain the blessing due unto him
for keeping of the same.

Why was it requisite that our Saviors soul should be separated from his body?

Because we were all dead, that so he might be the death of death for us, 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55. for by sin death came into the
world, and therefore the Justice of God could not have been satisfied for our
sins, unless death had been joined with his sufferings.

How could the death and sufferings of Christ, which were but for a short time,
be a full satisfaction for us, which have deserved eternal death?

Although they were not everlasting, yet in regard of the worthiness of the
person who suffered them, they were equivalent to everlasting torments;
forasmuch as not a bare man, nor an Angel did suffer them, but the eternal Son
of God, (though not in his Godhead, but in our nature which he assumed) his
person, Majesty, Deity, Goodness, Justice, Righteousness, being every way
infinite and eternal, made that which he suffered of no less force and value
then eternal torments upon others, yea even upon all the world besides. For
even as the death of a Prince (being but a man? and a sinful man) is of more
reckoning then the death of an Army of other men, because he is the Prince;
much more shall the death and sufferings of the Son of God the Prince of all
Princes, not finite, but every way infinite, and without sin; much more I say
shall that be of more reckoning with his Father then the sufferings of all the
world, and the time of his sufferings of more value (for the worthiness of his
person) then if all the men in the world had suffered for ever and ever.

What use are we to make of Christ's death and passion? Uses of Christ's Passion.


1. The consideration hereof may bring us to a sound persuasion and feeling of
our sins, because they have deserved so grievous a punishment, as either the
death of the Son of God, or hell fire.

2. Hereby we reap unspeakable comfort, forasmuch as by his stripes we are
healed, by his blood washed, by his sacrifice God is satisfied, and by his
death we are saved and redeemed, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Rev. 1. 5. Heb. 10. 10. 12. Romans
5. 8, 9, 10.

3. We learn from hence to die to our sins, and to live henceforth unto him
that has dyed for us, Romans 6. 2. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 15.

What befell our Savior after his soul was separated from his body?

He was buried, Christ's burial.
Act. 13. 29, 30. and went to Hades, or as we commonly speak, descended into
hell, Act. 2. 31.

Why was it needful that Christ should be buried?

1. To assure us more fully that he was truly dead, Mat. 27. 59, 60. 94, 65,
66. Act. 2. 29.

2. That even in the grave, the very fortress of death, he might loose the
sorrows and bands of death, Act. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 55.

What is meant by his descending into Hell? His descending into hell.


Not that he went to the place of the damned, but that he went absolutely unto
the estate of the dead, Romans 10. 7. Ephesians. 4. 9.

What do you call the estate of the dead?

That departing this life he went in his soul into heaven, Luc. 23. 43. and was
in his body under the very power and dominion of death for a season, Acts 2.
24. Heb. 2. 14. Romans 6. 9.

What comfort have you by Christ's death, burial, and lying under the power of
death?

1. I am comforted, because my sins are fully discharged in his death, and so
buried, that they shall never come into remembrance.

2. My comfort is the more, because by the virtue of his death and burial sin
shall be killed in me and buried, so that henceforth it shall have no power to
reign over me.

3. I need not to fear death, seeing that sin which is the sting of death is
taken away by the death of Christ, and that now death is made unto me an
entrance into his life.

Hitherto of his sufferings, what is the other part of his satisfaction?

His perfect righteousness, Christ's righteousness in fulfilling the Law.
whereby he did that which we were not able to do, and absolutely fulfilled
the whole law of God for us, Ps. 40. 7, 8. Romans 3. 19. and 5. 19.

Why was it necessary that Christ should as well fulfill the Law, as suffer for
us?

Because as by his sufferings he took away our unrighteousness, and freed us
from the punishment due to us for our sins: so by performing for us absolute
obedience to the whole law of God, he has merited our righteousness (making
us just and holy in the sight of God) and purchased eternal happiness for us
in the life to come, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 4. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Romans 8. 3, 4.
For as we are made unrighteous by Adams sin, so are we made fully and wholly
righteous, being justified by a man that is God.

How manifold is the righteousness of our Savior?

Twofold: Original, and Actual.

What is his original righteousness? Christ's original righteousness.


The perfect integrity and pureness of his humane nature, which in himself
was without all guile, and the least stain of corruption. Heb. 7. 26.

Being very man, how could he be without sin?

The course of natural corruption was prevented, because he was not begotten
after the ordinary course by man, but was conceived in the womb of a Virgin
without the help of man, by the immediate power and operation of the holy
Ghost; forming him of the only substance of the woman, and perfectly
sanctifying that substance in the Conception. Luke 1. 34, 35. 42. So was he
borne holy, and without sin; whereunto all other men by nature are subject.

Why was it necessary that Christ should be conceived without sin?

First, because otherwise the Godhead and Manhood could not be joined
together, for God can have no communion with sin, much less be united unto
it, which is sinful, in a personal union.

Secondly, being our Priest he must be holy, harmless, undefiled, and
perfectly just; without exception. Heb. 7. 26. 1 John 3. 5. For if he had been
a sinner himself, he could not have satisfied for the sins of other men,
neither could it be, that an unholy thing could make us holy.

What fruit then and benefit have we by his original righteousness?

First, his pure Conception is imputed unto us, and the corrupruption of our
nature covered from Gods eyes, whiles his righteousness as a garment is put
upon us.

Secondly, our original sin is hereby daily diminished, and fretted away;
and the contrary holiness increased in us.

What is his actual holiness? Christ's actual holiness.


That absolute obedience whereby he fulfilled in act every branch of the Law of
God, walking in all the Commandments, and perfectly performing both in
thought, word, and deed, whatsoever the Law of God did command: and failing in
no duties, either in the worship and service of God, or duty toward men.
Matthew. 3. 15. Romans 5. 18. and 4. 8.

What benefit have we hereby?

1. All our actual sins are covered while we are clothed by faith with his
actual holiness.

2. We are enabled by him daily to dye unto sin, and more and more to live
unto righteousness of life.

But receive we no more by Christ, then those blessings which we lost in Adam?

Yes, we receive an high degree of felicity by the second Adam, more then we
lost by the first, Romans 5. 1. for being by faith incorporated into him, and by
communication of his Spirit unseparably knit unto him, we become the children
and heirs of God, and fellowheires with Christ Jesus, Gal. 4. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 12.
12, 13. Romans 8. 9, 10. who carries us as our head unto the highest degree of
happiness in the Kingdom of heaven, where we shall lead, not a natural life,
as Adam did in Paradise, with meat, drink, and sleep; but a spiritual life in
all unspeakeable manner and glory.

There remains yet the second part of Christ's Priesthood, Of the intercession
of Christ.
namely, his Intercession, what is that?

It is that work whereby he alone does continually appear before his Father in
heaven, to make request for his elect in his own worthiness, making the
faithful and all their prayers acceptable unto him by applying the merits of
his own perfect satisfaction unto them, and taking away all the pollution that
cleaves to their good works, by the merits of his passion; Romans 8. 34. Heb. 9.
24. and 12. 24. 1 John 2. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Exodus 28. 36, 37, 38.

In how many things does his intercession consist?

In five. 1. In making continual request in our name unto God the Father, by
the virtue of his own merits.

Secondly, in freeing us from the accusations of our adversaries.

Thirdly, in teaching us by his Spirit, to pray, and send up supplications for
our selves and others.

Fourthly, in presenting our prayers unto God, and making them acceptable in
his sight.

Fifthly, in covering our sins from the sight of God by applying unto us the
virtue of his mediation.

What fruit then have we by his intercession?

1. It does reconcile us to the Father, for those sins which we do daily
commit.

2. Being reconciled in him, we may pray to God with boldness, and call him
Father.

3. Through the intercession of our Savior Christ, our good works are of
account before God.

How are we made Priests unto God by our communion with Christ?

Being sanctified by him, and our persons received into favor, Ephesians. 1. 6. we
have freedom and boldness to draw near and offer our selves, souls, and
bodies, and all that we have, as a reasonable sacrifice to God the Father; and
so we are admitted as a spiritual Priesthood (1 Pet. 2. 5.) to offer up the
sacrifices of our obedience, prayers, and thanksgiving; which howsoever
imperfect in themselves, ( Esa. 64. 6.) and deserving rather punishment then
reward; ( Psalm. 143. 2. Tit. 3. 5.) are yet, as our persons, made acceptable
unto God, and have promise of reward, ( Matthew. 10. 41, 42.) by the only merit
and intercession of the same our high Priest.

So much of our Saviors Priestly-office which is exercised in things
concerning God: Of the Prophetical office of Christ.
how does he exercise his office in things concerning man?

By communicating unto man that grace and redemption which he has purchased
from his Father. Romans 5. 15. 17. 19 Joh. 5. 21. 17. 2. 6. Luke 4. 18, 19.

What parts of his office does he exercise therein?

His Prophetical and Kingly office. Acts 3. 22, 23. Psalm. 2. 6, 7, 8.

What is this Prophetical office?

The office of instructing his Church, by revealing unto it the way and means
of salvation, and declaring the whole will of his Father unto us, in which
respect he was, he is, and ever shall be our Prophet, Doctor, or Apostle; Esa.
61. 3, 4. Psalm. 2. 6. 7. Luke 4. 18. Mat. 17. 5. 23. 8, 9, 10. Heb. 3. 1, 2.

For what reasons must Christ be a Prophet?

First, to reveal and deliver unto his people so much of the will of God as is
needful for their salvation.

Secondly, to open and expound the same being delivered.

Thirdly, to make them understand and believe the same.

Fourthly, to purge his Church from errors.

Fifthly, to place Ministers in his Church to teach his people.

In what respect do you say that he is the only teacher of his Church?

1. In that he only knowing the Fathers as his Son, has the prerogative to
reveal him of himself, and others by him to us: for no man knows the Father
but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27.

2. In that he is only able to cause our hearts to believe and understand the
matter he does teach and reveal.

What were then the Prophets and Apostles?

They were his Disciples and servants, and spoke by his Spirit. 1 Pet. 1. 10,
11. and 3. 19. Nehemiah 9. 30. Ephesians. 2. 17.

What difference is there between the teaching of Christ, and of the Prophets
and Ministers sent from him?

1. Christ taught with another authority then did ever any other Minister
before, or after him. Mat. 5. 22. 28. 32. 34. 44. and 7. 28, 29. Mark. 1. 22.

2. By virtue of his Prophetical office, he did not only bring an outward
sound unto the ear, but wrought (as he did before his coming, and as he does
now by the ministry of his word) an alteration of the mind so far as to the
clearing of the understanding.

How then does our Savior perform his Prophetical office?

Two ways, outwardly, and inwardly.

How inwardly?

By the teaching and operation of his holy Spirit, Ioh. 6. 45. Act. 16. 14.

How outwardly?

By opening the whole will of his Father, and confirming the same with so many
signs and wonders.

How did he this?

Both in his own person when he was upon the earth, Heb. 2. 2, 3. as a Minister
of the circumcision, Romans 15. 18. but with the authority of the Lawgiver, Mat.
7. 29. and by his servants the Ministers, Mat. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof; before his incarnation by the
Prophets, Priests, and Scribes of the old Testament; Heb. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 11,
12. and 3. 18, 19. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 20, 21. Hos. 4. 6. Mat. 2. 5. and 6. 17. and
23. 37. And since to the worlds end by his Apostles and Ministers called and
fitted by him for that purpose; 2 Cor. 4. 6. and 5. 19, 20. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11, 12,
13.

How does it appear that he has opened the whole will of his Father unto us?

Both by his own testimony, Joh. 15. 15. I call you no more servants, because
the servant knows not what his Master does, but I call you friends, because
all which I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you; and by the
Apostles comparison, Heb. 3. preferring him before Moses, though faithful in
Gods house.

In what respect is our Savior preferred before Moses?

1. As the builder to the house, or one stone of the house.

2. Moses was only a servant in the house, our Savior Master over the house.

3. Moses was a witness only, and writer of things to be revealed, but our
Savior was the end and finisher of those things.

What learn you from hence?

1. That it is a foul error in them that think of our Savior Christ (so
faithful) has not delivered all things pertaining to the necessary
instruction and government of the Church, but left them to the traditions and
inventions of men.

2. That since our Savior was so faithful in his office, that he has
concealed nothing that was committed to him to be declared; the Ministers of
the word should not suppress in silence for fear or flattery the things that
are necessarily to be delivered, and that are in their times to be revealed.

3. That we should rest abundantly contented with that Christ has taught,
rejecting whatsoever else the boldness of men would put upon on us.

Did he first begin to be the Prophet, Doctor, or Apostle of his Church, when
he came into the world?

No, but when he opened first his Fathers will unto us by the ministry of his
servants the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. and 3. 19. Heb. 3. 7.

Is his Prophetical office the same now in the time of the Gospel, that it
was before and under the Law?

It is in substance one and the same, but it differs in the manner and
measure of revelation: for the same doctrine was revealed by the ministry of
the Prophets before the Law, by word alone, after by word written, and in the
time of the Gospel more plainly and fully by the Apostles and Evangelists.

What have we to gather hence, that Christ taught and teaches by the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles?

1. In what estimation we ought to have the books of the old Testament, since
the same Spirit spoke then that speaks now, and the same Christ.

2. We must carry our selves in the hearing of the word of God not to harden
our hearts, Heb. 3. 8. 15. For as much as the careless and fruitless hearing
thereof, hardens men to further Judgment: for it is a two-edged sword to
strike to life, or to strike to death; it is either the favor of life to life,
or the savor of death to death; 2 Cor. 2. 16.

How does the Apostle press this? Heb. 3. verse 8, 9, 10. etc.

First, he aggravateth the refusal of this office of our Savior against the
Israelites by the time, forty years; by the place, the wilderness, and by the
multitude of his benefits; then he makes an application thereof, verse 12, 13.
consisting of two parts.

1. A removing from evil.

2. A moving to good.

What comfort have we by the Prophetical office of our Savior?

1. Hereby we are sure that he will lead us into all truth revealed in his
word, needful for Gods glory, and our salvation.

2. We are in some sort partakers of the office of his prophecy by the
knowledge of his will: for he makes all his to prophecy in their measure,
enabling them to teach themselves and their brethren, by comforting,
counselling, and exhorting one another privately to good things, and
withdrawing one another from evil as occasion serves. Acts 2. 17, 18.

So much of the Prophetical office of our Savior Christ, Of the Kingly office
of Christ.
what is his Kingly office?

It is the exercise of that power given him by God over all, ( Ps. 110. 1.
Ezekiel. 34. 24.) and the possession of all ( Mat. 28. 18. Psalm. 2. 8, etc.) for
the spiritual government and salvation of his elect, ( Esa. 9. 7. Luke 1. 32,
33.) and for the destruction of his and their enemies; Psalm. 45. 5.

For what reasons must Christ be a King?

1. That he might gather together all his Subjects into one body of the Church
out of the world.

2. That he might bountifully bestow upon them, and convey unto them all the
aforesaid means of salvation, guiding them unto everlasting life by his Word
and Spirit.

3. That he might appoint Laws, and Statutes, which should direct his people,
and bind their consciences to the obedience of the same.

4. That he might rule and govern them, and keep them in obedience to his
Laws.

5. That he might appoint officers, and a settled government in his Church,
whereby it might be ordered.

6. That he might defend them from the violence and outrage of all their
enemies, both corporal and spiritual.

7. That he might bestow many notable privileges, and rewards upon them.

8. That he might execute his judgments upon the enemies of his subjects.

How does he show himself to be a King?

By all that power which he did manifest as well in vanquishing death and hell,
as in gathering the people unto himself which he had formerly ransomed, and in
ruling them being gathered, as also in defending of them, and applying of those
blessings unto them, which he has purchased for them.

How did he manifest that power?

First, in that being dead and buried he rose from the grave, quickened his dead
body, ascended into heaven, and now sits at the right hand of his Father
with full power and glory in heaven, Act. 2. 9.
Act. 10. 30. Ephesians. 4. 8.

Secondly, in governing of his Church in this world, (1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, 27,
28.) continually inspiring and directing his servants by the divine power of
his holy Spirit, according to his holy word, Esa. 9. 7. 30. 21.

Thirdly, Mat. 25. 24. 31. 33, 34.
by his last judgment in the world to come.

Why is Christ Jesus also called our Lord?

Because he is the Lord of glory and life that has bought us, (1 Cor. 1. 2.)
our head that must govern us; and our Sovereign that subdues all our enemies
unto us, Act 3. 15. 1 Cor. 2. 8. 1 Pet. 1, 19. Ephesians. 1. 22. Joshua 5. 14, 15.
Dan. 12. 1. Heb. 1. 10. 14, 15.

How has he bought us?

Not with gold or silver, but with his precious blood he has purchased us to
be a peculiar people to himself, 1 Pet. 1. 18.

What comfort have you by this?

Seeing he has paid such a price for us, he will not suffer us to perish.

What learn you from hence, that Christ is our head to govern us?

To obey his Commandments, and bear his rebukes and chastisements, Luke 6. 46.
John 14. 15. Col. 3. 23, 24.

In what place of Scripture is the doctrine of Christ's Kingdom specially laid
down?

In Esa. 9. verse. 6, 7. For unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is
given, and the government is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name
Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of
Peace. The increase of his government and peace shall have none end, and he
shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it and to
establish it with Judgment, and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever;
the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this, Psalm. 110. 1, 2. etc.

What are we here taught concerning Christ's Kingdom?

The benefit that we receive by it, and the cause of it.

How is the former set forth?

By declaration, First, of his person, that he is a child born, namely God made
man, whereof has been spoken.

Secondly, of his properties, with the effects of the same.

How are his properties here expressed?

They are first generally set forth by comparison of the unlikelihood of his
Kingdom, with the Regiments of worldly Potentates.

What difference or inequality is there?

That whereas other Kings execute matters by their Lievtenants and Deputies
armed with their authority; In our Saviors Kingdom although there be used
instruments, yet do they accomplish his will and purpose, not only by his
authority, but also by his strength and virtue.

What further doctrine do you note hence?

That the man of sin (or Pope of Rome) is not the ministerial head of the
Church, which is Christ's Kingdom, since he is himself present, yea, and that
most notably by his Spirit, and more to the advantage of his Church, then when
he was bodily present, Ioh. 16. 7.

How are his properties set forth more particularly?

First, that he should be called Wonderful, not that it should be his proper
name, which was only Jesus: But that he should be as renownedly known to be
Wonderful, as men are known by their names.

How is he Wonderful?

Partly in his person, as is before said, and partly in his works; namely,
First, in the creation of the world; Secondly, in the preservation, and
especially in the redemption of it.

What is the next that follows?

It is showed more particularly wherein he is Wonderful, and first, that he is
Wonderful in counsel, and The Counselor.

What is here to be observed?

First, in the government of a Kingdom, counsel and wisdom are the chief; as
that which is preferred to strength, Esa. 9. 15. 2 Samuel 20. 16. Eccl. 7. 19. 9.
16. Prove. 21. 22. 24. 5. and therefore that we may assure our selves, that in
the Kingdom of Christ all things are done wisely, nothing rashly, in which
respect he is said to have a long stoal and a white head, Rev. 1. 13, 14.

Secondly, a great comfort for the children of God, that our Savior Christ is
our Counselor who gives all sound advice.

Thirdly, that when we are in any perplexity and know not which way to turn,
yet we may come to our Savior Christ who is given unto us for a Counselor.

By what means may we come to him for advice?

By our humble supplications and prayers to him.

How may we receive advice from him?

By the doctrine of God drawn out of his holy word, which is therefore termed
the man of our counsel, Psalm. 119. 24.

What is the next property?

That he is wonderful in might, and the strong God, having all sound strength.

What have we here to learn?

1. That as he is wise and does all things pertaining to the good of his
Church, so he is of power to execute all that he advises wisely.

2. That as there is in us no advice of our selves, so there is in us no sound
strength to keep us from any evil, but that as he gives good advice to his,
so does he with his own power perform and effect it. Phil. 2 13. And therefore
although we be as the vine, of all other trees the weakest, or as the sheep, of
all other beasts the simplest, yet we have for our vine a gardner, and for our
shepherd Christ Jesus the mighty strong God.

3. That we should take heed how we depart from his obedience, for he will do
what he lists; for if to obey be a good means to help us into the favor of
our earthly Princes, it will much more help us in the favor of the King of
Kings.

What other properties follow?

Two other, which are, as it were, the branches and effects of the former. 1.
That he is the Father of eternities. 2. The Prince of Peace.

Since he is called the Father of eternities, is there not a confusion of
persons?

In no wise, for it is a borrowed speech, signifying that he is the author of
eternity.

What do you here gather?

That where other Kingdoms alter, his is everlasting, Dan. 2. 44.

What doctrine is thereof to be gathered?

First, that the Kingdom of our Savior Christ being perpetual, he dasheth and
crushes in pieces al other mighty Monarchies and Regiments that shall rise up
against him; and therefore, that his Church and subjects generally, and every
particular member need not to fear any power whatsoever.

Secondly, that whatsoever we have by nature or industry, is momentany, like
unto the grass that fades away; and whatsoever durable thing we have, we have
it from Christ.

What is the second property arising out of the former?

That he is the Prince of peace; that is, the procurer, cause and ground of
peace, that causes his subjects to continue in peace and quietness.

Of what nature is this peace?

It is spiritual, Romans 5. 1. Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17,

1. When we have peace with God.

2. When we have peace in our Consciences.

3. When there is peace between men and men, which arises out of both the
former.

Where should this peace be established?

Upon the throne of David: that is, in the Church of God.

What is the cause of all this?

The love and zeal of God, breaking thorough all lets, either inward, from our
selves and our own sins; or outward, from the enmity of the Devil and the
world, Esa. 9. 7.

What fruit receive we by the Kingly office of our Savior Christ?

By it all the treasures brought in by his Priestly and Prophetical office,
are dealt to us continually. For, from it all the means of applying and making
effectual unto us Christ and all his benefits do come; yea, without it all
the actions of his other offices are to us void, fruitless, and of none effect.

What comfort have we by this?

Hereby we are assured, that by his Kingly power we shall finally overcome the
flesh, the world, the devil, death and hell.

To whom will this blessed King communicate the means of salvation?

He offers them to many, and they are sufficient to save all mankind; but all
shall not be saved thereby, because by faith they will not receive them, Matthew.
20. 16. Joh. 1. 11. 1 John 2. 2.

Are not the Faithful in some sort also made partakers of this honor of his
Kingdom?

Yes verily: For they are made Kings to rule and subdue their stirring and
rebellious affections, and to tread Satan under their feet, Romans 6. 12. 16. 20.
Rev. 1. 6. 5. 10.

You have spoken of the two natures, Of Christ's Humiliation.
and three offices of our Savior: Show now in what state did Christ God and
man perform this threefold office.

In a twofold estate: 1. Of abasement and humiliation, Phi. 2. 7, 8.

2. Of advancement and exaltation, Ph. 2. 9. Col. 2. 15. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21.

In the former he abased himself by his sufferings for sin; whereof we have
heard largely in the declaration of his Priesthood:

In the latter he obtained a most glorious victory, and triumphed over sin,
thereby fulfilling his Priesthood, and making way to his Kingdom.

What was his estate of Humiliation?

It was the base condition of a servant, whereto he humbled himself from his
Conception to his Cross, and so until the time of his resurrection, Phil. 2.
7, 8.

Wherein did this base estate of the Son of God consist?

In his Conception, Gestation, and Birth, and in his Life diversely; as in his
Poverty, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness and other Humiliations even unto death, of
which heretofore has been spoken.

What learn you from this, that Christ first suffered many things before he
could enter into his Glory? Luke 24. 26. 46.

That the way to reign with Christ, is first to suffer with him, and such as
bear the Cross constantly, shall wear the Crown eternally, Romans 8. 17, 18. 2 Timothy 2. 12. 4. 8. James 1. 12.

What is his estate of Exaltation? Of Christ's Exaltation.


His glorious condition, Phil. 2. 9. Heb. 2. 9. beginning at the instant of his
Resurrection, Acts 2. 24, 31, 36. and comprehending his Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 8.
Acts 2. 34. Heb. 9. 24, 25. Sitting at the right hand of God his Father, Psalm.
110. 1, 2, 5, 6. Mark 16. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 22. and the second coming in glory to
judge the world, Mat. 25. 31.

What is the first degree of this estate?

His glorious Resurrection; Of the Resurrection of Christ.
for after he had in his manhood suffered for us, he did in the third day rise
again by his own power from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. Luc. 24. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 4.

What it needful that Christ being dead should rise again?

Yes; it was for his own glory and our good, Acts 2. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.

How for his glory?

That being formerly abased as a servant, and crucified as a sinner, he might
thus be declared to be the Son of God, and exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior, Phil. 2. 7. Luc. 23. 33. Esaias 53. 12. Romans 1. 4. Act. 5. 30, 31.

How for our good?

That having paid the price of our redemption by his death, we might have good
assurance of our full Justification by his life, 1 Pet. 1. 19. Acts 20. 28.
Romans 4. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 17.

What special comfort arises from this, that the Lord of life is risen from
death?

1. It assures me that his righteousness shall be imputed unto me for my
perfect Justification, that he that had the power of death is destroyed, Heb.
2. 14. his works dissolved, 1 John 3. 8. and that all our misery is swallowed
up in Christ's victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54.

2. It comfort me, because it does from day to day raise me up to
righteousness and newness of life in this present world.

3. It ministers unto me a comfortable hope, that I shall rise again in the
last day from bodily death.

What fruits then are we to show from the virtue of his resurrection? Phil. 3.
10.


We are to stand up from the dead, to awake to righteousness, to live unto
God, and dying in him or for him, to look for life again from him, Ephesians. 5. 14.
1 Cor. 15. 34. Romans 6. 4. 11. Phil. 3. 20. 1 These. 4. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Col.
3. 4.

Why is Christ said to raise himself?

To let us know that as he had power to lay down his life, so he had also to
take it up again, Joh. 10. 18.

What gather you hence?

That being Lord both of quick and dead, he can and will both quicken our souls
here to the life of grace, and raise our bodies hereafter to the life of glory,
Romans 14. 9. John 5. 21. Phil. 3. 21.

Why did he rise the third day?

Because the bands of death could no longer hold him, this being the time that
he had appointed, and the day that best served for his glorious resurrection,
Act. 2. 24. Mat. 20. 17. and 12. 40.

Why did he not rise before the third day?

Lest rising so presently upon his death, his enemies might take occasion of
cavil, that he was not dead, Mat. 27. 63, 64. and 28. 13, 14.

And why would he not put it off until the fourth day?

Lest the faith of his Disciples should have been weakened, and their hearts too
much cast down and discouraged, Mat. 28. 1. Luc. 24. 21.

What gather you hence?

That as the Lord sets down the term of our durance, so does he choose the
fittest time of our deliverance, Rev. 2. 10. Mat. 12. 40. Dan. 11. 35. Hosea 6.
2.

What is the second degree of his Exaltation? Of Christ's Ascension.


His Ascension, Mark 16. 19. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9. For we believe that Christ in his
humane nature (the Apostles looking on) ascended into heaven.

What assurance have you of Christ's Ascension?

The evidence of the Word, the testimony of heavenly Angels and holy men, Luc.
24. 51. Acts 1. 9.

Wherefore did Christ ascend into heaven?

Because he had finished his Fathers work on earth, Joh. 17. 3, 4, 5. and that
being exalted in our nature, Heb. 10. 20.
he might consecrate a way, prepare a place, Joh. 14. 2, 3. and appear in the
presence of God to make intercession for us, Heb. 4. 29. and 9. 24.

What benefits did he bestow upon his Church at his Ascension?

He triumphed over his enemies, gave gifts to his friends, and taking with him
a pledge of our flesh, he sent and left with us the earnest of his Spirit, Ephesians.
4. 8. Heb. 10. 12. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 5. Acts 2. 33.

What comfort does hence arise to Gods children?

1. That our head being gone before, we his members shall follow after; Christ
having prepared a place for us in heaven, which now we feel by faith, and
hereafter shall fully enjoy, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 15. 49. Joh. 14. 3. and 13.
23, 24.

2. That having such a friend in heaven we need not fear any foes on earth, nor
fiends in hell, Heb. 7. 25. Phil. 1. 28. Romans 16. 20. Acts 20. 24. Rev. 2. 10.

What fruits are we to show in our lives from the virtue of his Ascension, in
our hearts?

1. To have our conversation in heaven whilst we be on earth, placing our
hearts where our head is, Col. 3. 1, 2. Phil. 1. 23 and 3. 20.

2. To look for the presence of Christ by faith, not by sight, in spiritual,
not in carnal things, Mat. 28. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 7. Joh. 6. 63.

What is the third degree of his Exaltation? Of the third degree of Christ's
Exaltation.


That he sits at the right hand of God, the Father Almighty, Mar. 11. 19.
Ephesians. 1 20, 21, 22.

What is meant by this? His sitting at the right hand of God.


That Christ in our nature is worthily advanced by the Father to the height of
all Majesty, Dominion, and Glory, having authority to rule all things in heaven
and in earth, Ephesians. 4. 10. Heb. 1. 3, 4, 5. and 8. 13. Mat. 28. 18.

How may this appear?

Because he is hereby exalted to be the Kings of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. the Judge
of sinners, Act. 17. 31. the Prince of our salvation, Act. 5. 31. and the high
Priest of our profession, Heb. 8. 1.

What comfort arises hence to all true Believers?

That 1. as our King he will govern us, Heb. 1. 8, 9. Luc. 1. 33. and that from
him we shall receive all things needful for us under his gracious government.

2. As our Judge he will avenge us, Rev. 6. 10. and 16. 5, 6. and as our Prince
defend us, Dan. 12. 1. subduing all our enemies by his power, treading them
under our feet.

3. As our Priest he will plead our cause and pray for us, Heb. 7. 25. Romans 8.
34.

Why is he said in the Creed to sit at the right hand of God, the Father
Almighty?

That we may know he enjoys both the favor and power of God in full measure;
the Father having committed all Judgment to the Son, Heb 1. 13. Mat. 28. 18.
Joh. 5. 22.

What duties are here required?

To honor the Son as we do the Father, to cast our Crowns at his feet, stoop
to his Scepter, live by his Laws; so to follow him here, that we may sit with
him in his throne hereafter, Joh. 5. 23. Rev. 4. 10. Psalm. 2. 10. Jam. 4. 12.
Rev. 3. 21.

Does he not now thus reign for the raising of his friends, and the ruin of
his enemies?

Yes; he does graciously by his Word and Works, Heb. 1. 8. Romans 10. 15, 16. But
he shall more gloriously when he comes again to judge the quick and the dead,
2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Romans 14. 9.

Having thus declared that which concerns the Mediator of the New Testament;
The state of the godly in Christ.
what are you now to consider in the condition of the rest of mankind which
hold by him?

Two things: 1. The participation of the grace of Christ, and the benefits of
the Gospel. 2. The means which God has ordained for the offering and effecting
of the same.

To whom does God reveal and apply the Covenant of Grace?

Not to the world, but to his Church called out of the world, John 14. 22. and
17. 9. Mat. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 8. etc. that is, not to the reprobate, appointed
from everlasting to be vessels of wrath, but to the Elect and chosen; For
howsoever the light is come into the world, yet most men rather love darkness
then light, Joh. 1. 5. And though the proclamation of Grace be general, 1 Timothy
2. 4. yet most men refuse or neglect Gods goodness by reason of the
naughtiness of their hearts; neither are any saved but such as God draws to
embrace his mercy, and casts as it were into a new mould, Joh. 6. 44.

It would seem by this, that the most part of the world be in no better estate
then the Devil himself.

Most men questionless abide without recovery in the state of sin and death, 1 John 5. 19. because the Lord does not grant unto them the benefit of
Redemption, Mat. 13. 15.
and grace of Faith and Repentance unto life, Acts 14. 16. and 17. 30.
but suffers them to run on in sin deservedly unto condemnation.

How does God suffer them to run into Condemnation?

In a diverse manner; some Reprobates dying infants, other of riper years, of
which last sort some are not called, others called.

How does God deal with Reprobates dying infants?

Being once conceived, they are in the state of death, Romans 5. 14. by reason of
the sin of Adam imputed, and of original corruption cleaving to their nature,
wherein also dying they perish; as for instance, the children of Heathen
Parents; for touching the children of Christians we are taught to account them
holy, 2 Cor. 7. 14.

How does God deal with those of riper years uncalled?

Being naturally possessed with ignorance and vanity, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. he gives
them up to their own lusts to commit sin without remorse, with greediness in a
reprobate mind, Romans 1. 26. 28. until the measure of sin being fulfilled, they
are cut off, Genesis 15. 16. Ps. 69. 27.

How does God deal with such Reprobates as are called?

He vouchsafes them outward means of salvation, Heb. 4. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2.
etc. giving farther to some of them some illumination, Heb. 6. 4, 5. A
temporary faith, Acts 8. 13. some outward holiness and taste of heaven, whom he
yet suffers to fall away, and the means of grace to become a favor of death
unto them, 2 Cor. 2. 16. yea some of these do fall even to the sin
unpardonable, Heb. 6. 6.

So much of the company of the Reprobates, which are not made partakers of the
benefit of Redemption; Of the Church of Christ.
what is the Church of Christ, which enjoys this great benefit?

A company of men and women called out of the world to believe and live in
Christ, and endued accordingly with spiritual graces for the service of God,
Gal. 3. 26, 27, 28. John 1. 12. 17. 14, 16. Ephesians. 2. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Tit. 2.
14. or rather the whole number of Gods elect, which are admitted into
fellowship with Christ Jesus: Ephesians. 1. 1. 5. 23.
for all these being taken together, Col. 1. 21. 27.
are called the Church; that is, Gods assembly, or congregation, which in the
Scripture is likened to the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 4. 9. Ephesians. 5. 32. 25. which
in the Creed we profess to believe under the title of The holy catholic
Church, Heb. 12. 22, 23. Ephesians. 5. 27.

Do you believe in the Catholic Church? Catholic Church.


No, I believe that God has a certain number of his chosen children which he
does call and gather to himself, that Christ has such a flock selected out of
all nations ages, and conditions of men, Ephesians. 5. 23. Ioh. 10. 16. Gal. 3. 28.
Rev. 7. 9. 17. and that my selfam one of that company, and a sheep of that fold.

Why say you that you believe that there is a Catholic Church?

Because that the Church of God cannot be always seen with the eyes of man.

Why is this Church called holy?

Because she has washed her robes in the blood of the Lamb, and being
sanctified and cleansed with the washing of water by the word, is presented and
accepted as holy before God, Rev. 7. 14. Ephesians. 5. 26 27. Col. 1. 21, 22. for
though the Church on earth be in it self sinful, yet in Christ the head it is
holy, and in the life to come shall be brought to perfection of holiness.

What learn you hence?

That if ever we will have the Church for our Mother, Gal. 4. 26.
or God for our Father; 1 Pet. 1. 13. 14, 15, 16, 17.
we must labor to be holy, as he is holy.

What is meant here by catholic Church? Lev. 20. 7.


The whole universal company of the elect that ever were, are, or ever shall
be gathered together in one body; knit together in one Faith, under one Head
Christ Jesus; Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. 12. 13. Col. 2. 19. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. For God in
all places, and of all sorts of men had from the beginning, has now, and ever
will have an holy Church; that is, Gods whole or universal Assembly, because
it comprehends the whole multitude of all those that have, do, or ever shall
believe unto the worlds end.

Do all those make one body?

The whole number of believers and Saints by calling make one body, the Head
whereof is Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 10. 22, 23. Col. 1. 18. 24. Having under him
no other Vicar; and so the Pope is not the Head of the Church, for neither
property nor office of the head can agree unto him.

What is the property of the Head? The property and office of the head of the
Church.


To be highest, and therefore there can be but one, even Christ.

What is the office of the Head?

First, to prescribe laws to his Church, which should bind men's consciences to
the obedience of the same, and of such lawgivers there is but one, James 4. 12.

Secondly, to convey the powers of life and motion into all the members, by
bestowing spiritual life and grace upon them. For the natural members take
spirit and sense from the head, so the Church has all her spiritual life and
feeling from Christ, who is only able (and no creature beside) to quicken and
give life.

Thirdly, to be the Savior of the body. Ephesians. 5. 23. But Christ Jesus only is
the Savior of the Church, whom by this title of the head of the Church, Paul
lifts up above all Angels, Archangels, Principalities, and Powers. And
therefore if the Pope were the successor of Peter and Paul, yet should he not
therefore be the head of the Church, which agrees to no simple creature, in
heaven or under heaven.

So much of the Head; where be the members of this holy Catholic Church?

Part are already in heaven triumphant, part as yet militant here upon earth.

What call you the Church triumphant? The triumphant Church.


The blessed company of those that have entered into their Masters joy, Heb. 12.
23. Rev. 7. 14. 16. waiting for the fulfilling of the number of their
fellow members, and their own consummation in perfect bliss, Rev. 6. 7.

Why is it called Triumphant?

Because the Saints deceased have made an end of their pilgrimage, and labors
here on earth, and triumph over their enemies, the world, death and damnation.

Are the Angels of the Church triumphant?

No; First, because they were never of the Church militant. Secondly, because
they were not redeemed, nor received benefit by the death of Christ; and
therefore it is said, that He took not on him the nature of Angels, but the
seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16.

What is the special duty which the Church triumphant in heaven does perform?

Praise and thanksgiving to God.

What is the Church militant? The Church militant.


It is the society of those that being scattered through all the corners of the
world, are by one faith in Christ conjoined to him, and fight under his banner
against their Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the devil; continuing in the
service and warfare of their Lord, and expecting in due time also to be crowned
with victory and triumph in glory with him, Rev. 1. 9. 12. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

Who are the true members of the Church militant on earth?

Those alone who as living members of the mystical body, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Col.
1. 18. are by the Spirit and Faith secretly and inseparably conjoined unto
Christ their head. Col. 3. 3. Psalm. 83. 3. In which respect the true militant
Church is both visible, Mat. 16. 18. and invisible, Romans 2. 29. 1 Pet. 3. 4.
the elect being not to be discerned from the reprobates till the last day.

But are none to be accounted members of this Church, but such as are so
inseparably united unto Christ? doubtless many live in the Church who are not
thus united unto him, and shall never come to salvation by him?

Truly and properly none are of the Church, saving only they which truly
believe and yield obedience, 1 John 2. 19. all which are also saved; howbeit
God uses outward means with the inward for the gathering of his Saints, and
calls them as well to outward profession among themselves, as to inward
fellowship with his Son, Act. 2. 42. Cant. 1. 7. whereby the Church becomes
visible. Hence it comes, that so many as partaking the outward means, do
join with these in league of visible profession, Act. 8. 13. are therefore in
humane judgment accounted members of the true Church, and Saints by calling; 1
Cor. 1. 2. until the Lord, who only knows who are his, do make known the
contrary, as we are taught in the Parable of the tares, the draw-net, etc. Mat.
13. 24. 47. Thus many live in the Church as it is visible and outward, which
are partakers only outwardly of grace; and such are not fully of the Church
that have entered in but one step, Cant. 4. 7. Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 John 2. 19. That a
man may be fully of the Church, it is not sufficient, that he profess Christ
with his mouth; but it is further required, that he believe in him in heart;
These do the one, but not the other; or if they believe in heart, they believe
not fully: For they may generally believe indeed that Christ is the Savior of
mankind, but they know not whether themselves have part in him; yea, by their
works they disclaim any interest in him.

What say you then of such?

They are partakers of all good of the outward or imperfect Church, and
therefore their children also are baptized and admitted as members of Christ's
Church. These are like evil citizens (as indeed the Church is Gods city) who
are in truth but citizens in profession and name only; For they as yet want the
chiefest point, which only makes a man to deserve the true name of a citizen;
which is to use the place aright. And therefore have no part in those rewards
that are proposed for good, and perfect citizens; though they enjoy what
outwardly belongs to the city.

Are we then to acknowledge one Church, or many?

One alone, as there is but one Lord, one Spirit, one Baptism, one Faith; Ephesians.
4. 4. Cant. 6. 8. Gal. 3. 28. Howsoever (as has been said) there is a begun,
and a perfect Church; For the Church of God is one in respect of that inward
nature of it, having one Head, one Spirit, and one final state: But outwardly
there be as many Churches, as there be congregations of Believers knit together
by special bond of order, for the religious expressing of that inward nature.
Romans 1. 11. Yet, though there be many visible Churches, there is but one
Catholic and Universal Church, of which not one shall be lost, and out of
which not one shall be saved. Acts 2. 47. Ephesians. 5. 23. John 17. 12. 20.

What gather you hence?

That the Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, because it is particular,
not universal; and because out of it many have been saved, and in it some
shall be damned, Rev. 18. 4. 19. 20. 2 Th. 2. 11, 12.

What are the special prerogatives whereof all Gods children, Prerogatives of
the members of the Catholic Church.
the true members of the Catholic Church, are made partakers? Joh. 1. 12.

In the Creed there are some principal notes rehearsed.

1. The Communion of Saints, Heb. 12. 22, 23. Ephesians. 2. 19.

2. The forgiveness of sins, Romans 8. 33.

3. The Resurrection of the body, 1 Cor. 15. 52. Act. 24. 15.

4. Life everlasting, Rom 6. 23.

There are four also recorded by the Apostle Paul in that golden sentence, 1
Cor. 1. 30. Ye are of him in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, Wisdom
and Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Why is Wisdom here set down by the Apostle as necessary to our salvation?

Because it was necessary that having absolutely lost all godly and saving
wisdom wherein we were first created, that it should be again repaired ere we
could be partakers of life eternal.

Why? have we no true wisdom naturally able to bring us unto it?

No verily: for although we have wisdom naturally ingraffed in us to provide
for this present life, and sufficient to bring us to condemnation in the life
to come; yet we have not one grain of saving wisdom able to save us, or to make
us step one foot forward unto eternal life.

Where is this wisdom to be found?

In the word of God.

How come we to it?

By Christ; for God dwells in light which no man has approached unto, 1 Timothy
6. 16. only the Son which was in the bosom of his Father he has revealed
him, Joh. 1. 18.

What does the Apostle mean by Righteousness?

As by the chief part thereof, our whole justification, which consists of the
remission of our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

How do you prove this righteousness here, to be meant of the righteousness
that is in Christ?

Because he speaks afterward of sanctification, which is the righteousness
within us.

What is Sanctification? What Sanctification is.


It is freedom from the tyranny of sin into the liberty of righteousness,
begun here, and increased daily, until it be fully perfected in the life to
come, Romans 6. 14. Psalm. 19. 14.

What is Redemption? What Redemption is.


It is the happy estate that the children of God shall have in the last day.

What is the ground of all these spiritual blessings?

The whole work of our salvation must be ascribed to the grace of God alone.

What is meant by the grace of God?

First and principally, that free favor with God does bear toward us:

2. Those gifts and helps that are in us, arising from that fountain.

Is man idle in this work of grace?

Man also works with Gods grace, but first he receives from God not only the
power to work, but also the will and the deed it self, Phil. 2. 13.

Is this work of God only an offering of good things unto us?

God does not only offer grace unto us, but causes us effectually to receive
it, and therefore is said not only to draw us, Cant. 1. 3. Joh. 6. 44. but also
to create a new heart in us, whereby we follow him, Ps. 51. 10.

What profit has every one of Gods elect in Christ the Mediator, Of our Union
and Communion with Christ.
by the application of the covenant of grace?

Union and communion both with Christ himself and with his whole Church,
whence arises the communion of Saints, whereby nothing else is understood, but
that heavenly fellowship which all the faithful have with Christ their head,
and with the members of his body, all true Christians, the whole Church thus
communicating with Christ and every member one with another, Heb. 3. 14. 12.
22. 23. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. 4. 12. 1 John 1. 3.

What are the bands of this fellowship, and who is the author of it?

The Spirit knits the body to the head by faith, and the members one unto
another by love. 1 Cor. 12. 11. 27. Col. 3. 14. 1 Cor. 6. 17.

What comfort have we by this?

1. That we are justified by that faith whereby Adam and Abraham were
justified, which is tied to no time or place, and excludes no person.

2. That we are made partakers of Christ and all his merits by faith, and of
all the blessings of the Church by love.

What are the special comforts of this communion with Christ?

That we are sure to have all graces and all good things from him, and that
both our persons are beloved, and our services accepted in him and for him;
John 1. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 13. 1 Pet. 2. 5.

And what especial comforts do arise out of our communion with Christians?
Communion of Saints.


That we have a portion in their prayers, Romans 12. 13.
Act. 1. 2. 15. a share in their comforts, 1 Ioh. 1. 17.
Romans 12. 15. a room in their hearts, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. mutually bearing
infirmities, Gal. 6. 1, 2. furthering duties, Heb. 10. 24. and relieving
necessities.

What duty does this communion of Saints require of us? Ephesians. 4. 3.

To renounce all fellowship with sin and sinners, 2 Cor. 6. 17 to edify one
another in faith and love, Jude 5. 20. to delight in the society of the Saints,
Ps. 16. 3. and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4. 3.


Why are all Believers called Saints?

Because they are partakers of Christ's holiness, daily growing and increasing
in the same; and to let us know that none shall ever be Saints in heaven, but
such as are first Saints on earth. Heb. 12. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.

Forasmuch as the point of our union and communion with Christ, is of great
importance, and the very foundation of allour comfort, it is more largely to be
stood upon; First therefore show how the elect are united to Christ his person.

They are incorporated and made members of the mystical body, whereof Christ
is head, Ephesians. 5. 30. which the Scripture figureth, as by other resemblances, so
especially under the similitude of marriage, Ephesians. 5. 2. and the whole book of
the Canticles.

How may we conceive of this our marriage with Christ?

We are to conceive therein as in outward marriage, first, the consent of
parents and parties, secondly, the manner of conjunction.

What consent of parents is there in this marriage?

Only Gods donation, who being the alone parent of both parties, as in the
marriage of the first Adam, Genesis 2. 22. gives first Christ to us as a Savior,
John 3. 16. 17. 6. Secondly, us to Christ as a people to be savedby him, Heb.
2. 13.

What consent of parties is there?

First, Christ consents to take us for his own spouse, which he witnesses
especially by taking our flesh upon him, Heb. 2. 14. that he might be our
Emmanuel, God with us; Mat. 1. 23.

Secondly, we being drawn of God, John 6. 44. and prepared by the freeing of
the Bridegroom, 2 Cor. 11. 2. do consent to take Christ as our Lord and
Husband, Cant. 7. 10. as we profess by taking his name, Esa. 44. 5. and yoke,
Math. 11. 29. upon us.

What is the manner of this our Conjunction?

Mystical, that is to say, real in respect of the things conjoined, our very
nature, body, and soul, being coupled to the body and soul of Christ, so that
we are members of his body, of his flesh, of his bones; Ephesians. 5. 30. thereby
also to the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Yet not corporal, but spiritual, in
regard of the means whereby this conjunction is wrought.

What be the means of the spiritual conjunction?

On Christ's part, his only Spirit, 1 John 4. 15. Romans 8. 9. given by him to
every member of his body in the very moment of Regeneration, Gal. 4. 6. 1 John
3. 24. 4. 13. as the soul of spiritual life, and fountain of supernatural
grace, Gal. 5. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 45. in which respect he that is joined to the
Lord, is said to be one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17.

What is the Spirit of Christ?

The Holy Ghost truly residing, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and powerfully working in all
those that are Christ's, Romans 5. 5. derived unto them from him, Romans 8. 2. and
knitting them inseparably unto him, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 2. 18. 4. 4.

Is the holy Ghost given to none but such as are thus joined to Christ?

The Holy Ghost is considered three ways: first, as the Author of all
excellence, even in common gifts of nature and reason; as strength and courage,
Judge. 14. 6. Arts and Sciences, Exodus 31. 31. Policy and government, 1 Samuel 11.
6. etc. in which sense he is given to many which never heard of Christ.
Secondly, as the Author of spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 1. 4. so called, because
being sanctified they are means of edification; As the power of working
Miracles, Healing, Languages, etc. yea a taste of the heavenly gift, and of the
good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4, 5. in
which sense he is given to sundry reprobates that are called, as has been
showed. Thirdly, as the Author of the perpetual, effectual, and virtuall
influence of saving grace from Christ the head to every true member of his
body, John 6. 51. 57. 63. in which sense the world cannot receive or know him,
John 14. 17. but he is bestowed on the elect only, 1 Pet. 1. 2. and those truly
regenerated and converted to the Lord.

But on our part what means is there of this conjunction?

Only faith, which yet is not of our selves, but the gift of God; Ephesians. 2. 8.
and of all other, the first and more general effect and instrument of the
Spirit of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 13. Gal. 5. 5. disposing and enabling us so to
embrace and cleave unto him, Ephesians. 3. 16. 17. as first to receive from God by
him, whatsoever benefits and graces; Romans 5. 2. Secondly, to return to God in
him all holy and thankful obedience, Cor. 2. 7. Gal. 5. 6.

Is faith absolutely required in every one that is united unto Christ?

It is absolutely required of all those that are of discretion and capacity,
but in those that are not capable of knowledge (without which there can be no
faith; as some naturally fools and infants, which are within the covenant) we
are not to proceed farther then Gods election, and the secret operation of his
Spirit, Act. 2. 39. 1 Cor. 7. 14. 12. 13.

So much of our union with Christ's person: what is our communion with him?

It is our participation with him in the benefits flowing from his several
offices, whereby he is made to us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1. 30. So we also by him after a sort
become Prophets, Acts 2. 17, 18. Priests and Kings, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 5. 10. as
in the unfolding of the several functions of our Savior Christ, has been
more fully declared: for being made one with him, we are thereby possessed of
all things that are his, Rev. 2. 28. Col. 2. 10. as the wife of the wealth of
her husband, the branch of the sap of the root, John 15. 5. and the members of
sense and motion from the head, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. in which regard the whole
Church is also called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Gal. 3. 16. and the several
members Christians, Acts 11. 26.

What are the main benefits which Christians receive by their communion with
Christ? The benefit of our Communion with Christ.


Justification and glorification, Romans 8. 30. By the one whereof we have our
persons accepted, Justification.
and new relations between God and us established; Glorification.
By the other, our nature reformed, and new obedience infused: which latter is
but begun in this life, and is called Sanctification, and perfected in the life
to come; which most usually has the term of Glorification, of which in its
proper place.

What is Justification? Of Justification, and first what Justificaon is.


Justification is the sentence of God, whereby he of his grace for the
righteousness of his Son, by him imputed unto us, and through faith
apprehended by us, does free us from sin and death, and account us righteous
unto life. Romans 8. 30. 33, 34. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 9. For hereby we both
have a deliverance from the guilt and punishment of all our sins, and being
accounted righteous in the sight of God by the righteousness of our Savior
Christ imputed unto us, are restored to a better righteousness then ever we
had in Adam.

I perceive your Answer needs further explaining; first, why call you
Justification a sentence?

That thereby we may be informed, that the word to justify does not in this
place signify to make just by infusing a perfect righteousness into our natures;
(that comes under the head of sanctification begun here in this life, which
being finished, is Glorification in heaven* but here the word signifies to
pronounce just, to quit and discharge from guilt and punishment; and so it is a
judicial sentence opposed to condemnation. Romans 8. 34, 35. Who shall lay any
thing (says Paul) to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, who
shall condemn? Now as to condemn is not the putting any evil into the nature
of the party condemned, but the pronouncing of his person guilty, and the
binding him over unto punishment: so justifying is the Judges pronouncing the
Law to be satisfied, and the man discharged and quitted from guilt and
judgment. Thus God imputing the righteousness of Christ to a sinner, does not
account his sins unto him, but interests him in a state of as full and perfect
freedom and acceptance, as if he had never sinned, or had himself fully
satisfied. For though there is a power purging the corruption of sin, which
follows upon justification, yet it is carefully to be distinguished from it,
as we shall further show hereafter.

This for the name of Justification, but now for the thing it self; what is
the matter first of our justification?

The matter of justification, or that righteousness whereby a sinner stands
justified in Gods sight, is not any righteousness inherent in his own person
and performed by him, but a perfect righteousness inherent in Christ and
performed for him.

What righteousness of Christ is it whereby a sinner is justified?

Not the essential righteousness of his divine nature, but,

First, the absolute integrity of our humane nature, which in him our head was
without guile. Heb. 7. 6.

Secondly, the perfect obedience which in that humane nature of ours he
performed unto the whole law of God, both by doing whatsoever was required of
us, Mat. 3. 15. and by suffering whatsoever was deserved by our sins, 1 Pet. 2.
24. for he was made sin and a curse for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

What is the form or being cause of our justification, and that which makes
this righteousness so really ours, that it does justify us?

The gracious imputation of God the Father, accounting his Sons righteousness
unto the sinner, and by that accounting, making it his to all effects, as if he
himself had performed it.

But how can Christ's righteousness be accounted ours? is it not as absurd to
say that we are justified by Christ's righteousness, as that a man should be
wise with the wisdom of another, or live and be in health by the life and
health of another?

No doubtless, because this righteousness is in Christ, not as in a person
severed from us, but as in the head of the Church, the second Adam; from whom
therefore it is communicated unto all who being united as members unto him do
lay claim thereunto, and apply it unto themselves, Romans 5. 19. Romans 10. 4. For
if the sin of Adam were of force to condemn us all, because we were in his
loins, he being the head of our common nature; why then should it seem strange
that the righteousness of our Savior Christ both God and man, should be
availeable to justify those that are interessed in him, especially considering
that we have a more strict conjunction in the Spirit with him, then ever we had
in nature with Adam? And though it be not fit to measure heavenly things by the
yard of reason, yet it is not unreasonable that a man owing a thousand pound,
and not being able to pay it, his creditor may be satisfied by one of his
friends.

If Christ have paid our debt, how are we then freely justified by grace?

It is of grace that Christ is given unto us, and also that his righteousness
apprehended by faith is accounted ours; It is true that the justification of a
sinner, considering the case as it is between the Father and Christ, no man
dare call it free; no, the price of our Redemption was the deepest purchase
that the world ever heard of; but what ever it cost Christ, it cost us nothing:
and so to us it is freely of grace from Christ, yea and to us it is freely
grace from God the Father too; not because he acquits us without a full
satisfaction to his Justice, or accepts that for perfect righteousness which
is not perfect righteousness; but because he receives full satisfaction from the
hands of a surety, and that surety being his own Son; when as he might have
challenged the uttermost farthing at our hands, which were the principals; and
then there had been no possibility for us to have been delivered.

What gather you from this doctrine of Justification by Christ's righteousness?
Uses arising from the doctrine of Justification.


1. To condemn the proud opinion of Papists, who seek Justification by their
own works and righteousness inherent in themselves; whereas though being
accepted, we must in thankfulness do all we can for God, yet when all is
done, we must acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants: the only matter of
our joy and triumph both in life and death, must be the imputation of Christ's
righteousness; not our persons, nor the best actions of the holiest men dare
appear in Gods presence, but in his name and merit (who consecrates all) the
Lords Jesus.

2. We may here take notice, that there is no comfort to a Christian soul like
that which flows from this Well of salvation, this sweet doctrine of
Justification. 1. Here we have assurance of the sufficiency of our Redemption:
that soul must be thoroughly acquitted that is stated in such a righteousness,
that debt must be fully discharged that has such a price laid down for it; our
sins though never so great, cannot weigh down his righteousness and merit,
Romans 8. 33. and God having accepted his Sons righteousness for us, will not hold
us any longer trespassers, but he disables his own Justice from making any
further demand. 2. Hence there is nothing comes upon the Saints from Gods
revenging Justice, but all our corrections are medicinal from Gods Fatherly
love; to purge out that sin out of our nature, which he has already pardoned
to our persons. 3. Lastly, this doctrine may be great comfort to weak
Christians in the midst of their troublesome imperfections, and sense of their
weak measures of Sanctification; To consider that the righteousness that is
inherent in themselves, is not the matter of their Justification, or that which
must appear before Gods presence to be pleaded: the righteousness of Christ is
complete and perfect; that is our main joy and crown of rejoicing to be found
in Christ, not having our own righteousness, but that which is in him, and
made ours by Gods gracious account.

But how is this great benefit of Justification applied unto us, and
apprehended by us?

This is done on our part by faith alone, Of Faith.
and that not considered as a virtue inherent in us, working by love; but only
as an instrument or hand of the soul stretched forth to lay hold on the Lord
our righteousness. Romans 5. 1. and 10 10. Jer. 23. 6. So that faith justifies
only Relatively, in respect of the object which it fasteneth on; to wit, the
righteousness of Christ by which we are justified: Faith being only the
instrument to convey so great a benefit unto the soul, as the hand of the
beggar receives the Alms.

Forasmuch as it stands us much in hand to know what this faith is, The
various acceptions of Faith.
whereby we have profit by Christ's Redemption, declare how many ways the word
Faith is taken in the Scriptures.

Sometimes it is taken for true and faithful dealing between man and man both
in word and deed, called Fidelity or Faithfulness, (as Mat. 23. 23. Acts 2.
10. 1 Timothy 5. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 12.) but of that faith we are not here to speak.
Sometimes it is taken for the faith (or fidelity) of God toward man, but that
also is besides our purpose.

Here we are to entreat of man's faith toward God, and that word Faith is also
taken two ways.

1. For the object to be apprehended, or things to be believed, even the whole
doctrine of faith, or points of Religion to be believed. (as Acts 6. 7. and 13.
8. Romans 1. 5. and 3. 31. and 12. 3. 6. and 16. 26. Gal. 1. 22. and 3. 2. and 5.
23. 1 Timothy 1. 2. and 4. 1. Jude verse. 3.

2. For the action apprehending or believing the same, viz. that work of God in
man whereby he gives assent or credence to God in his word; yea, and applies
that which any way concerns him in particular, how otherwise general soever
it be, (as Romans 10. 7. etc.) And this faith is set out by two names, Heb. 11.
1. The substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; by
the first meaning, that whereas God in his word has made promise of things
which are not presently enjoyed, but only hoped for; they being not in esse,
but in posse: yet faith does after a sort give them a present subsisting or
being, as if they were in esse. By the second meaning, that whereas many of the
promises are of things so far out of the reach of man, that they are both
invisible to the eye, and unreasonable or impossible to the sense or
understanding of man; yet faith is the very evidence of them, and that which
does so demonstrate them unto us, that by it (as through a prospective glass)
we as clearly discern them, as if they were even at hand.

How many kinds of faith be there? The diverse kinds of Faith.


Although there be but one true saving faith, ( Ephesians. 4. 5.) yet of faith there
are two sorts.

1. Such as is common to all, which all men have, or may have.

2. That which no man has or can have but the elect, it being proper to them.
2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Romans 11. 32. Tit. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

How many sorts be there of the common faith?

Two; ordinary and extraordinary: and of the ordinary two also, that which we
call historical, and that we call temporary faith.

What is an historical faith? Historical Faith.


It is a knowledge and persuasion of the truth of Gods word concerning the
letter and story of it: as that there is one only God, and in the God a
Trinity in Unity; that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world, etc.

What is a temporary faith? Temporary Faith.


It is a joyful entertaining of the promises of the Gospel with some seeming
confidence, which yet is but vanishing, uncertain, and not rooted; lasts but
for a time, and then comes to nothing. Mat. 13. 20, 21. Luke 18. 3, 14.

What is that common faith which you call extraordinary? Miraculous Faith.


It is the faith of miracles, which is the cleaving to some special and
singular promise; either for the doing of some extraordinary effect, or for the
receiving of some outward good, after an extraordinary manner. 1 Cor. 13. 2.
Mat. 21. 2. and 7. 22. Mark. 9. 3. Acts 14. 9. Luke 17. 19.

By this kind of faith, Judas might work miracles as well as the other
Disciples; and by this Faith, many might be healed by our Savior in their
bodies, who were not healed in their souls.

What now is true saving faith, Justifying Faith.
which none have but the elect, it being proper to them?

It is such a firm assent of the mind to the truth of the word, as flows into
the heart, and causes the soul to embrace it as good, and to build its
eternal happiness on it.

What is that which you make the object of saving Faith?

The general object of true saving Faith, is the whole truth of God revealed;
but the special object of Faith as it justifies, is the promise of remission
of sins by the Lord Jesus: For as the Israelites, by the same eyes by which
they looked upon the brazen Serpent, they saw other things; but they were not
healed by looking upon any thing else, but only the brazen Serpent: So, though
by the same Faith whereby I cleave to Christ for remission of sins, I believe
every truth revealed; yet I am not justified by believing any truth but the
promise of grace in the Gospel.

Open the nature of this saving and justifying Faith, somewhat more fully.

Justifying Faith may be considered two ways, either as God works it in man's
heart, or else as man's heart works by it toward God again.

For first God enables man to believe, and then he believes by Gods enabling.

In the first respect, Faith is said to be Gods gift. Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29.
And it is the greatness of Gods power, that raises man's heart unto it. Ephesians.
1. 19.

In the second respect man is said to believe, Romans 10. 10. and to come to
Christ. But he believes by Gods enabling him to believe, and he comes by Gods
causing him to come, Joh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me except the Father draw
him, says our Savior.

What does God work in man when he gives him Faith?

First, he enlighteneth the understanding to see the truth and preciousnesse
of the rich offers of grace in the Lord Jesus. 1. Cor. 2. 11, 12. 14. John 1.
5. John 12. 39. John 6. 45. Matthew. 16. 17. Acts 26. 18.

Secondly, he enables the will to embrace them, and reach all the desires of
the soul after them, and rest and build eternal comfort on them. The things
of God as they are foolishness to man's natural Judgment; so they are enmity
to his natural will. And therefore when God gives faith, he gives a new light
to the understanding, and new motions and inclinations to the heart. As the
Covenant of Grace is, I will give them a new heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26. It must be a
mighty power to turn the heart of man upside down, and cause him to pitch all
the desires of the soul upon a supernatural object. Joh. 6. 44.

What gather we from hence?

First, The Popish implicit faith confuted.
the monstrous wickedness of the Popish Doctors, who persuade the multitude to
rest in a blind faith, which they call implicit and folded up, telling them
that it is enough for them to believe as the Church believes, though they know
not what the Church believes, nor who the Church is, whereas the Scripture
teaches us that Faith comes by hearing; that is, by hearing the blessed
promises of grace offered to the people: Romans 10. 14. 17.

Faith does not consist in darkness and ignorance, but knowledge is of the
ingredience of it, John 12. 39. and therefore sometimes put for it. John 17. 3.
Esa. 53. 11. Where God does work Faith, there he gives a saving light to the
understanding, though in diverse measures and degrees; as there are weak
measures of Faith, so weak measures of knowledge and apprehensions in saving
mysteries: But no man can build upon Gods gracious word and promise for the
truth and reality of what he speaks, without he know what he speaks.

Secondly, That the whole soul is the seat of Faith.
we may here learn that Faith does not consist only in the understanding, or
only in the will, but in the whole soul; the whole intelligent nature is the
seat of Faith: And therefore either Faith is not a supernatural gift of God,
or else they speak ungraciously of Gods grace in the work of Faith, who
attribute no more to God then the renovation of man's understanding, and
revealing those things to him, which by nature he could not see; leaving the
action of consenting and embracing by faith the things revealed to man's
free will, so sharing the business of believing between God and man; the
enlightening of the understanding shall be Gods, but the inclining the will must
be a man's own, any further then it may be invited by moral persuasion. But the
Scripture every where shows faith to be such a transcendent and supernatural
gift, as far exceeds all natural power to produce or reach unto; God does all
in this high business by his powerful Spirit and supernatural grace.

But how then is it said, that man believes, man receives Christ, man comes
unto him?

These phrases and the like show what man does when faith is wrought in him,
how his soul acts by it, and exercises this excellent habit received. And it
is thus: 1. By Gods teaching him he understands; by Gods enlightening his mind
he sees the excellency of the Lord Jesus, and firmly assents unto the word of
grace as true; that indeed Christ is the only blessed Savior, and that all the
promises of God in him are yea and amen. 2. By Gods changing and enabling his
will he wills; by Gods sanctifying his affections he loves and embraces; by
Gods printing and sealing them on his heart he possesses and closes with
Christ, and the precious promises of mercy in him, and embraces the tenure of
the Gospel as the sweetest and happiest tidings that ever sounded in his ears,
and entertains it with the best welcomes of his dearest heart, and places his
eternal happiness on this Rock of salvation.

Put now all these things together.

They all show that faith is nothing else but a supernatural action and work
of God in man, whereby man's heart, (that is) all the powers of man's soul move
as they are first moved by God: So that the action of man in believing, is
nothing but his knowing of heavenly things by Gods revealing them and causing
him to know them; his willing them and embracing them by Gods enabling him to
will and embrace them: Thus the motion of man's heart to Christ being moved by
God is called man's believing with the heart: even as a wheel which of it self
cannot move, yet being moved by a higher wheel does move; which motion though
it be but one, yet is said to be the motion of two, that is, of the Mover and
of the thing moved.

It seems then that justifying faith consists in these two things; viz. in
having a mind to know Christ, and a will to rest upon him.

Yes; whosoever sees so much excellency in Christ that thereby he is drawn to
embrace him as the only Rock of salvation, that man truly believes to
Justification.

But is it not necessary to Justification to be assured that my sins are
pardoned, and that I am justified?

No, that is no act of faith as it justifies, but an effect and fruit that
follows after Justification: for no man is justified by believing that he is
justified, for he must be justified before he can believe it: and no man is
pardoned by believing that he is pardoned, for he must be pardoned before he
can believe it. But faith as it justifies, is a resting upon Christ to obtain
pardon, the acknowledging him to be the only Savior, and the hanging upon him
for salvation, Mat. 16. 16. John 20. 31. Acts 8. 37. Romans 10. 9. 1 John 4. 15.
and 5. 1. 5.

It is the direct act of faith that justifies, that whereby I do believe; it
is the reflect act of faith that assures, that whereby I know I do believe,
and it comes by way of argumentation thus,

Maj. Whosoever relyeth upon Christ the Savior of the world for Justification
and pardon, the word of God says, that he by so doing is actually justified
and pardoned.

Min. But I do truly rely upon Christ for Justification and pardon. Concl.
Therefore I undoubtedly believe that I am justified and pardoned.

But many times both the former propositions may be granted to be true, and yet
a weak Christian want strength to draw the conclusion; for it is one thing to
believe, and another thing to believe that I do believe: It is one thing for a
man to have his salvation certain, and another thing to be certain that it is
certain.

How then does the soul reach after Christ in the act of justifying?

Even as a man fallen into a river and like to be drowned, as he is carried
down with the flood espies the bough of a tree hanging over the river, which he
catches at and clinges unto with all his might to save him, and seeing no
other way of succor but that, ventures his life upon it: this man so soon as
he had fastened upon this bough is in a safe condition, though all troubles,
fears and terrors are not presently out of his mind, until he comes to
himself and sees himself quite out of danger, then he is sure he is safe, but
he was safe before he was sure. Even so it is with a Believer; Faith is but the
espying of Christ as the only means to save, and the reaching out of the heart
to lay hold upon him. God has spoke the word and made the promise in his Son,
I believe him to be the only Savior, and remit my soul to him to be saved by
his mediation: So soon as the soul can do this, God imputes the
righteousness of his Son unto it, and it is actually justified in the Court of
Heaven, though it is not presently quieted and pacified in the Court of
Conscience: that is done afterward, in some sooner, in some later, by the
fruits and effects of Justification.

What are the Concomitants of Justification?

Reconciliation, and Adoption, Romans 5. 1. Joh. 1. 12.

What is Reconciliation? What Reconciliation is.


It is that grace whereby we that were enemies to God are made friends, Romans 5.
10. we that were rebels are received into favor; we that were far off, and
aliens from God, are now brought near through Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. and 18.
19. 1 John 1. 3. Heb. 12. 22, 23.

What is Adoption? What Adoption is.


Adoption is the power and privilege to be the sons of God, Joh. 1. 12. Ephesians.
1. 5. derived unto us from Christ, who being the eternal Son of God, became by
Incarnation our brother, that by him God might bring many sons and daughters
unto glory, Heb. 2. 10.

What are the benefits that flow to us from our Adoption?

1. Some are privative immunities, The benefits of Adoption.
and freedom from many grievances; as 1. We are freed from the slavery of sin,
Romans 6. 14. 2 From condemnation, Romans 8. 1. 3 From all slavish fears and
terrors, Romans 8. 15. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again,
but the spirit of adoption. 4 From the law, not Ceremonial only, Gal. 5. 1.
but Moral; freed I mean from the curse of it, freed from the condemning power
of it, freed from the coaction and compulsion of it, freed from the rigorous
exaction and inexorable demands of it, as it is a Covenant of works: But not
freed from the doctrine of holiness contained in it; the justified and adopted
are every way freed from the Law, as it was an enemy and against us, Luc. 1.
but not freed as it is our guide and director, containing the rule of Gods holy
will. Our Sonship does not free us from service, but from slavery, not from
holiness, but to holiness: There is a free service which benefits the
condition of a son, Gods service is perfect freedom.

2. Some are positive dignities; as, 1. Free access to the throne of Grace,
that we may come to God in prayer as to a Father. Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 15. 2 We
have an Interest in Gods particular and special Providence, 2 Cor. 6. ult.
Romans 8. 28. 3 We by our adoption have a free and sanctified use of all God^
creatures restored, the right unto which we forfeited in Adam; for no man has
any true right to any thing now by nature; he may have the use of Gods
creatures by Gods patience and forbearance, but not by Gods license and
allowance, until he be in Covenant with God in Christ, and made a son and heir
with him, and then all things are restored, 1 Cor. 3. 21. Romans 8. 32. 4 From
Adoption flows all Christians joy, which is called the joy in the holy Ghost,
Romans 14. 17. unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8, 9. Romans 5. 2. For the
spirit of Adoption is, first, a witness, Romans 8. 16. 2ly. A seal, Ephesians. 4. 30.
3ly. The pledge and earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14. settling a holy
security in the soul, whereby it rejoices even in affliction in hope of glory.

Do the Justified children of God always then rejoice?

Joy considered as a delightful apprehension of the favor of God gladding the
heart, though it ought continually to be labored for, Phil. 4. 4. and
preserved, yet it may be at times not only darkened and daunted, but for a time
even lost, and to be restored, Psalm. 51. 12. yet it is as all spiritual gifts
of God, perpetual and without repentance, if we regard

1. The matter of rejoicing, which is Gods unchangeable love and grace, Mal. 3.
6.

2. The causes and fountains of joy in the regenerate, which are the never
failing graces of Faith, Luke 22. 32. Hope, Romans 5. 5. and Love toward God in
Christ, 1 C^^ 8.

3. The valuation (even in the deepest dismay) of our part and hope in Christ
above the pleasures of ten thousand worlds.

4. The pretense and claim of a faithful heart promising and challenging unto
it self a comfortable harvest of joy for the present seed-time of sorrow, Psalm.
42. 5. Psalm. 126. 5. and 57. 11.

So much of the first main benefit which Christians receive by their communion
with Christ, viz. Justification.

Now what is the second benefit which is called Glorification and
Sanctification?

It is the renewing of our nature according to the Image of God, Sanctification.
in righteousness and true holiness, which is but begun in this life, and is
called Sanctification, and perfected in the life to come, which therefore is
most strictly called Glory.

How far forth is our nature renewed in this life by Sanctification?

This renewing is of our whole nature, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Romans 12. 2. the
understanding being enlightened, the will rectified, the affections regulated,
the outward man reformed. But not wholly in this life; and this is done by the
powerful operation of the Spirit of God, who having begun a good work in us,
will perfect it unto the day of the Lord, Joh. 13. 6. Psalm. 51. 10. Ezekiel. 36.
26.

What be the parts of our Sanctification?

Two, answerable to the two powerful means whereby they are wrought; First,
Mortification, or dying unto sin, and thereby freedom from the dominion
thereof by the death of Christ, Romans 6. 6, 7.

Secondly, Vivification, or quickening unto newness of life, by the power of
the resurrection of Christ; In regard whereof it is also called our first
resurrection, Rev. 20. 6.

How does Sanctification differ from the former grace of Justification?

In many main and material differences; The differences between Justification
and Sanctification.
as,

1. In the order, not of time, wherein they go together, Romans 8. 30. nor of
knowledge and apprehension, wherein this latter has precedence, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
but of nature, wherein the former is the ground of this latter, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Secondly, in the Subject: the righteousness whereby we are justified being
inherent in Christ for us; but this of Sanctification in our selves from him,
Romans 8. 10.

Thirdly, in the cause: our Justification following from the merit; our
Sanctification from the efficacy of the death and life of Christ. Ephesians. 1. 19.
2. 1.


Fourthly, in the Instrument; Faith, which in Justification is only as an hand
receiving, in Sanctification is a co-working virtue, Acts 15. 19. Gal. 5. 6.

Fifthly, in the measure; Justification being in all Believers, and at all times
alike; 2 Cor. 3. 18.
but Sanctification wrought differently and by degrees. 2 Pet. 3. 18.


Sixthly, in the end; which being in both eternal life, Romans 6. 23, 24. yet the
one is among the causes of reigning, the other only as the highway unto the
kingdom.

What is the rule and square of our Sanctification?

The whole word of God, Joh. 17. 17. Ps. 119. 9. as containing that will of
his, Romans 12. 2. which is even our Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, etc.

How do you prove that Gods word is such a rule?

1. By express warrant of Scripture, (2 Timothy 3. 14. 17.

2. By the resemblances and things whereunto it is compared, as to the way we
walk in, ( Jer 6. 16. Mark 12. 14. Act. 18. 24, 25.) to a Light and a Lanthorn
in a dark place, to guide our feet into the way of peace, Psa. 119. 105. Prove.
6. 23. 2 Pet. 19. 20. Luc. 1. 77. 79. to a Glass, Jam. 1. 25. to a Rule, Line,
Square, Measure, and Balance, whereby must be framed, Phil. 3. 16.
ordered, measured, and pondered. Isa. 28. 17. Gal. 6. 16.

3. Because they only are commended for a holy and righteous life, who have
framed it according to the Word, Luc. 1. 6. and all others secluded, Isa. 8.
19, 20. Mat. 22. 29.

4. Because nothing can be counted holy and righteous which God does not so
account, and that in his Word, so as he only is righteous, and makes this or
that to be holy and righteous. So his Word only shows us what that is which
he so accompteth, and therefore it is called his holy Word, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
holy Scriptures, righteous Laws, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. 8.

What mean you here by the holy Word of God?

Both the Law and the Gospel, Job 22. 22.
the Old Testament and the New.

How is the Gospel a rule of obedience being the rule of faith? Joh. 17. 17.


As the Law requires obedience, Jam. 12. 1. so the Gospel directs the
faithful how to perform it, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21.
1 Timothy 1. 9, 10, 11. only with difference,

1. Of the manner; The differences between the Law and the Gospel.
the Law propounding God to be worshipped of us in himself as our Creator, the
Gospel in Christ as our Savior John 5. 23. and 14. 1.
.

2. Of the end; The Law requiring all duties, as for the procurement of our own
salvation: The Gospel in way of thankfulness, for salvation in Christ already
bestowed, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.

3. Of the effect; the Law (like Pharaoh, that required brick, but allowed no
straw) demanding obedience, but vouchsafing no assistance; (supposing man as in
the state of Creation) The Gospel both offering and conferring to the
regenerate that which it requires, Romans 10. 5, 6. 8. for it both requires and
confirms faith unto the Elect, and that not only as a hand to lay hold on
Christ, but also as a chief virtue working by love in all parts of obedience;
without which even the Gospel is a Law, that is, a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
to the unregenerate, and with which the Law becomes as it were Gospel to the
regenerate, even a law of liberty, Jam. 1. 25. and 2. 12. For as the Law saves
us not without the Gospel, so the Gospel saves us not without the Law.

Does not the Gospel add other Precepts or Counsels to those of the Law?

Not any other in substance of action, but only renews and enforces those of
the Law, 1 John 2. 7, 8. and specifieth some duties, as of faith in the
Messiah, of the Sacraments, etc. which have their general ground from the Law.
As for those that are propounded in form of counsel, and do concern things
indifferent, they are not therefore arbitrary courses, Rev. 3. 18. of higher
perfection, much less meritorious of greater glory, but as they are applied
with due circumstances, necessary precepts referred to some or other
Commandment of the Law, Mat. 19. 23.
the neglecting whereof excludes from the kingdom of God.

What is that law which with the direction of the Gospel is the rule of
Sanctification?

The Moral law, The Moral law the rule of Sanctification.
or law of nature engraven by God himself first in the heart of man in his
Creation, after in Tables of stone Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
, in the days of Moses, and so published and committed to the Church for all
ages as the royal Law, for obedience to God our King ( Jam. 2. 8.)

Why did God write that law in Tables of stone?

Partly to signify the perpetual use and continuance of them to the end of
the world: Partly to show the stony hardness of our hearts, in which this law
was to be written, and to declare how hard it is to bring us to obedience of
them.

Why did none but God write this Law in Tables of stone?

Because none but God can write his Law in our hearts.

How was this Law delivered?

To show the gloriousness of it God delivered it in fire, for the Mountain
burned, the Trumpet sounded, the people fled, and Moses himself trembled.

What did this signify to them, and teach us?

1. That without Christ the Law is but death.

2. That we should be very careful to perform obedience to the same.

Did God give no other law but the Moral law only?

Yes, he added the Ceremonial and Judicial laws, as special explications and
applications of the law Moral, unto that present Church and people the
Israelites.

What was the Ceremonial law?

That law which did set down orders for direction in rites of outward worship,
Ceremonial Law.
shadowing the grace of the Gospel ( Heb. 10. 1, etc.)

Are we bound to keep and observe those laws?

No, for the substance being now exhibited, those shadows are utterly abolished
by the death of Christ, and therefore the use of them now, would be a kind of
denial of his death.

What call you the Judicial law?

That wherein God appointed a form of Politic and Civil government of the
Commonwealth of the Jews, Judicial Law.
which therefore is ceased with the dissolution of that State, for which it was
ordained; saving only in the common equity.

Is this law utterly revoked and abolished by Christ?

No; for he came not to overturn any good government of the Commonwealth, much
less that which was appointed by God himself.

May not Christian Magistrates then swerve any thing from those laws of
government, which were set down by Moses?

In some circumstances they may, but in the general equity and substance they
may not.

What Judicial laws are immutably to be observed now of Christian Magistrates?

Those which have reasons annexed unto the^, and specially those wherein God
has appointed death for the punishment of heinous offenses.

What is the Moral law? The Moral Law.


That which commands the perfection of godliness and righteousness, and
directs us in our duties to God and man, Deuteronomy. 5. 32. 12. 32.

Are we not delivered from this law by the means of Christ?

From the burden of the law exacting in our own persons perfect obedience, and
from the curse of that law due unto disobedience, we are delivered by Christ,
Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13. But from the Commandment as a rule of life, we are not
freed, Jam. 2. 8. but contrariwise are inclined and disposed by his free Spirit
to the willing obedience thereof, Ps. 51. 12. and 119. 32. 45. 1 John 5. 3.

To what end serves the Law? The end and use of the Law.


First, it is a Glass, to discover our filthiness, and to show us our sins,
and the punishment thereof, that thereby we may be driven unto Christ, to be
purged by him, ( Gal. 3. 24. Romans 3. 20. 27.) For it lays open all the parts
of our misery, both sinfulness, accursednesse, and impotency, or unablenesse
to relieve our selves; so whipping us, and chasing us to Christ, that in him we
may find deliverance.

Secondly, when we are come to Christ, and feel our selves saved by him, it is
a guide to direct us in the way we have to walk in all our life after, Matthew.
5. 17. Luke 1. 6. Deuteronomy. 6. 6. For after the Law has brought us to Christ, the
feeling of the love of God within us, makes us to strive toward the obedience
of it, and then it is a rule to direct us how to behave our selves in all
things that we do, teaching us how we are to live, in such sort as whosoever
walks not accordingly, cannot be saved.

What further use has the Law in the Regenerate?

First, as a light it directs us, for the world being a dark wilderness,
and we being naturally blind, are in continual danger of falling, unless our
steps be guided by the Lamp of the Law.

Secondly, as a prick it inciteth us to obedience, because God commands them.

Thirdly, it frames us to humility whilst by it we understand that we are
far from fulfilling it.

What gather you of this?

First, what great reason there is, that we should be well acquainted with the
Law of God, seeing it is of so great use.

Secondly, that every one should have a warrant of all his doings out of this
Law of God; whereby all the creatures are sanctified for man's use.

What is the contrary vice?

Ignorance; whereof Christ says, that the blind fall into the ditch. Matthew.
15. 14.

So much of the use of the Law: What is required for our profiting therein?

In the first place it is required, that we have the right understanding of the
Law, without which it is impossible to reap any of the former fruits; 1.
Knowledge of the Law required.
for how can a man acknowledge the breach of that Law, which he knows not? or
how can he serve God in the endeavor of the performance of it, unless he
understand his Masters will?

What Rules are principally to be observed for the understanding and right
interpreting of the Law?

Three especially.

What is the first?

That the Law is spiritual, Rules to be observed for the interpretation of the
Law.
reaching to the soul and all the powers thereof, and charging as well the
heart and thoughts, as the outward man. Romans 7. 14. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Matthew. 22. 37.
Mark 12. 30. Luke 10. 27. 1. Rule* The Law is spiritual.


How does the Law shape all the powers of the soul?

It shapeth the understanding to know every duty, even all the will of God: It
charge the judgment to discern between good and evil; and between two good
things which is the better: It charge the memory to retain: It charge the
will to choose the better, and to leave the worse: It charge the affections to
love things to be loved; and to hate things to be hated.

Does the Law require these alike of all?

No; but according to the Sex, growth in age, and difference of calling; as
more of a man than of a woman; of a young man than of a child; of a public
person, than of a private man.

What is the second Rule?

That the Law is perfect. 2. Rule: That the Law is perfect.
Psalm. 19. 7. Not only binding the soul; but also the whole soul, the
several functions of her faculties, perfectly; as the understanding to know
the will of God perfectly; the judgment to discern perfectly betwixt good and
evil; the memory to retain, and remember all perfectly; the will to choose the
good, and leave the evil perfectly; the affections to love the one, and hate
the other perfectly. So in condemning evil, it condemns all evil: and in
commanding good, it commands all good, charging man to practice the good, and
refuse the evil perfectly; and that not only as it was commanded Adam before
his fall; but also according to the several times, before, in, and after the
Law.

What is the third?

That in every Commandment there is a borrowed Speech, 3. Rule: In every
Commandment there is a Metaphor, or Synecdoche.
whereby more is commanded or forbidden than is named.

What special Rules are comprehended under this third?

These three following.

1. Whatsoever the Law commands, 1. Branch of the third Rule.
it forbids the contrary; and whatsoever it forbids, it commands the
contrary. Matthew. 5. 21, 23, 24, 25. So where any duty is enjoined as in the
affirmative Commandments, there we must understand the contrary sin to be
forbidden. Matthew. 4. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 34. And where any sin is forbidden, as in
the negative, there must we know the contrary duty is required. Ephesians. 4. 28.

2. Whatsoever the Law commands or forbids in one kind, it commands or
forbids all of the same kind, 2. Branch.
and all the degrees thereof: for under the kind, manifest, and plain, are
understood all things of like sort, and under one maine duty, or crime
expressed all degrees of good or evil in the same kind are either commanded,
or forbidden. Matthew. 5. 21, 22, etc. 1 Ioh. 3. 10.

Thirdly, 3. Branch.
whatsoever the Law commands or forbids, it commands or forbids the
causes thereof, and all means whereby that thing is done, or brought to pass:
So that with the thing forbidden, or the duty enjoined, all occasions, and
provocations, or furtherances thereto, are consequently condemned, or required.
1 These. 5. 22. Heb. 10. 24, 25. Matthew. 5. 27 30.

Besides the true knowledge, what is further required for a profitable course
in the Law.

First, remembrance, without which our knowledge is nothing, as that which is
powered into a riven Vessel. And therefore in the fourth Commandment, God
using this word Remember, teaches us how deeply negligence and forgetfulness,
(although not alike) in all, are condemned.

Secondly, judgment to take heed, that we do nothing rashly and suddenly, but
ever to examine our ways.

Thirdly, the will and affections must be formed to an obedience of the
Commandments: whereto also it may help to consider, that God propounds the
ten Commandments in the second person of the singular number, saying, Thou
shall not, etc.

Why are the Commandments uttered in this sort; rather than by ye, or no man,
or every man? etc.

First, Why the Commandments are propounded in the second person.
because God being without partiality, speaks to all men alike; as well the
rich as poor, high as low.

Secondly, because no man should put the Commandments of God from himself, as
though they did not concern him: but every particular man should apply them to
himself, as well as if God had spoken to him by name.

What gather you of this?

That God wisely preventeth a common abuse amongst men, which is to esteem
that spoken to all men, to be, as it were, spoken to none: as you shall have it
common amongst men, to say and confess, that God is good, and merciful, and
that he commands this, and forbids that; and yet they usually so behave
themselves, as that they shift the matter to the general, as if it did nothing
belong to them in particular; and as if they notwithstanding might live as they
list: and therefore every man is to judge and esteem that God speaks in the
Law to him in particular; and is accordingly to be affected therewith.

That this obedience may be more willing and cheerful; what is further to be
thought upon?

We must set before our eyes Gods benefits bestowed upon us, as the Lord did
before the Israelites, in the Preface to the ten Commandments.

What benefits ought we chiefly to call to mind?

First, those which God does generally bestow upon all his Children, as our
Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification,
continual Preservation; and then particularly, such blessings as God has
severally bestowvd upon every one of us.

Are not the judgments of God also to be thought upon for furtherance to this
obedience?

Yes verily, to make us fear to offend in our ways. Exodus 20. 5. 7. Psalm.
119. 120.

Remains there yet any more?

Good company, which with David we must cleave unto. Psalm 119. 63. Prove. 13.
20. Good company required.
not the noblest, or of greatest account, but the godliest: for if we will
avoid such a sin, we must avoid all company that does delight therein; which
is no less dangerous, than good company is profitable.

What gather you of this?

That whosoever makes no choice of company, makes no conscience of sin: as
those that dare keep company familiarly with Papists, and profane persons,
thinking that they may keep their Conscience to themselves.

Hitherto of the helps both of the knowledge and practice: In what part of the
Scripture is the Moral Law of God contained?

It is handled at large throughout the whole Scripture; but is summarily first
contrived into ten words, or ten Commandments, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 10.
4. and then into two, Matthew. 22. 37. 40. Luke 10. 27. comprehending the sum
of the whole Law, which are now to be spoken of.

Why has God given ten Commandments, and no more? Deuteronomy. 5. 22.

First, that no man should either add any thing to, or take any thing from the
Laws of God.

Secondly, that we might be left without excuse, if we learned them not; seeing
they be but ten, and no more.

How are these ten Commandments propounded?

Sometime affirmatively, as the fourth and fifth: Others negatively, as all the
rest. Some with reasons annexed, as the five first: Some without, as the five
last: and all of them in the time to come, and in the second person singular.

Why they are laid down in the second person singular, you have showed before,
and why some have reasons added unto them, you shall hear a little after:
Declare now why God has propounded all the Commandments in the time to come,
saying, Thou shall not etc.

Because it is not enough for us that we have kept the Commandments of God
heretofore, except we continue in keeping of them to the end of our lives.

Why are there more of the Commandments negative, telling us what we should
not do, then affirmative, telling us what we should do, all of them except
two, being set down negatively?

1 To put us in mind of our corruption, Why the Commandments are propounded
negatively.
which needs greatly to be restrained, whereas if Adam had continued in
integrity, sin had not been known, and then virtue only had been
propounded to us to follow.

2 Because our souls being full of sin, must have them plucked forth, before
we can do any thing that is good.

3 Because the negative binds more strongly; for the negative precept binds
always, and to all moments of time, the affirmative binds always, but not
to all moments of time.

How are the Ten Commandments divided?

Into two Tables, The division of the Decalogue.
Deutero. 4. 13. 10. 1, 4. which Christ calls the two great Commandments,
Mat. 22.

What does the first contain?

Our duty to God in the four first Commandments.

What does the second?

Our duty to man in the six last.

What is the sum of the first?

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, The sum of the first
Table.
and with all thy Soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
Deutero. 65. Mat. 22. 37, 38. Luke 10. 27.

What is the sum of the second? The sum of the second Table.


Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, Luke 19. 19. Matthew. 22. 39 Luke
10. 27.

What is the sum of this sum?

Love, which consists in two heads (as we have heard) to wit the love of God,
and of our neighbor, Luke 10. 27. 1 John 5. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 4, 5.

What use is there of this short sum?

Very great; both to show the mavelous wisdom of God, and also for singular
profit that redoundeth to us thereof.

Wherein appears the wisdom of God?

That since it was great cunning to contrive the whole will of God into Ten
words, it must needs be more wonderful to bring all into two.

What is the profit that redoundeth unto us?

It furthereth us unto that twofold use of the Law before spoken of: for,
first, it is a means the more to humble us, and so the more effectually to
drive us unto Christ; secondly, it helps us much in our obedience to Christ
and his Commandments.

What profit arises of the first use concerning humiliation?

That men being brought to a nearer sight of their sins, might be the more
earnest to come unto Christ.

How shall that be?

That when all our sins are gathered into one heap, and mustered into one
Troop, they may appear the greater, and cast us down the more: as a man
owing sundry debts unto dives, or unto one man, in the particulars is confident
of his ability to pay all, as long as he hears they are but small sums, but
hearing the whole sum, despaireth of the payment of it: or when as there be
many Soldiers coming against their enemy, but yet here and there scattered,
they do not affect us with so great fear, as when they be gathered and
ranged in order, and are all under one sight or view.

How is this showed in our love toward God?

In that it should be done in simple obedience of the whole man, that is, of
all the powers both of body and soul, which is impossible for any man to do.

What are they of the soul?

Two, of the Mind, and of the Will.

What are they of the Mind?

The Understanding and Judgment, unto both which Memory is annexed.

How are these charged?

Our understanding should perfectly comprehend all thing that God would have us
to know; in Judgment we should think aright of them, and the Memory
accordingly should retain them; but we are ignorant of many things, and those
which we know, we know but in part, and that which we know, we judge not
aright of, nor remember as we ought.

How stand the Will and Affections charged?

Hereby must we love perfectly all known good, and perfectly hate all known
evil, of which we come a great deal shorter, then of the other.

What are they of the body?

All the Members, parts and graces of the body (as beauty, strength, etc)
should be wholly employed in the Service of God, and doing of His Will; but
the wandering of our eyes in the hearing of the Word, and other parts of Gods
Service, does easily bewray our great negligence, and the small obedience and
conformity of the rest of the Members and parts of the body.

Show the same in our love toward our Neighbor.

In that we must love him as our self, which as it is so much the less then
the former, as man is inferior to God; so we being not able to accomplish it,
are much less able to fulfill the other.

How shall that be tried?

By examination of our selves in some particulars: as for example; whether we
love a stranger, or our utter and most deadly enemy, as our selves, which no
man ever did, nay a common Man, or to be plainer, even our dearest friend, as
we do our selves, which cannot be found, Deuteronomy. 28. 53, 56. etc. and therefore
the righteousness of the Papists is a rotten righteousness, and such as will
never stand with the righteousness of God.

What profit arises of the second use?

That by it, as by a glass, we may the easier see, and being shortly
contrived, we may the better remember our whole duty both to God and man; it
being as a Card or Map of a Country easier carried about with us.

Seeing then that the whole sum and maine end of the Law is Love, what gather
you thereof?

That which the Apostle exhorts unto, ( viz.) To leave all idle questions as
unprofitable, and to deal in those matters only which further the practice of
love. 1 Timothy 1. 4, 5.

Why is the love of God called the first and greatest Commandment? Matthew. 22.
38.

Because we should chiefly, and in the first place, regard our duties to God,
and be most careful to understand his will, and to worship him. 1 John 4. 20.
In which respect the first Table is put before the second, as being the
principal.

How may it appear that our duties to God are to be preferred before the other
toward our Neighbor?

First, by the inequality of the persons offended; because it is worse to
offend God than man. Acts 4. 19.

Secondly, by the punishment assigned in the Scriptures: For the breaches of
the first Table are to be more severely punished than the breaches of the
second: As he that revileth the Magistrate shall bear his sin; but he that
blasphemeth God shall be stoned to death. 1 Samuel 2. 25. Number. 24. 11. 14.

What gather you of this?

The crafty practices of Papists, who would make men believe, that the chiefest
godliness, and most meritorious good works of all required in the Law of God,
are the works of the second Table; as Charity, Almsdeeds, etc. thereby
deceiving the people to enrich themselves.

Are all the duties of the first Table greater than all the duties of the
second?

No, unless the comparison be equally made: for the moral duties of the
second Table being perpetual, are greater than the Ceremonial duties of the
first being temporal: whereunto agrees, That God will rather have mercy than
sacrifice. Hos. 6. 6. Matthew. 9. 13.

When do you count the comparison equal?

When they are compared in like degrees, as the chief Commandment of the
first Table, with the chief of the second, the middle duties of the one, with
the middle duties of the other; and the last and least of the former, with the
last and least of the latter: Thus if we compare the greatest with the
greatest, and the meanest with the meanest, the duties and breaches of the
first Table are greater than the duties and breaches of the second. But though
the principal service of the one be greater than the principal service of the
other; if the comparison be not made in the same degrees: as if (for example)
the murder of a man be compared with the least abuse of the name of God; or
Adultery, with the least breach of the Sabbath; these of the second Table are
greater.

Why is the second Table said to be like unto the first? Matthew. 22. 39.

For that they go so hand in hand together, that no man can perform the one,
unless the other, as St. John teaches. So Ephesians. 1. 2. chap. fourth and fifth.
For whosoever keeps the first Table well, cannot but keep the second: and
whosoever keeps the second, must needs keep the first.

What is to be said of those, that seem to keep the one, and care not for the
other?

If they will seem to serve God, and are not in Charity, they are mere
hypocrites; and if they will seem to deal uprightly with their neighbor, and
have not the love of God in them, they are profane Hypocrites, and very
Atheists.

Wherein else do the Tables agree?

First, in that they are both perpetual.

Secondly, in that they are both perfect.

Wherein do the Commandments of the first Table agree?

In this principally, that they concern the worship of God, and contain our
whole duties toward him.

How are they divided?

They either respect the root of this worship, The division of the first Table.
as the first; or the branches thereof, as the three following: For the
fountain worship of God is prescribed in the first Commandment; the means of
this service in the other three.

Why did God enjoyne his worship in four Commandments?

That we might the better know and retain them in mind, or otherwise might be
left the more without excuse.

What is common to these four Commandments of the first Table?

That every one has his several reason annexed, yet with this difference,
that the first has his reason going before the Commandment, and the other
three have it following.

Have not the Commandments of the second Table their reasons also?

Yes verily in the Scriptures; but for brevity they are omitted in the
Decalogue.

Why are the reasons of the Commandments of the first Table rather set down
then of the second?

First, that we might know, that there is no less light left in us of the
worship of God, then of the duties we owe to our neighbors.

Secondly, to teach us, that as all obedience should be grounded upon Reason
and Knowledge, so especially that which concerns Gods worship.

What gather you of this?

That those are greatly deceived who think it sufficient, if they have the
Commandments by heart, or can say them by roat.

Why is the reason of the first Commandment set before, which in all the other
comes after?

Because it serves not only for a reason of this Commandment, but also for a
Preface to all the ten; for it has a reference to them all, and is a reason to
urge the observance to every one of them.

In what words is it expressed?

In these words of God, The Preface of the Commandments.
Exodus 20. 2. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, and out of the house of Bondage.

How prove you this to be a Reason, and not a Commandment, as some do think?

First, because it is commonly used for a reason of other Commandments. Exodus
20. 5. 7. Lev. 19. 36. 37.

Secondly, because it has not the form of a Commandment.

Thirdly, since the other three Commandments have their reasons added, it is
unlikely* that the first and chiefest should have none.

How is this Preface set as a reason to enforce the observation both of the
first Commandment, and of all the rest?

Thus: If I be the Lord, the God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
thou must take me for the Lord thy God alone, and keep all my Commandments.
But I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt:
therefore thou must take me for thy God alone, and keep all my Commandments.

What ground of obedience is there laid in this Reason?

That this Law is to be obeyed, because it proceeds from him; who is not
only the Lord our Maker, Psalm. 100. 3. but also our God and Savior, 1 Timothy 4.
10. Psalm. 36. 6.

Whence is the latter?

From the Covenant of grace, whereby he is our God, and Savior of them that
believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. assuring them of all gracious deliverances by virtue of
his Covenant, from all evils and enemies, both bodily, and especially
spiritual: a proof whereof is laid down in that famous deliverance of the
people of Israel out of the slavery of Egypt, which was so exceeding great,
that by reason thereof they were said to be in an Iron Furnace; Deuteronomy. 4. 20.

How can this belong to us which are no Israelites?

Though we be not Israel in name, or according to the flesh, yet we are the
true Israel of God according to the spirit and promise.

Why does the Lord make choice of that benefit which seems nothing at all to
belong unto us, rather then of any other, wherein we communicate with them?

1. Because it is the manner of God to allure the Israelites, How the reason of
the first Commandment belongs to us.
to whom the Law was given at first, as children with temporal benefits,
having respect to their infirmity and childhood: whereas we are blessed of
God with greater knowledge, and therefore in respect of them are (as it were)
at man's estate, Deuteronomy. 28. 13.

2. Because it was fittest to express the spiritual deliverance from Satan by
Christ, which was thereby figured and represented; and so it belongs no
less, if not more, to us than to them.

3. Because we being freed from the slavery of our bloody enemies, whereunto we
were so near, more than once, and unto whom we justly have deserved to have
been enthralled, and it being the common case of all Gods Children to be in
continual danger of the like, and to feel the like goodness of God toward
them; we may also make use of this Title, and esteem it a great Bond also of
us unto God.

4. Because it was the latest benefit, the sweetness whereof was yet (as it
were) in their mouth: and herein the Lord had respect unto our corrupt nature,
who are ready to forget old benefits, how great soever.

What is there is this reason to set forth the true God whom we worship, and to
distinguish him from all Idols whatsoever?

1. The name Jehovah, which betokens that he only is of himself, and all
other things have their being of him: whereby we are taught, that there is but
one true God, whose being there is no creature able to conceive, and that he
gives being to all other things, both by creating them at first, and by
preserving and directing of them continually.

2. The name Elohim, or God; which in the Hebrew is of the plural number, to
signify the Trinity of the Persons in the Unity of the Godhead.

3. That he is both Omnipotent, and is able to do all things, and also willing
to employ his power to the preservation of his people, proved from an argument
of the effects, in the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt.

So much of the Preface. What are the words of the first Commandment?

Thou shall have no other Gods before Me. The first Commandment*
Or, Thou shall not have any strange God before My Face. Exo. 20. 3.

What is the scope and meaning of this Commandment? The scope and meaning of
this Commandment.


1. That this Jehovah, one in substance, and three in persons, the Creator, and
Governor of all things, and the Redeemer of his people, is to be entertained
for the only true God, in all the powers of our soul, Matthew. 22. 33.

2. That the inward and spiritual worship of the heart, Prove. 23. 26. wherein
God especially delights, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. and which is the ground of the outward,
Prove. 4. 23. Matthew. 12. 35. is to be given to him, and to none other, and that
sincerely without hypocrisy as in his sight, who searches and knows the
heart, Jer. 17. 10. For this word, Before me, or, Before my face, notes that
inward entertainment and worship whereof God alone does take notice: and thereby
God shows that he condemns as well the corrupt thoughts of man's heart,
concerning his Majesty, as the wicked practice of the body; for our Thoughts
are before his face.

What is forbidden in this Commandment? What is forbidden and required in this
first Commandment.


Original corruption, so far forth as it is the fountain of impiety against
God, Romans 8. 7. with all the streams thereof.

What is required in this Commandment?

That we set up, embrace and sanctify the Lord God in our hearts, Isa. 8. 13.
yiedling to him in Christ, that inward and spiritual worship which is due unto
his Majesty.

Wherein does this consist?

1. In knowing of God in himself, in his properties, and in his works; for it
should be the joy of every Christian soul, to know the true God, and whom he
has sent, Christ Jesus. Io. 17. 3.

2. In cleaving unto him. Deuteronomy. 11. 22. Josh. 23. 8. Acts 11. 23.

How is that to be done?

1. We must be persuaded of Gods love to us, and so rest upon him for all we
want; being assured, that he both can and will abundantly provide for us here
and for ever.

2. We are to love him so heartily as to be loath to offend him, and delight to
please him in all things.

So much of the Commandment in general: What are we to consider of it in
particular?

First, The several branches of the first Commandment.
the several branches of it.

Secondly, the helps, and hindrances of the obedience thereof.

What be the several branches of this Precept?

There is here commanded:

1. The having of a God; and herein Religion.

2. The having of one only God and no more; and herein unity.

3. The having of the true God, and none other for our God; and herein truth.

To what end does God command us to have a God; seeing we cannot choose but
have him for our God, whether we will or not?

Because albeit all men of necessity must have a God above them, yet many
either know him not, or care not for him; and so make him no God, as much as in
them lies.

What is it then to have a God?

To know and worship such an infinite Nature as has his being in himself,
What it is to have a God.
and gives being to all other things, wholly to depend upon him, and to yield
absolute obedience to his will.

What is it to have no God?

In heart to deny either God himself, or any of his properties, or so to live
as if there were no God at all.

What things are to be considered in this first branch of this Commandment?

Such as do concern the faculties of the soul, and the several powers of
the inward man; namely, the Understanding, Memory, Will, Affections, and
Conscience.

What is the Understanding charged with, in being commanded to have a God?

1. To know God as he has revealed himself in his Word, and in his Works. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. John 17. 3.

2. To acknowledge him to be such an one, as we know him to be.

3. To have faith both in believing the things that are written of him, and
applying to our selves his good promises.

What are we to consider in the knowledge of God?

First, Of the knowledge of God.
the knowledge of God himself. Secondly, of the things belonging unto him.

Wherein is God himself to be considered?

In the Unity of his Essence; and Trinity of his Persons.

What are the things belonging unto God?

His properties and his actions, whereby only we can know him, his substance
being past finding out of man or Angel.

What are his properties?

His Wisdom, Omnipotence, Justice, Goodness, etc. which are in him all
essential.

What are his actions?

His determining, and executing of all things.

What are the things forbidden in this Commandment, Opposites to the knowledge
of God.
as repugnant to this knowledge of God?

They either fail in defect, or in excess.

What are those that fail in defect?

1. Ignorance of God, Ignorance of God.
and of his will, which being a breach of Gods Commandment, does therefore
deserve damnation, 2 These. 1. 8. Hos. 4. 16.

2. Vncapablenesse of knowledge.

3. Atheism, which is a denial of God.

How many sorts of ignorance be there?

Three: 1. Simple ignorance, such as children and fools have. 2. Wretchlesse
ignorance, when a man may learn, and will not. 3. Wilful ignorance, when a
man would feign be ignorant of that he knows.


What is that which fails in excess.

Curious searching into the secrets of God, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

What vice is contrary to that faith which is here commanded?

Infidelity and doubtfulnesse, Psalm. 116. 11.

Hitherto of the Understanding: what is required in the Memory?

The remembrance of God and good things, especially of those which most
concern us, and chiefly at that instant, when we should make use of them.

What is the contrary vice?

Forgetfulness.

What is required in the Will?

That we serve God with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. 1 Chronicles. 28.
9.

What is the contrary to this?

Unwillingness to good things, principally the best.

What affections be there here ordered?

1. Affiance. 2. Love and Hatred. 3. Fear. 4. Joy and Sorrow.

What are we commanded in regard of the first of these.

To put our whole trust and confidence in God, Affiance in God.
and continually to depend upon him, Psalm 22. 4, 5, 8, 9. 73. 25. Ephesians. 4. 14.

What vices are coudemned repugnant to this?

1. In defect, want of dependence upon God, and distrust of his power, mercy,
promises, and providence.

2. In excess, presuming of Gods mercies, though we live as we list. And
tempting him when we so depend upon him, that we neglect the use of the means,
which he has appointed, Matthew. 4. 6, 7.

What virtues do arise of this affiance and trust in God?

Patience and Hope.

What is Patience?

That virtue whereby we willingly submit our selves to the pleasure of God in
all things, Patience.
and with alacrity go through those troubles which he sends upon us like
obedient children, meekly enduring the correction of our heavenly Father, 1 Samuel 30. 6. Heb. 12. 7, 8, 9. etc.

What vices are condemned as repugnant to Patience?

1. In defect; murmuring and impatiency in grudging to bear whatsoever cross
the Lord shall lay upon us.

2. In excess; stupidity in not being touched, nor profiting by the hand of
God being laid upon us.

What is Hope?

That virtue whereby we expect all good things from God, Hope.
and patiently attend for all things that we need at his hands; not only when
we have the means, but also when we want all apparent means, (as the
Israelites did in the Desert. Yea, when the means seem contrary, as the three
companions of Daniel, and Daniel himself did, Dan. 3. 17, 18. and Job professed
he would do; I will trust in God, though he kill me, Job 13. 15. Psalm. 22. 4,
5. and 57. 7. and 37. 7.

What is contrary to this?

Despair of Gods mercies. Genesis 4. 13.

What is required in the affections of Love and Hatred?

First, Love of God.
that we love God above all, and all things that are pleasing unto him.

Secondly, that we hate ungodliness, and every thing that God hates.

Upon what is our love of God grounded?

That we know and believe that he is good, yea the chiefest good, and that we
love him above all things, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. which is so excellent a virtue that it
is accounted the end of the Law.

What contrary vices are here condemned?

Coldness of affection toward God, and little love of goodness, of Gods
Servants and Service.

2 Want of hatred against our own and others sins.

3 Hatred of God and godliness, Psalm. 10. 3, 4. Romans 1. 30.

It is possible that any man should be a hater of God?

None indeed will confess this; yet by this mark he may be known, when he is
a despiser of the Worship and Service of God.

And how may one that loves God be discerned?

When a child does love his father, his only desire will be to do such things
as please his father, and to abstain from those things which might displease
him, yea, his chiefest felicity will be, to be always in his favor, and in
his presence; and in his absence he will be always thinking and speaking of
him. Such then as be the Children of God, by grace, as long as they are absent
from their father will talk, and muse, and meditate upon him, in all things
they do, they will desire to be well thought of by him, they will be always
careful to please him, and by their honest callings to glorify him.

What duties then do arise from the love of God?

1 To love his Word and Commandments, John 14. 15. and ver. 21. 23. Psalm. 119.
97.

2 To yield absolute obedience to his whole Will.

3 To bestow all our care, pains and diligence in pleasing him, and so to
consecrate our selves to him, never being weary of his Service.

What vices are repugnant to this?

1 In defect, Profaneness, when a Man is without all care and conscience of
glorifying God.

2 In excess, Superstition, when a man would give more Worship unto God then
he requires.

What other duties appertain to the love of God?

1 To esteem of his favor above all things. Thankfulness.


2 To give him the praise of all his benefits, bestowed upon our selves and
others, and to be thankful unto him for the same, 1 These. 5. 18.

What is contrary to this?

Ingratitude, and unthankefulnesse unto God, for all his benefits, Romans 1. 21.

Upon what is our fear of God grounded?

Because we know and believe that he is most powerful, Fear of God.
and just above all, we stand in such a godly fear, as not to do any thing,
but that which makes for his glory, ( Mat. 10. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 17. and 3. 2.
Heb. 12. 28. Psalm. 103. 13. Isa. 66. 2.) For this is not a servile fear,
(whereby one is afraid to be damned) but an awful fear, whereby we are afraid
to offend our Maker.

What then is required in this fear?

That we do not the good we do only or principally for fear of danger from
men, but for fear of God.

What is the vice contrary to this?

The want of the fear of God, and contempt of his Majesty.

What sin is joined with the want of the fear of God?

Carnal security, whereby a man does flatter himself in his own estate, be
it never so bad.

What virtues arise from the fear of God?

Reverence and Humility.

What is the former?

The Reverence of the Majesty of God, Reverence.
in regard whereof we should carry such an holy shamefastness in all our
actions, that no unseemely behavior proceed from us, that may any ways be
offensive unto him; Heb. 12. 28. Of which if Men be so careful in the presence
of Princes, who are but mortal Men; how much more careful ought we to be
thereof in the presence of the Almighty, and most glorious God?

How was this prefigured in the Ceremonial Law?

That when Men would ease themselves (according to the course of nature) they
should go without the Host, and carry a paddle with them to cover their
filth; because, says the Lord, I am in the midest of you; whereby the
filthiness and impurity of the mind was forbidden more then of the body, and
the equity hereof reaches also unto us, Deuteronomy. 23. 12, 13, 14.

What is contrary to this Reverence of the Majesty of God?

Irreverence and Profaneness of Men to Godward.

What is Humility?

That virtue whereby we account our selves vile and unworthy of the least of
Gods mercies, Humility.
and casting our selves down before his Majesty do acknowledge our own
emptiness of good, and insufficiency in our selves; for so all our behavior
should be seasoned with humility.

What sins are repugnant to this virtue?

1 Counterfeit humility, when a man would seem more lowly then he is.

2. Pride, Pride.
vain glory, and presumption, whereby we boast and glory of our selves, and
our own strength and goodness.

Who are to be accounted proud?

1 They that would be thought to have those good things in them which they
want.

2 They that having a little goodness in them, would have it seem greater then
it is.

3 They that having any goodnsse in them, do think that it comes from
themselves.

4. They that think they can merit from GOD, and deserve his favor.

What is the godly sorrow which is required in this Commandment?

Spiritual grief and indignation against our own and others transgressions,
Sorrow.
and also lamenting for the calamities of Gods people, private and public,
the want of both which is here condemned.

What spiritual joy is there here enjoined?

Ioying in God, Joy.
rejoicing in all our afflictions, with consideration of the joy prepared for
us before the beginning of the world, Luke 1. 47. Romans 5. 3. James 1. 2. the
defect of which spiritual joy is here condemned.

So much of the Affections; what is required of us in respect of our Conscience?

That we live in all good conscience before God, Acts 23. 1. Heb. 13. 8.

What sins are here condemned?

1. Hardness of heart, and benummednesse of conscience.

2. Hellish terros and accusations, proceeding from doing things either without
or against the rule of the Word.

So much of the first branch of this Commandment, what is required in the
second branch thereof?

Unity in Religion, Unity in Religion.
because we are commanded to have but one God and no more.

What things are required of us that we may come to this unity?

Four principally.

1. An upright and single heart, ready to embrace the true Religion and no
other.

2. Constancy and continuance in the truth.

3. A godly courage to stand to the truth, and withstand the enemy.

4. An holy zeal of the glory of God.

What contrary vices are forbidden?

1. Indifferency in Religion, when a man is as ready to embrace one Religion as
another.

2. Inconstancy and wavering in Religion.

3. Obstinate and wilful continuance in any Religion without any good ground.

4. Rash and blind zeal, when a man without knowledge or judgment will
earnestly maintain either falsehood or truth by wicked means.

To what end does God will us to have no other God but himself, seeing no man
can have any other God, though he never so much desire it?

Because howsoever there be but one God, yet many do devise unto themselves
diverse things which they place in Gods stead, and to which they give that
honor which is proper to God, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5. 10. 20.

What sin then does God condemn by forbidding us to have many gods? What it is
to have other Gods.


All inward idolatry, whereby men set up an Idol in their heart in stead of
God, Ezekiel. 14. 3. ascribing thereunto that which is proper to him, and giving
it any part of spiritual adoration.

Show how this is done in the Understanding.

When men do think that other things have that which is proper unto God: as
Papists when they believe; That the Sacrament is their maker; That the Saints
know their hearts; That the Pope can forgive sins, which none can do but God.

How does the Memory fail herein?

In remembering of evil things, especially of those which most corrupt us, and
chiefly then, when we should be most free from the thoughts of them.

What is the fault of the Will?

Readiness unto, and wilfulness in evil, especially the worst.

Show the like in the Affections, first in sinful confidence.

There is here condemned trust in the Creatures more then in God, Sinful*
Confidence.
and all fleshly confidence in our selves, or in our friends, honor, credit,
wit, learning, wisdom, wealth, etc. thinking our selves the better or more
safe simply for them, Prove. 18. 11. Psa. 62. 10. Jer. 17. 5. 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
whence arises pride, Acts 12. 23. and security.

What is our duty concerning these things?

1. To esteem of them only as good means given us of God, whereby to glorify
him the better.

2. To trust in God less when we have them, then when we want them, Job 13. 15.

What is further here condemned?

1. To ascribe the glory of any good thing, either to our selves, or any other
then the Lord.

2. To seek for help of the Devil by Witches or Wise men.

Wherein stands inordinate love?

In loving of evil, Inordinate Love.
or in loving of our selves, or any other thing more then God, of whose favor
we ought more to esteem, then of all the world besides. Here therefore is
condemned all carnal love, of our selves, our friends, our pleasure, profit,
credit, or any worldly thing else, for whose sake we leave those duties undone
which God requires of us, 2 Timothy 3. 4. 1 John 2. 15. 1 Samuel 2. 29. whereas the
true love of God will move us with Moses and Paul, to wish our selves accursed,
rather then that the glory of God should any thing at all be stained by us,
Exodus 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.

What fear is here condemned? Sinful Fear.


All carnal fears, and especially the fearing of any thing more then God,
Isa. 7. 2. 8. 12, 13. 51. 12, 13. Mat. 10. 28.

How may a man know that he is more afraid of God then of any other thing?

If he be more afraid to displease God then any other, and this fear of God be
stronger to move us to good then the fear of men to move us to evil.

What disorder in joy and sorrow is here condemned?

1. Immoderate carnal mirth. Sinful Joy and Sorrow.


2. Abundance of worldly sorrows, shame and discontentments.

What is required in the third and last branch of this Commandment?

True Religion, The third branch of the first Commandment, True Religion.
because we are commanded to have the true God, and none other for our God.

What is contrary to this?

The having of a false God, and a false Religion.

How many things are required of us, that we may come to true Religion?

Three.

1. We must labor earnestly to find out the truth. How we must come to the
true Religion.


2. We must examine by the Word, whether it be the truth which we have found.

3. When by trial we have found the truth we must rest in it.

What is here forbidden?

1. All errors and heresies, especially concerning God and his properties, and
the three Persons in the Trinity; where we must take heed, we imagine no
likeness of God, for as much as we set up an Idol in our hearts, if we liken
him to any thing whatsoever, subject to the sense or imagination of man; for
the better avoydance whereof we must settle our minds upon Christ, in whom
only God is comprehensible.

2. To believe any Doctrine concerning God without any trial.

3. Not to believe that which he has revealed concerning himself in his Word.

We have spoken hitherto of the several branches of the first Commandment.
What are the helps of the obedience thereof?

The only means to settle and uphold us in this spiritual worship of God,
Helps inabling us to obey this Commandment.
is to endeavor to attain and increase in the knowledge of him in Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. to consider what great things he has done for us, Psalm
116. 12. 1 Jo. 3. 1. Yea, in all our ways to take knowledge of his presence,
promises, and providence, Prove. 3. 6.

What are the means whereby we may attain to the knowledge of God? Means of
the knowledge of God.


Principally twelve.

1. Prayer.

2. A simple heart desirous of knowledge.

3. Hearing of the Word.

4. Reading of the Word and holy Writings.

5. Meditation in the Word.

6. Conference.

7. Diligence in learning.

8. Remembrance of that we learn.

9. Practice of that we learn.

10. Delight in learning.

11. Attentive marking of that which is taught.

12. Meditation on the Creatures of God.

What are the hindrances of the obedience of this Commandment? Hindrances.


The neglect of the knowledge of God. Hos. 4. 1. and 8. 12. and not considering
his words and works, Esa. 5. 12. and 26. 10. 11. are the ground of all
impiety, and spiritual Idolatry here forbidden, Esa. 1. 3. 4.

What things are forbidden as means of this ignorance? Means of ignorance here
forbidden.


Five.

First, Curiosity, when a man would know more then God would have him know.

Secondly, Vanity of mind, when the mind is drawn away and occupied upon
vain and unprofitable things.

Thirdly, Pride our own knowledge, when we think we know enough already.

Fourthly, Forgetfulness of God and his Will.

Fifthly, Weariness in learning, and talking of God and his Will.

Hitherto of the first Commandment, concerning the entertaining of of God in
our hearts: What is enjoined in the other three?

The means of his service: for as in the first Commandment we are required to
have, What is enjoined in the 3. following Commandments.
so in the other we are required to serve the Lord our God.

What be the branches of this service?

Either they are such as are to be performed at all times, as occasion shall
require; or such as concern a certain day, wholly set apart for his worship.
The duties of the former kind are prescribed in the second and third, of the
latter in the fourth and last Commandment of the first Table.

How are the duties of the former kind distinguished?

They do either concern the solemn worship of Religion prescribed in the
second Commandment, or the respect we should carry to God in the common course
of our lives laid down in the third.

What do you consider in the second Commandment? The second Commandedement.


Two things. 1. The Injunction. 2. The Reasons brought to strengthen the same.

What are the words of the Injunction?

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any likeness of
things, that are in Heaven above, nor in the Earth beneath, nor in the Waters
under the Earth; thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, Exodus 20.
4, 5.

What is the scope and meaning of this Commandment? The scope and meaning of
the second Commandment.


To bind all men to that solemn form of religious Worship which God himself
in his Word prescribes, that we serve him, not according to our fancies, but
according to his own will, Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

What is generally forbidden herein? What is here forbidden.


Every form of Worship, though of the true God, Deuteronomy. 12. 31. contrary to, or
diverse from the prescript of Gods Word, Mat. 15. 9. called by the Apostle
Will Worship, Col. 2. 23. together with all corruption in the true Worship of
God, 2 King. 16. 10. and all lust and inclination of heart unto superstitious
Pomps, and Rites in the service of God.

What are the parts of that Will Worship?

Either the worship of any besides God, or of God himself, any other ways
then he has commanded; for both vices are here forbidden, either to worship
the true God falsely, or to worship those things that are not God at all.

Who do chiefly off end in this kind?

The Papists, which give religious worship unto Creatures, and serve God, not
according to his will prescribed in the Word, but according to the Popes will,
and the Traditions of men.

Why does the Lord forbid all these Corruptions, under one instance of Images?

Because therein he foresaw there would be greatest abuse.

What does he expressly forbid concerning them?

1. That we make no Image to worship it.

2. That we worship it not when it is made.

What is meant by making of Images? What is meant by making Images.


All new devices, and inventions of men in the service of God, whereby we are
forbidden to make any new Word, new Sacraments, new Censures, new Ministries,
new Prayers, new Fastings, or new Vows, to serve him withal: also all
representations of any grace of God, otherwise then God has appointed, or may
be allowed by his Word; as Christ condemned the Pharisees washing.

What by worshipping of them?

All use in Gods Service of any new devised Inventions, or practicing of them,
and all abuse of things commanded.

What is generally required in this Commandment?

That we worship and serve God in that holy manner which he in his Word
requires.

How is that to be done?

First, we must use all those holy exercises of Religion, public and private,
which he commands.

Secondly, we must perform all the parts of Gods Worship prescribed with
Reverence and Diligence, using them so carefully as may be to Gods glory, and
our good. Eccles. 4. 17. and 5. 1.

What observe you by comparing the second Commandment with the first?

That the inward and outward worship of God ought to go together: For as in
the first Commandment, the Lord requires that we should have no other Gods
before him: that is, in the secret of our heart, whereof he alone takes
notice: So in the second; by the words Make, Bow, Worship, he forbids any
outward service of Religion to any other.

Wherefore must God be worshipped both by our bodies and our souls?

Because he is the Lord and Maker of them both. 1. Cor. 6. 20.

What gather you from hence?

That such as dare to present their bodies to a Mass, or to any other gross
Idolatry, and say that they keep their hearts to God, are here convicted of
falsehood and hypocrisy.

So much of the second Commandment in general: what are the particular
branches of it?

There is here first required, The special branches of the second Commandment.
that all solemn religious Worship should be given to the true God: and
secondly, that it be given to him alone, and not communicated to anything which
is not God. So that the sum of the first part is; Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Matthew. 4. 10.

How are we to worship the Lord our God?

By those means only which himself approves in his Word: according to the
saying of Moses: Do that which I command thee, and do no more, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
and 12. 32.

What is here required?

First, that we give unto God that Worship which he himself has prescribed
in his Word.

Secondly, that we give him that alone without addition or alteration.

What is forbidden?

First, the neglect of Gods Worship or any of his Ordinances, when we contemn,
or despise, or leave undone that service, which he has commanded us to
perform unto him.

Secondly, the adding any thing unto, or taking any thing from the pure
Worship, when we serve him by any other means, then that which he himself
has commanded.

What are we to consider in the pure worship of God, which he has prescribed
in his Word?

1. The parts of it. 2. The right manner of using of it.

What be the parts of it?

They are partly such as we give unto God, and partly such as God gives unto
us.

What is required of us touching these kinds?

1. That we use these things that God has given us, to that end that God has
given them for.

2. That neither in giving to God, nor taking from him, we devise any thing of
our own to serve him withal.

What are the things God gives us to serve him by?

His Creatures in the first place, and his Word, Sacraments, Ministry,
Discipline and Censures of the Church, which we must use according as they are
instituted of God.

What duties are here required?

Our presence at the exercise of Religion, the preaching, hearing, and reading
of the Word of God, together with meditation, conference, and all other means
of increasing our knowledge therein, the administering and receiving of the
Sacraments, etc. Acts 2. 42.

How do you worship God in these?

In the Creatures, by beholding his glory in them; in his Word, by diligent
hearing of it, and careful believing and practicing of it; in his Sacraments,
by receiving them duly; in the Ministry, and Censures, by submitting our
selves to them.

What are the things that we give unto God?

They are either more or less ordinary.

What are the more ordinary?

1. To pray to God, Of Prayer.
both publicly and privately.

2. To praise God, both alone and with others.

Are these duties required of all Christians?

Yea, every true Christian must offer this Sacrifice to the Lord every day: For
in all ages, and at all times, it has been the practice of Gods Saints, to
offer unto God the Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise; as we may see by the
practice of Daniel, and Peter, who went up at noone to pray, Acts 10. 9. and
Isaac, who went out at Eventide to pray in the Fields, Genesis 24. 63.

What are the parts of Prayer?

Three.

1. Confession, which is the Sacrifice of a broken Heart and wounded Soul.

2. Petition for such things as we lack.

3. Thanksgiving for such things as we have received.

What are the things less ordinary?

1. Fasts, Of Fasts.
public or private, Joel 2. 12, 15.

2. Solemn Thanksgiving for special Blessings, Psalm. 50. 14. whereunto
Feasting also is joined, when special occasion of joy is given us.

3. Making and performing holy Vows unto God.

What is Fasting?

And abstinence for a time from all the commodities and pleasures of this life,
so far as comeliness and necessity will suffer, to make us more apt to
Prayer, and more able to serve God.

What is a Vow? Of Vows.


A solemn promise made unto God of some things that are in our power to
perform, which we do to declare out thankfulness, to strengthen our faith,
and to further us in doing of good duties, wherein we are backward: our
abstaining from some evil, whereunto we find our selves especially inclined.

So much of the parts of Gods solemn Worship: What is required to the right
manner of using of the same?

Our careful, The manner of Gods worship.
sincere, and diligent behavior in all his Service; that every thing may be
done as he has appointed, and no otherwise.

What are the things required hereunto?

They are partly inward, partly outward; the former whereof concern the
Substance; the latter the Circumstance of Gods worship.

What are the inward?

As all the powers of the soul are charged to join together (by the first and
great Commandment) in the entertaining and loving; so by this, in performing
all acts of solemn worship to the true God; therefore herein there must be a
concurrence as well of the understanding, that we have knowledge of the
particular service which we do, Romans 14. 5. 1 Cor. 14. 14, 15. as of the
will and affection, that we may worship God in Spirit and in Truth. Joh. 4. 22.

What things are requisite to the performance of this?

Three.

1. A diligent Preparation and advisednesse before we come to any holy exercise.

2. A right disposition of the mind in the action of it self.

3. A comfortable departure, upon the sensible feeling of the fruit thereof.

What is required in the Preparation before the Action? Of Preparation.


That we bethink our selves beforehand, about what things we come, and
dispatch our selves of all the things that hinder us in the service of God:
which since we must do in things otherwise lawful, much more in things
unlawful.

What is further to be observed herein?

That every Preparation be answerable to the exercise whereunto we are called:
as in the parts of Prayer, for example.

1. In Confession we must have a true feeling of our former sins.

2. In Petition, we must have the like sense of our wants, and bethink our
selves what need we have of the things we ask, and strive against our
staggering, and doubting of Gods promises.

3. In Thanksgiving we must call to mind at least Gods benefits bestowed upon
us, and consider the greatness of them. And so in all other Services of God.

What Disposition of the mind is required in the Action?

1. A reverent, Of disposition in the action.
diligent, and earnest attentiveness to the thing, withal the powers of our
souls, thereby to fasten our minds, and so to hold them during the exercise,
that no idle or vain thoughts withdraw us from the same.

2. Zeal in the Action, with such Affections as are answerable to the matter
in hand: as in Prayer we must have a sure confidence in God, that we shall
obtain the things we ask agreeable to his will: In thanksgiving we must have
a sweet feeling of the benefits that God has given us: in the Word and
Sacraments, we must come with affection to them.

What is required of us after the Action? What required after the Action.


That we feel the fruit of it; that is, some increase, either of knowledge, of
true fear, or comfort for the strengthening of us in the duties we perform: So
also every one must examine themselves herein, and all those that belong unto
them; else they are like unto them, that having eaten a good meal, by warm
water do give it up again.

What be the outward things that do accompany Gods Worship?

1. Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, Ecclesiastical Ceremonies.
making for Order and Decency, 1 Cor. 14. 40. which are left to the appointment
of the Church, being of that nature, that they are varied by Times, Places,
Persons, and other Circumstances.

2. All comely and reverend gestures of the body; as kneeling, lifting up the
hands and eyes to Heaven, silence in the service of God, and such like: For the
gestures of religious Adorations being here forbidden to be given unto Images,
are therein commanded to be given unto the God of Heaven.

Is there any use of our bodily behavior, Of bodily Gestures.
since he is a Spirit, and looks to the Heart?

Yes verily: For,

1. The whole Man; and consequently, the Body it self owes duty unto God.

2. It is a Glass, wherein the affections of the Mind are beheld.

3. The Mind is the better holden in the thing affected, and the better helped,
and furthered in the inward Worship, when both Body and Mind are joined
together; notwithstanding the Mind must always proceed in Affection, else it
is shameful hypocrisy.

What gestures are most convenient for the Body?

Diverse, according to the diverse Exercises of Religion; as at the reading of
the Word, standing; at prayer, kneeling, and therein to witness our humility,
by casting down our eyes; our confidence, by lifting them up; or with the
Publicane, to knock our breasts, except our infirmities, or the like Lets
hinder us herein.

So much of the right use of Gods Ordinances. Wherein stands the abuse of
them?

1. In rash, Of the abuse of Gods Ordinances.
negligent, and careless dealing in any particular point of the worship of God.

2. In using any thing that God has commanded for his worship otherwise then
he himself has appointed, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. For the brazen Serpent abused, was
worthily broken in pieces, 2 Kings 18. 4. and the Israelites, for carting the
Arc, were worthily punished, 2 Samuel 6. 3, 7, 8.

What special abuses of the Word are here condemned?

To hang pieces of Saint John's Gospel about Men's necks, or to use any other
Gospel to heal the diseases, as for any man to charge a Devil to go out of
one, as the Apostles did.

What may be lawfully done in this cause?

We must and may pray only unto God, that he would command the Devil to
depart: for he is the Master that authorized him to go thither.

What special abuses of the Sacraments are condemned?

The receiving of them unworthily, making them to be Sacrifices. 1 Cor 11. 27.
29. as is done in Popery.

What of the Ministry?

The turning of that which is given to edify in Christ to other ends then
those for which it was ordained, and when Ministers exercise Tyrannical
Lordship over their flock, or their fellow servants, as the Bishops of the
Church of Rome use to do. Luke 22. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Or when in the
execution of their function, they seek themselves, and not the edification of
Gods people.

What of the Discipline and Censures?

When they are used in another manner, and for other causes then God has
ordained. Esa. 66. 5.

What of Prayer?

To ask evil things, or to pray for such things as God has made no promise
of; or for such persons as he has made no promise unto; as when men pray for
souls departed; or for those that sin to death. 1 Ioh. 5. 14, 15, 16. To
pray in a strange tongue which we do not understand; to pray on Beads, and use
much babbling; as also to aim more in our requests at the relieving of our
necessity, then at the advancement of Gods glory.

What of thanksgiving?

To thank God for things unlawfully gotten, or come unto us.

What of Fasting?

To make it a matter of merit, or to use superstitious choice of meats, as is
done in Popery.

What of Vows?

To undertake rash Vows, to break, or else to delay and defer the paying of
our lawful Vows; as also to perform Vows that are unlawful, Psalm. 66. 13.
and 76. 11. Eccles. 5. 1. 5. Genesis 35. 1.

What defects are condemned that concern the inward things required in the
performance of all these parts of Gods worship?

1. Want of understanding, Defects respecting the inward worship.
when we do good duties ignorantly, or think that we can please God by
meaning well, when that which we do is evil.

2. Want of Zeal and Affection in performing God service.

3. Hypocrisy, when men make a greater show of the service of God outwardly,
then they have a desire to serve him inwardly.

4. Hearing, Reading, Meditating, Conferring, singing of Psalms, and receiving
the Sacraments without Preparation, Attention, Reverence, Delight, and Profit.

5. Praying without Faith, Feeling, Reverence, Fervency, not waiting for answer.

What defects concern the outward worship?

1. All unreverent, Defects in outward Worship.
and unbeseeming Gestures.

2. All Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and Rites of Religion, which are pugnant to
Gods Word, or not warrantable by the general grounds thereof; such as are not
for Order, and Comeliness, and Edification.

So much of the parts of Gods Worship prescribed, together with the right use
and abuse thereof. What say you of such forms of Worship as are not prescribed
by God in his Word?

We are commanded to serve God, not according to the Traditions of men, but
according to his Will revealed in the Scripture, Col. 2. 18. Mat. 15. 9.

What follows hereupon?

That no Power must be admitted in the Church, to prescribe other forms of
Worship not appointed by God himself in his Word.

What is then to be observed herein?

We must observe the Apostles rule and practice, 1 Cor. 11. 28. where he says,
That which I have received, I have delivered unto you: For if he might add
nothing to Gods Ordinances, much less may we.

What is here forbidden?

In general, all VVill-worship, whereby we make any thing a part of Gods
service, which he has not commanded: For how great a show soever it have; yet
in that it leans to man's wisdom, it is unlawful, Col. 2. 23. In particular,
to ordain any other Word, or Sacraments, then those which God has appointed;
to devise any other Ministry, then that which God has ordained; to place any
Religion in Meat, Drink, Apparel, Time, Place, or any other indifferent
things.

What Caution must we keep in the use of things indifferent?

1. We are to maintain that Christian Liberty which Christ has purchased for
us.

2. We must yet be careful not to abuse the same; to the hardening,
insnaring, perverting, or just grieving of any.

Remains there any thing else to be spoken of the first maine branch of this
Commandment?

Yes, the helps that may further us in performing this pure worship of God.

What be they?

1. That all men labor for knowledge of the express Will of God, Helps in
performing Gods pure Worship.
touching all parts of his Worship, Mich. 6. 6, 7, 8. and that they increase
therein every day more and more, by reading the Scriptures; using also for that
end, meditation, conference, good Books, and good company.

2. That they marry, and make leagues of Friendship only with such as profess
the true God; and therefore no Professor of the true worship of God may join
himself in Marriage with one of another Religion, or an apparent, profane,
and irreligious person; but with such only as are godly, at least in show.

3. That we give no toleration to superstition, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. but show our
hatred and reluctation of all false Worship, so far as we may within our
Calling.

4. That we join together with order and decency in the performance of Gods
Worship, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

5. That such whom it concerns, take care that faithful and able Ministers
be ordained in every Congregation, Tit. 1. 5. and that sufficient maintenance
for encouragement be allotted them, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.

6. That places for public Assemblies be erected and preserved, Luke 7. 5, 6.

7. That Schools and Universities be founded and maintained, 2 King 6. 1.

8. That Books of necessary use and edification, especially, the holy Book of
God, be set forth and divulged, Rev. 1. 3.

9. That as occasion requires, Synods and Councels be called and assembled,
Acts 15. 6.

10. That such whose Calling and ability reaches no further, do yet afford
the help of their prayers unto all these, Mat. 9. 38.

What is required in the second maine branch of this Commandment?

That all religious Worship and Reverence be given unto God alone, The 2d main
branch of the second Commandment.
and not imparted to those things which are not Gods at all.

What sins are here condemned?

Magic and Idolatry, both which are condemned by the name of spiritual
Adultery, Lev. 20. 5, 6.

Who are guilty of the first of these sins?

1. The practisers of all diabolical Arts, Lev. 20. 27. Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11.

2. Such as seek after them, Lev. 20. 6. Isa. 8. 19, 20. 1 Samuel 28. 7. 1 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14. by going to Witches, or consulting with Star-gazers, or the
like; to whom Moses opposes a Prophet, as the only lawful Minister of God:
and warrantable means to know his will, by signifying thereby, that to seek
secret things of strange Ministries is abominable.

Who are guilty of the latter of these sins?

1. Such as worship those things that are not God.

2. Such as countenance them, or do any thing that may tend to the furtherance
of Idolatry.

What Worship is here forbidden to be given unto those that are not God?

All Religious service; as,

1. Praying, Isa. 44. 17.

2. Thanksgiving, Judge. 16. 23, 24. Dan. 5. 4.

3. Offering of Sacrifice, 2 King. 17. 35.

4. Burning of Incense, Jer. 18. 15. and 44. 17.

5. Vowing.

6. Fasting.

7. Building of Temples, Altars, or other Monuments unto them, Hos. 8. 14. and
11. 12.

8. Erecting of Ministers, 1 King. 12. 31, 32. or doing any Ministerial Work
for their Honor, Amos 5. 26. with Numbers 4. 24, 25.

9. Preaching for them, Jer. 2. 8.

10. Asking counsel of them, Hos. 4. 12.

11. Outward religious Adoration of them, Acts 10. 25, 26. Rev. 22. 8, 9.

To whom must this Worship be denied?

To every thing that is not God, as the Sun and Moon, Angels, Saints,
Relics, Images, and such trash, as Rome allows, Deuteronomy. 4. 17. 19. Col. 2.
18, Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 8, 9. Acts 10. 25, 26.

What is here in this Commandment expressly forbidden concerning Images?

First, the making of them.

Secondly, What forbidden concerning Images.
the bowing unto them, or worshipping them.

Why is the first of these so largely set forth?

To meet with the corruption of men that by nature are exceeding prone unto
Idolatry.

What men are forbidden to make Images?

All men which have not some special warrant from God to make them.

But though I do not make Images my self, may I worship them that another man
makes?

No: For that is likewise forbidden, Exodus 32. 1.

Is it not lawful to put them in Churches, or in public places, if they be
not worshipped?

No.

Why then did Moses make the Cherubims, and the brazen Serpent?

For so doing he had a special Commandment from God, who may dispense with
his own Laws when he will.

To what end did God command them to be made?

The one, to signify the crucifying of Christ, John 3. 14. The other, to
signify the Angels readiness to help Gods children in all distresses.

Is all manner of making of Images forbidden?

No: but only in matters of Religion, and Gods Service: for in civil matters
they have a lawful and commendable use, Matthew 22. 20. But to make them for
religious ends and uses, is altogether unlawful, Amos 5. 26. with Acts 7. 43.

What gather you of this?

That the Popish Doctrine of Images; that they are Laymens books, is directly
contrary to the word of God, and therefore as false and erroneous, to be
detested of all Gods Children, Hab. 2. 18. Ierem. 10. 14. Esa. 44. 10.

What kind of Images are we forbidden to make?

All kinds, whether hewn or engraven, cut or carved, (which in the
Commandment is expressed, Molten, Imbroydered, Painted, Printed, or Imagined,
Hosea 13. 2. Ezekiel 8. 10. Acts 17. 25. 29.

Of what things are we forbidden to make Images?

Of all things which are in the heavens above; or in the earth beneath, or in
the waters beneath the earth.

What is meant by things which are in the heavens?

GOD, CHRIST, the Angels, and the Saints which are in the Highest; the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, which are in the middle, and the Fowls, which are in the
lowest heaven, Deuteronomy. 4. 27. 19.

Is it not lawful to make the Image of God?

To represent him by any shape is most of all forbidden and condemned: That it
is unlawful to make the Image of God.
for it is a great sin, to conceive or imagine in our heart that he is like
any thing, how excellent soever we think it, Acts 17. 29. but it is much worse
to set him out to the view of others, considering that the mind can conceive a
further beauty then the hand of the Artificer can express: and therefore the
children of Israel did sin grievously, and were worthily condemned for making
God like a Calfe, Exodus 32. 4, 9, 10, 27, 28.

How may it further appear, that it is unlawful to make the Image of God?

First, because God being Infinite and Invisible, cannot without a lie be
resembled by any Finite or visible thing, Acts 17. 20.

Secondly, God by such Images is, as it were, mocked, Romans 1. 23.

Thirdly, when the Law was delivered by God himself unto the Israelites, he
appeared in no shape unto them, lest they should make a likeness of him, and
fall to Idolatry. And therefore Deuteronomy. 4. 10. 12. he forewarned them, that as
they saw no Image of him, when he gave the Law, but only heard a voice, they
should learn that the knowledge of God comes by hearing, and not by seeing,
Esa. 40. 17, 18. where the matter is laid down at large.

But what moved the Papists to paint God like an old man?

The false expounding of that place in Daniel, where God is described to be
that Ancient of days, Dan. 7. 13. whereby is meant his Eternity, that he was
before all times, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. But whatsoever property in God it be, that
they should set it forth by an Image, it is execrable so to do.

May we then paint Christ for remembrance of his death? That it is unlawful to
make the Image of Christ.


No verily. For,

1. It is a part of the worship here forbidden, because his body is a creature
in Heaven, therefore not to be represented by an Image in the service of God.

2. An Image can only represent the manhood of Christ, and not his Godhead,
which is the chiefest part in him. Both which Natures being in him unseparable,
it were dangerous by painting the one apart from the other, to give occasion of
Arianisme, Apollinarisme, or other Herisies.

3. Since that in all the Scriptures, which speak so much of him, there is no
show of any portrayture or lineament of his body: it is plain that the wisdom
of God would not have him painted.

4. Since by Preaching of the Gospel, and Administration of the Sacraments,
Christ is as lively painted, as if he were crucified again amongst us, Gal.
3. 1. it were to no purpose to paint him to that end.

What lastly may be added to these former Reasons?

That although the painting of Christ were both lawful to do, and profitable
for remembrance, yet because it has been so much abused, and no where in the
Scripture commanded, it is not now to be used: As Ezechias worthily brake the
Brazen Serpen, being abused, although Moses had set it up at the Commandment
of the Lord, and might have served for a singular Monument of Gods mercies,
after the proper use thereof, had not the superstitious opinion thereof been.

What is meant in this Commandment, by things in the Earth?

The likeness of man, or woman, or or beasts, or creeping things, Ezekiel. 23.
14. Deuteronomy. 4. 16, 17, 18. Isa. 44. 13. Romans 1. 23.

What by things in the Waters under the Earth?

The resemblance of any Fish, or the like, Deuteronomy. 4. 18.

So much for the making of Images. What is meant by worshipping Images.
What is meant by the bowing unto them, and worshipping them?

That we must not give the least token of Reverence; either in Body, or in
Soul, unto any religious Images, Psalm. 97. 7. Hab. 2. 18. Isa. 44. 15. Exodus
32. 4. For that is a further degree of Idolatry; as to shrine, elothe, and
cover them with precious things; to light Candles before them; to kneel and
creep to them, or to use any gestures of religious Adoration unto them, 1 King.
19. 18. wherein, although the gross Idolatry of Popery be taken away from
amongst us; yet the corruption cleaves still to the hearts of many, as may be
seen in them that make courtesy to the Chancell where the High Altarstood, and
gave the Right hand unto standing Crosses and Crucifixes, etc.

But though we do not reverence the Images themselves, may we not worship God
in or by the Images?

No: For the Israelites are condemned, not for the worshipping the golden Calfe
as a God, but for worshipping God in the Calfe.

How does that appear?

In that they said, Let us make a Feast to morrow to Jehovah, Exodus 32. 5. And
that Moses otherwise might seem, not to have done well, in making them to
drink that against their conscience, which they judged to be God, ver. 20.

Wherein did they sin so grievously?

In tying the presence of God to the work of their own hands, and coupling
him with their Idols, which he cannot endure: For God says by his Prophet
Hosea, You shall no more call me Baal, Hos. 2. 16. So impossible it is truly to
serve God by an Idol, as the Papists do.

What kind of Images are here forbidden to be worshipped?

All kinds; whither, such as are made with man's hands, of which Esaias speaks,
saying; One piece of wood is cast into the fire, and another of the same Tree
is made an Idol, Isa. 44. 15, 17. or such as in themselves are the good
Creatures of God, as those which Hosea speaks of, saying; They worship their
Gold and Silver, Hos. 8. 4. Yea of whatsoever things it may be said, That they
have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, noses and smell not, feet and go
not, Psalm. 115. unto them is this Worship forbidden to be performed.

What gather you of this?

That the Popish Idolatry is here flatly condemned: For although they worship
not Jupiter, Mars, and such like Heathen Idols, but the holy Saints (as they
say) in and by their Images; yet that worship of theirs is alike with the
other, because these places of Scripture do agree as well to the one as to the
other; and therefore it is impious and abominable Idolatry.

So much for the practicing of Idolatry What is forbidden in the countenancing
of it?

All the means and occasions of and to Idolatry, Of countenancing idolatry.
and giving the least allowance, or liking that can be thereunto. As,

1. Urging by Authority, or tolleration of Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16.

2. Approbation thereof by speech; praising and extolling these inventions of
men by silence, or any gesture.

3. Presence at Idolatrous worship; as going to Mass, and communicating with
false Service. 1 Cor. 10. 18. 20, 21. and 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17.

4. Contributing toward the maintenance thereof. Number. 7. 3. 5. Nehem. 32. 39.

5. Making a gain thereby; as those Merchants do which sell Beads, and
Crosses; and those Painters, which take money for religious Images, Acts 19.
24, 25.

6. Retaining and preserving any superstitious Relics or Monuments of
Idolatry, as Images, 2 Kings 18. 4. Books, Acts 19. 19. Names, Psalm 16. 4.
and such like.

7. Keeping company with teachers of Idolatry, 2 Epistle of John ver. 10, 11.

8. Making leagues of familiarity, society, and friendship with Idolators, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.

9. Joining in marriage, and affinity with them, 2 Cor. 6. 14. Neh. 13. 23. 26,
27. Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4.

What Reasons does God use to strengthen this Commandment withal?

They are taken partly from his Titles, Reasons to back this commandment,
taken from his titles.
and partly from his Works.

What have we to learn from hence?

That if we consider aright of the Titles and Works of God, it will be a
notable means to keep us from sin.

How is the reason drawn from Gods Titles laid down?

In these words; For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.

Which is the first Title that is mentioned here?

Jehovah, which notes the Essence of God, and the perfection thereof.

What have we to learn from thence?

That Idolaters are so far from worshipping the true God; that they deny his
Being and Perfection.

What is the second Title?

Thy God; whereby the Covenant of grace is signified, which on our part is by
no sin so directly violated as by Idolatry; called therefore in Scripture,
Spiritual Adultery, Ier. 3. 8.

What does this teach us?

That Idolaters are most miserable in forsaking the true God, who is all
happiness to his people.

What is the third Title?

El; That is, a mighty and strong God; and therefore perfectly able to save and
destroy.

What does this teach us?

That there is no power so great which can deliver Idolaters, or any sinners
from the wrath of God.

What is the fourth Title?

Jealous: Jealous God.
whereby the nature of God is signified, loving chastity in his Spouse, with a
most fervent love; and abhorring spiritual whoredom, with most extreme
hatred.

What are we to learn from hence?

That the Lord can no more abide Idolatry, then a married man can brook it,
that his Wife should commit adultery: For his wrath is compared to the rage of
a jealous Husband, upon unchaste behavior of his Wife, Prove. 6. 34, 35.

Declare this Comparison more at large.

The jealous man finding the Adulterer with his Wife, spares neither the one
nor the other: So if any that by profession has been espoused to Christ, and
joined unto God in him, and has promised in Baptism to serve him alone; yet
notwithstanding shall forsake him, and worship others: How good soever they be
(whether Saints or Angels) they shall not escape Gods wrath: For if corporal
Adultery be so severely punished, much more shall spiritual.

What do the reasons drawn from the Works of God contain?

A just recompense to the breakers of this Law, Reasons drawn from the works of
God.
and a gracious reward to them that keep it; God showing himself in this case
to be jealous,

1. By punishing sin in many generations.

2. By extending his mercy in a far more abundant manner to them that keep his
Law.

So the former reason contains a threatening to restrain from disobedience;
the latter, a promise to allure to obedience.

How is the former of these reasons laid down?

In these words: The 1. Reason.
Visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me.

What is the sum of this reason?

That he will visit such as (howsoever pretending love) do thus declare their
hatred of him, and punish them both in themselves, and their Children, to many
generations.

What does God mean, when he says, That he will visit the sins of the Fathers
upon the Children?

Two things. 1. That he will enquire and search, whether he can find any of the
Parents sins; and especially, their Idolatry in their Children, continuing in
their Fathers sins; and that if he do, he will remember the same in the
punishment of them.

What are we to learn from hence?

1. That howsoever God for a time does seem not to regard our sins; yet he
does both see them, and in his due time will punish them, if we do not repent.

2. That neither the example of our Parents, nor any other that do amiss, can
be sufficient warrant to us to commit any sin.

3. That all Parents are careful to take heed how they commit any sin; because
in so doing, they bring Gods Judgments, not only upon themselves, but also
upon their Children.

4. That Children are to sorrow for being borne of Idolatrous Forefathers.

But how does that agree with the Righteousness of God, to punish the Children
for the sins of their Fathers?

Very well: for if Princes (whose judgments are shallow in comparison of Gods,
the depths whereof are past finding out) do with equity dis-inherit and put to
shame the posterity of Traitors; the Lord may much more justly do the like
with the wicked child which follows his Fathers steps, and is a Traitor
himself, having both his Fathers sin and his own upon his head: for God
here only threatens to punish those children which continue in their Fathers
sins; and therefore as they have part in their fathers sins, so it is
reason they should have part in their Parents punishments.

What does God mean by the third and fourth generation?

He means that not only the next children, but the children of diverse and
many generations shall smart for their fathers sins: As in Amos; for three
transgressions and for four: that is, for many.

Why then does he specially name three or four Generations?

Because Parents live so long oft-times, that they see their Posterity for
four Generations following punished for their sins.

Why does God say, Of them that hate me?

To show, that not all the sons of the wicked, but only such as continue in
their Fathers wickedness shall be punished for their sins* Ezekiel. 18. 4. 10.
13, 14. 17.

But is there any that hate God?

Yes verily, so many as worship him otherwise then himself has commanded, do
hate him: for although every Idolater will say, that he loves God; yet here
God witnesses of him, that he is a liar, and that he hates God, in that he
hates the worship that he commands; in the love whereof, God will have the
experience of his love, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Mic. 2. 8. John 15. 18. Romans 1. 29, 30.
and 5. 10. and 8. 7. Col. 1. 21.

In what words is the second reason laid down, The second Reason.
which is drawn from the clemency of God?

Wherere it is said, that he shows mercy unto thousands of them that love
him, and keep his Commandments.

What is the sum of this reason?

That God will bless the obedient unto many generations; both in themselves,
their children, and posterity, and in whatsoever belongs unto them: thus
extending his mercy unto thousands of such as show their love of him by
obedience to this his Law.

Why does the Lord say, that he will show mercy to them that love him, and keep
his Commandments?

To teach us that the best deeds of the best men, cannot merit or deserve any
thing at Gods hands, but had need to be received of him in mercy.

Wherefore does he say, that he will have mercy to thousands, seeing he said,
that he would visit only the third and fourth Generation of them that hate him?

Because he is more willing and ready to exercise his mercy then his anger.

But what will God be merciful to all the Children of the godly?

No: But only such as love him, and keep his Commandments.

Is this Blessing proper to the Godly?

Not altogether neither: For God rewards the posterity of the wicked, with
outward benefits oftentimes, according to their outward service, as appears
by the succession of Iehu.

So much of the second Commandment.

What is the third?

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, The third
Commandment.
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, Exodus
20. 7.

What is contained in these words?

1. The Commandment.

2. The Reason.

What is the sum of the Commandment? The sum of the third Commandment.


That we impeach not, but by all means advance the glorious Name of God in all
things, whereby he makes himself known to men, Psalm. 29. 2. and carefully
endeavor in our whole life to bring some honor to God, Mat. 5. 16.

What do you observe herein?

The high honor that God shows unto us, who being able without us, to
maintain his own Name and glory; either by himself, or by his Angels, has
notwithstanding committed the maintenance thereof unto us, which should teach
us to be very chairy of it; and careful to discharge our duty faithfully, in
walking worthy of this honor and defense of his Name, which he vouchsafes us.

What is the meaning of those words: Thou shall not take?

Thou shall not take up upon thy lips or mouth, as this phrase is opened, in
Psalm. 16. 4. and 50. 16. that is, not speak, use, or mention: for the tongue
is here specially bound to the good abearing.

Why was it needful to have a special Commandment for the direction of the
tongue in Gods service?

Because it is an untamed evil, and unbridled, Iam. 3. 8. and therefore a
whole Commandment cannot be employed amiss, for the direction of it in the
use of the Name of God. And seeing in the second Table there is a Commandment,
tending almost wholly, to restrain the abuses of our tongues toward our
neighbors, there is much more need of a Precept, both for direction and
restraint of it, in the matters concerning God, and his most glorious Name.

What are we to understand by the Name of God? What is meant by the Name of God.


The speech is taken from the manner of men, who are known by their Names, to
signify God himself, both in his Essence and Majesty, Isa. 26. 8. Exodus 3.
13, 14. and 34. 5, 6, 7. And in all things whereby he has made himself known
unto us, as he is holy.

1. Titles and proper names; Exodus 3. 14. 6. 3.
as Jehovah, Elohim, Jesus.

2. Properties and Attributes; Psalm. 68. 4.
as Love, Wisdom, Power, Justice, Exodus 33. 18, 19. and 34. 5, 6, 7. and 14.

3. Works and Actions, Psalm. 8. 1, 9. and 14. 5, 10.

4. Word; both Law and Gospel, Psalm 138. 2. Deuteronomy. 18. 19. 22. 32. 3. Acts 9.
15. Whence the Law of Christ, Esa. 42. 4. is expounded to be his name, Matthew.
12. 21.

5. Sacraments, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. Acts 2. 38.

6. Censures, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. Matthew. 18. 20

7. Prayer. Genesis 4. 26. What is meant by the word in vain.


8. The whole worship of God, with all the Ordinances pertaining thereto, and
whatsoever he honored, reverenced, and glorified, Deuteronomy. 5, Mal. 1. 11, 12.
Mich. 4. 5. Acts 21. 13.

What is meant by this word in vain?

All abuse of them, and all rash, negligent and careless dealing therein;
where mentioning the smaller fault, What is forbidden in the third Commandment.
he declares the hainousnes of the greater: For if the taking of his name in
vain only be a sin; how heinous a sin is it when it is blasphemed or used
for confirmation of a lie?

What is then forbidden in the Commandment?

Every wrong offered to the glory of God, and doing of ought that may any way
reproach the Lord, to cause him to be less esteemed, Mal. 1. 6. 12. All
unreverent and unholy use of his name, and profaning of his Titles,
Properties, Actions, and Ordinances, either by mouth or by action, Lev. 21. 32.

What are the parts of the Prohibition? Two.

1. The mentioning or using of Gods name, in word, or in deed, when it should
not be used; and when there is no just cause so to do.

2. The using of it amiss, and abusing it when duty binds us to use it with
fear and holiness. What is required in the third Commandment.


What is required in this command?

1. That we sanctify Gods Name, as it is holy and reverend, Matthew. 6. 9. Psalm.
111. 9. and labor by all we can to lift it up, that others may be moved by us
more to love, serve, and honor him.

2. That we use the things aforesaid with all reverence and circumspection, to
such uses as they are appointed unto by God: In a word, that we have a careful
and a heedy watch to all things that may advance Gods glory, and use all
sincere and diligent behavior therein.

What is that wherein this our carfulness is required?

1. A diligent preparation and advisednesse before we meddle with any of these
holy things, that we bethink our selves before hand what we are to do; and
consider both of the cause that should move us to speak of them, and of the
reverent manner of using them.

2. A reverent disposition in the action it self, that we use earnest
attentiveness therein, and seriously think how powerful God is to punish the
taking of his name amiss: as also how able and ready to bless them who shall
reverently and holily behave themselves in the right use thereof; The
particular duties required in the third Commandment.
for which cause we are to remember, that the Name of God is fearful, as it
is written, Psalm. 99. 3. Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

Declare now what particular duties are contained in this Commandment?

1. The honoring of God and his Religion by our holy conversation, Mat. 5. 16.
Tit. 2. 10. The contrary whereof is profession joined with hypocrisy, Tit. 1.
16. Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. profaneness and an evil life, whereby the Name of God,
and profession of Religion is dishonored, Romans 2. 24.

2. Confession of Christ unto suffering, yea, martyrdom if cause be, Rev. 2.
13. the contrary whereof, is, shrinking in case of peril, and denying God the
honor of our suffering for him, Mat. 10. 33.

3. Honorable and reverent mention of God and his Titles, Properties,
Attributes, Works, Word and Ordinances, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. and 71. 15. Prove. 31.
26.

What vices are repugnant to this?

An unreverent mention, The vices repugnant.
or an unadvised, sudden, and causeless speaking of any of these, and all
abusing of the Names and Titles of God.

How is that done?

1. By saying in our common talk; O Lord, O God, O Jesus, etc. or in wondering
wise; good God, good Lord, etc. in matters of light and no moment; and for such
foolish admirations, and taking Gods Name lightly upon every occasion is here
condemned.

2. By idle wishes.

3. By imprecations and cursings, Genesis 16. 5. 2 Samuel 16. 8, 9.

4. By Blaspheming.

5. By the abuse of Oaths, Jam. 5. 12.

Is there any true use of Oaths?

Yes, The right use of Oaths.
in matters of importance, that cannot be decided but by an Oath, it is good
and lawful to swear by the Name of God, and a duty specially commanded, Deuteronomy.
6. 13. and 10. 20. so that it be done truly, advisedly, and rightly; for so is
the Commandment, Jer. 4 2. Thou shall swear in righteousness.

How are we to swear in truth?

Affirming what we know to be true, and verifying by deed what we undertake,
Psalm. 15. 4. and 24. 4.

What is here meant by Judgment?

A due consideration both of the nature and greatness of an Oath, wherein God
is taken to witness against the soul of the swearer, if he deceive, 2 Chronicles.
1. 23. and of the due calling and warrant of an Oath; whether public, being
demanded by the Magistrate; whether peril to the swearer, Genesis 43. 3. 2 Samuel
24. 22, 23. or private, in case of great importance, when the truth cannot
otherwise be cleared, Exodus 22. 11. 1 Samuel 20. 17. 2 Cor. 1. 23.

What Considerations are then to be had in taking of an Oath?

1. Whether the Party we deal with, doubt of the thing we speak of or no.

2. If the Party doubt whether the matter whereof we speak, be weighty and
worthy of an Oath.

3. If it be weighty, whether the question or doubt may be ended with truly and
verily, or such like naked asseverations, or by doubling our asseverations, as
our Savior Christ did: for then by his example we ought to forbear an Oath,
Mat. 5. 37.

4. Whether there be not yet any other fit means to try out the matter before
we come to an Oath.

5. Whether he for whose cause we give the Oath, will rest in it, and give
credit unto it; for otherwise the Name of God is taken in vain, Heb. 6. 16.

6. Whether the matter is of importance, and there is no other trial, but an
Oath. And then we must have our minds wholly bent to sanctify the Name of God
by the Oath we take; and think upon the greatness of Gods power to punish
Oaths taken amiss, and to bless the true use of them.

How are we to swear in Righteousness?

1. In a due form, which must be no other then Gods Word allows; viz. by God
alone, not by any creature or Idol, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Isa. 65. 16. Zeph. 1. 5. Jer.
12. 16. Mat. 5. 34, etc. Although in lawful Contracts, with an Infidel, or
Idolater, we may admit of such Oaths, whereby he swears by his false Gods.

2. To a right end, which is the glory of God, Isa. 45. 23. with Phil. 2. 11.
the good of the Church, and peace amongst men, Heb. 6. 16.

What Persons may lawfully take an Oath?

Such only as have weighty matters to deal in; What persons may lawfully take
an Oath.
and therefore it is altogether unlawful for Children to swear; as also,
because they cannot think sufficiently of the dignity of an Oath. No Atheist
or profane man should swear, because either they believe not, or they serve
not God, Romans 1. 19. In women Oaths should be more seldom then in men; in
Servants then in Masters; in poor then in rich, because they deal not in so
weighty matters.

What are the special abuses of an Oath?

1. The refusing of all Oaths as unlawful, The special abuses of an Oath.
which is the error of the Anabaptists.

2. A rash and vain Oath, where there is no cause of swearing, when upon every
light occasion we take up the name of God, and call him for a witness of
frivolous things by usual swearing, Mat. 6. 24. Jam. 5. 12. Jer. 23. 10.

3. Superstitious or Idolatrous Oaths, when we swear by an Idol, or by Gods
creatures, Zeph. 1. 5. Amos 8. 14. as by the mass, our Lady, bread, salt,
fire, and many fond trashes, whereas God never appointed the creatures for such
uses.

4. A counterfeit and mocking Oath.

5. A passionate swearing, whereby we call God for a witness of our furious
anger, 1 Samuel 14. 39. 2 King 6. 31.

6. Outrageous and blasphemous swearing.

7. Perjury, when God is called for a witness of an untruth, by forswearing,
Isa. 48. 1. Zach. 5. 4. which is, 1. When one swears, that which he himself
thinks to be false, Lev. 19. 12. Secondly, When he swears, and does not
perform his Oath, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13.

8. Taking a lawful Oath, without due reverence and consideration.

So much for the right use and abuse of an Oath. Declare now further, how the
Name of God is taken in vain, in regard of his Properties and Attributes?

1. By seldom or never breaking forth into such Confession or declaration of
Gods power, How Gods Name is taken in vain in regard of his Properties.
wisdom, justice, mercy, etc. as our selves and others might thereby be
stirred up the more to be thankful unto him, and to stay upon him, Psalm. 40. 9.

2. By abusing his Properties; and by carnal, careless, and contemptuous
speaking of them, 2 King. 7. 2.

How is Gods Wisdom touched here?

By calling it into question, and by prying into the hidden Counsels of God; as
when a man undertaketh to foretell future things and events.

How is his Justice?

1. By passing over his Judgments without notice.

2. By Cursings and imprecations, whereby we make our selves Judges, and
attribute that to our selves which is due to God.

3. By misconstruing and perverting his Judgments.

How is his Mercy?

1. By passing over of his benefits without due notice taken; and not
observing, and recounting what special mercies he has vouchsafed us in
particular, Psalm. 66. 16. and 103. 2, 3, etc.

How is the Name of God taken in vain, How in respect of his Works.
in respect of his Works and Actions?

1. By not seeing God in his Works, Acts 17. 27.

2. By lightly passing over of Gods great Works, of Creation, Preservation,
Redemption; as also of other his Mercies, and Judgments, and not glorifying
God for that which may be seen in them.

3. Vain and foolish thoughts concerning the Creatures, whereby a virtue is
attributed unto them which God never gave unto them: as all ghessing of future
things by the Stars; by a man's face and hands; the counting it a prodigious
token, that a Hare should cross our way, etc.

4. Not using the Creatures as we ought, nor receiving them to Gods glory with
thanksgiving: As when a man gives not thanks to God for his meat and drink,
but does think them to come without Gods providence, which is a fearful
taking of Gods Name in vain.

5. Cavilling at the Doctrine of Predestination, Romans 9. 19, 20. and not
admitting the depth of his Counsels, Romans 11. 33, 34.

6. Murmuring at Gods Providence, under the names of Fortune, chance, and fate,
etc. Job 3. 23, etc.

7. Evil thoughts toward our brethren, which are afflicted; as when we see
one visited by God, either in body, goods, or both, we are always ready to
think the worst of him; viz. That God executes these punishments on him for
his sins, when as God may do it either to exercise the faith and patience of
the party afflicted, as in Job; or to stir others to compassion and pity; or
else to set forth his own glory, as we may see verified in the example of the
blind man in the Gospel, Joh. 9. 2, 3.

8. Abuse of Lots, Esther 3. 7. Prove. 16. 33.

How is Gods Name taken in vain in regard of his Word? How in respect of his
Word.


1. By not speaking of it at all. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Psalm. 37. 30.

2. By foolish and fruitless speaking of it, or abusing any part thereof unto
idle and curious questions, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

3. By abusing it to profane mirth, by framing jests out of it, or against it,
Psalm. 22. 13. Also by making Plays and Enterludes thereof.

4. By maintaining Error, sin, and profaneness by it, Mat. 4. 6. Isa. 66.
5.

5. By applying it to Superstition, and unlawful Arts, to Magical spells,
Sorceries, and Charms, for the healing of diseases, finding out of theft, etc.
Deuteronomy. 18. 11. Acts 19. 13.

How is Gods Name taken in vain, in regard of the Sacraments, and other holy
Mysteries and Ordinances of God?

When they are unworthily received, and profanely used, Mal. 1. 11, 12. 1 Cor.
11. 27. 29. Jer. 7. 4, 10.

So much of the chief particulars forbidden in this Commandment. What are the
helps or hindrances of the obedience thereof? Of the helps and hindrances.


1. That we both inure our hearts to fear and reverence the great and
dreadful Name of the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Eccles. 9. 2. and keep a
careful watch over our lips and lives, lest by any means we dishonor him,
Psalm. 39. 1.

2. That we avoid both the company of profane persons, who set their mouth
against Heaven, Psalm. 73. 9. and all unnecessary dangers, whereby diverse have
been occasioned to deny the Lord, Mat. 26. 69, etc.

What is contained in the Reason annexed to the Commandment?

A dreadful penalty: The reason annexed to the third Commandment.
That the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

What is the sum of this threat?

That God will not leave this sin unpunished, 1 King. 2. 9. but will grievously
punish the breach of this Commandment; whereby he threatens extreme miseries
and judgments to the Transgressors: For it being our happiness to have our
sins covered, and not imputed, Psalm. 32. 2. it must needs be extreme
unhappiness, to have it reckoned and imputed unto us.

What is employed herein?

A fit opposition: That howsoever man's Laws take not hold of offending in this
kind; yet God will not acquit them, Psalm. 1. 5. nor suffer them to escape his
righteous and fearful Judgments, Zach. 5. 3. Jer. 5. 12. Neither shall the
Transgressor escape unpunished, although the Magistrate and the Minister also
would pronounce him innocent; and although the Malefactor flatter himself, as
if all dangers were past; nay, the more free, that (usually) he escapes the
Judgments and punishments of men; the more heavy plagues, and vengeance will
surely light upon him from God, except he repent.

Hitherto of the Commandments concerning that service which is to be performed
to God at all times, as occasion shall require; which is that which concerns
the special time, wholly to be bestowed in his Worship?

The fourth and last Commandment of the first Table, The fourth Commandment.
which sets forth a certain day, especially appointed by the Lord himself,
to the practice of the Worship, prescribed in the three former Commandments:
for therein consists the chief point of the sanctifying of that day.

What are the Words of this Commandment?

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.

What are we to observe in these words?

First, the Commandment, and then the Reasons annexed thereunto.

What is the meaning of the Commandment?

It challenges at the hand of every man one day of seven in every week, The
meaning of the fourth Commandment.
to be set apart unto a holy rest, and requires all persons to separate
themselves from their ordinary labor, and all other exercises, to his service
on the same, that so they being severed from their worldly businesses and all
the works of their labor and callings, concerning this life, they may wholly
attend to the worship of God alone, Neh. 13. 15, 16. Esa. 58. 13, 14.

Why do you add these words [apart] and [separate?]

To make a difference between the Sabbath days, wherein we must wholly and
only serve God, and the exercises of the other six days wherein every man must
serve him in his lawful calling.

What need is there of one whole day in every week to serve God, seeing we may
serve him every day?

That is not enough: What need there is of one day in seven to serve God.
For,

1. To the end that we should not plunge our selves so deeply into the affairs
of the world, as that we should not recover our selves, the wisdom of God has
thought it fit, that one day in seven there should be an intermission from
them, that we might wholly separate our selves to the service of God, and with
more freedom of spirit perform the same.

2. A whole day is needful for the performance of all the parts of Gods
service and worship, as hearing of public Prayer, and the Word preached,
Chatechising, Administration of the Sacraments, exercise of holy Discipline,
and consideration of the glory of God in the creatures.

3. If Adam in his perfection had need of this holy day, much more have we who
are so grievously corrupted.

4. If the Lord in love and wisdom, considering our necessities both of soul
and body, has set out a weeks time for both of provision, that as every day we
set apart some time for food, and spend the rest in labor, so we set one day
in the week aside for our spiritual food, and bestow the other days on our
earthly affairs: so as this day may in comparison be accounted the souls day,
wherein yet we must have some care of our bodies: as on the six days we must
have some care of our souls.

What is forbidden in this Commandment?

The unhallowing or profaning of the Sabbath, either by doing the works of our
calling and of the flesh, or by leaving undone the works of the Spirit.

But is not this Commandment Ceremonial, and so taken away by the death of
Christ?

No; That the Sabbath day is not etremoniall.
but is constantly and perpetually to be observed; and never to cease till it
be perfectly consummated in the heavenly Sabbath, Hebr. 4. 9, 10.

How prove you that?

1. Because it is placed in the number of the perpetual Commandments;
otherwise the Moral Law should consist but of nine words or Commandments,
which is contrary to Gods Word, Deuteronomy. 4. 13.

2. Because this Commandment (amongst the rest) was written by the finger of
God, Exodus 31. 18. whereas no part of the Ceremonial Law was.

3. For that it was written in Tables of stone, as well as the other, Deuteronomy. 5.
22. As to signify the hardness of our hearts; so to signify the continuance
and perpetuity of this Commandment as well as the rest.

4. Because it was before any Shadow or Ceremony of the Law; yea before Christ
was promised, whom all Ceremonies of the Law have respect unto: for the Sabbath
was first instituted in Paradise, before there was any use of Sacrifices, and
Ceremonies, Genesis 2. 1, 2, 3.

5. The Ceremonies were as a Partition wall betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles;
but God does here extend his Commandment not only to the Jews themselves,
but also to strangers. Exodus 20. 10. Nehem. 13. 15, 16, etc.

6. Our Savior Christ willing his followers which should live about forty
years after his Ascension, to pray that their flight might not be on the
Sabbath day, to the end that they might not be hindered in the service of God,
does thereby sufficiently declare, that he held not this Commandment in the
account of a Ceremony, Matthew. 24. 20.

But it sometimes shadoweth our sanctification, and our eternal rest. Col. 2.
16, 17. Exodus 31. 13. and is therefore Ceremonial?

That follows not: For,

1. There is no Commandment which has not some Ceremonies tied unto it; as in
the Commandment touching Murder, to abstain from strangled things, and blood:
And the whole Law had the Ceremony of the Parchment Law. So that by that reason
the whole Law should be Ceremonial, which is absurd.

2. The Ceremonial representation of our eternal rest came after the
Commandment of the rest, and therefore is accessory and accidental: for which
cause, the time of correction and abolishment of Ceremonies being come, Dan. 9.
7. Matthew. 11. 13. Acts 15. 6. Col. 2. 13, 14. Heb. 10. 14. Gal. 5. 2. that use
may well fall away, and yet the Commandment remain, it being out of the
substance of the Commandment.

What is the special day of the week, which God has set apart for his solemn
Worship?

The first day of the week, called the Lords day, 1 Cor. 16. 2. Rev. 1. 10.
Acts 20. 7.

Was this day set apart thereunto from the beginning?

No: Of the change of the seventh day to the first, and the reasons of it.
For from the first Creation till the Resurrection of Christ, the last day of
the week, commonly called Saturday, was the day that was appointed thereunto;
and that which the people of God constantly observed.

And why so?

Because upon that God ceased from the work of Creation, Genesis 2. 2* Exodus 31.
17.

How came this day to be changed?

By divine Authority.

How does that appear?

1. By the practice of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, John 20. 19, 26.
Acts 2. 1. 20. 7. which should be a sufficient rule unto us, especially the
Apostles, having added a Commandment thereunto, 1 Cor. 16. 12.

2. There is no reason why it should be called the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. but
in regard of the special dedication thereof to the Lords service: for
otherwise all the days in the week are the Lords days, and he is to be
served and worshipped in them.

What was the cause that the day was changed?

Because it might serve for a thankful memorial of Christ's Resurrection. For
as God rested from his labor on the last day of the week: so Christ ceased
from his labor and afflictions on this day, Mat. 28. 1. Genesis 2. 1, 2. As the
one therefore was specially sanctified, in regard of the Creation of the World:
so was the other, in respect of the restoration and redemption of the world,
which is a greater work then the Creation.

Can this day then be altered?

No power of any Creature in Heaven or Earth can alter it, or place another
seventh day in the place and stead thereof.

But does this Commandment directly require the seventh day from the Creation?

No: but the seventh day in general.

Does not the reason annexed, where the Lord in six days is said to make
Heaven and Earth, and to rest the seventh day, and therefore to hallow it,
confirm so much?

No, not necessarily: For it does not hence follow, that we should rest the
same day the Lord rested; but that we should rest from our work the seventh
day, as he rested from his; which seventh day, under the Law, he appointed to
be Saturday: so nothing hinders, but by his special appointment under the
Gospel it may be Sunday, and yet the substance of the Commandment nothing
altered.

Why does not the New Testament mention this change?

Because there was no question moved about the same in the Apostles time. The
time of the Sabbath, and when it begins.


When then does this our Sabbath begin, and how long does it continue?

This day, as all the six, is the space of twenty four hours, and begins
at the dawning, though we ought in the Evening before, to prepare for the day
following.

Why does our Sabbath begin at the dawning of the day?

Because Christ rose in the dawning; and to put a difference between the
Jewish, and a true Christian Sabbath. For as the Jews begun their Sabbath in
that part of the day, in which the Creation of the World was ended, and
consequently, in the Evening: so the celebration of the memory of Christ's
Resurrection, and therein of his rest from his special labors, and the
renewing of the World, being the ground of the change of that day; it is also
by the same proportion of reason, to begin when the Resurrection began, which
was in the Morning.

Can you show this Example?

Yea, Paul being at Troas, after he had preached a whole day, until midnight,
celebrated the supper of the Lord the same night, which was a Sabbath days
exercise; and therefore, that night following the day, was a part of the
Sabbath; For in the Morning he departed, having staid there seven days, by
which it is evident, that that which was done, was done upon the Lords day,
Acts 20. 7, 10.

Is the Lords day only to be separated to Gods service?

No: For of this manner are holy Fasts observed for the avoiding of some great
evil, present or imminent, Lev. 23. 27. Joel 2. 12. and holy Feasts, for the
thankful remembrance of some special memorable mercies obtained, Zach. 8. 19.
Ester. 9. 17, 18, 19.

To what Commandment do you refer the Churches meeting on the working days?

That is also, by a manner of speech of one part for the whole, contained in
this Commandment: yea, it reaches to the times which the Family appoints,
or that every one for his private good proposes, although the Bond to that
time is not so strict, as is the Bond to observe the days of Rest.

So much of this Commandment in general: What do you note therein in
particular?

1. The entrance in the word Remember. What is meant by the word, Remember.


2. The parts of the Commandment.

What is to be observed in the word, Remember?

That although all the Commandments are needful diligently to be remembered,
yet this more specially.

Why so?

1. Because this Commandment has least light of nature to direct us to the
observation of it.

2. For that we are naturally most negligent in it, suffering our selves to be
withdrawn by our worldly business, from the Lords service, upon the Lords
day; and therefore, such a special warning is needful to be added.

What things are we thence to remember?

1. To look back unto the first institution of the Sabbath day in Paradise,
Genesis 2. 2, 3. before all Sacrifices and Ceremonies.

2. So to bear it in mind, as to live in continual practice of the duties we
learned the Sabbath day last past.

3. To bethink our selves before of the works of the Sabbath, and so to prepare
our selves, and our affairs, Luke 23. 54. that we may freely and duly attend
on the Lord in the Sabbath approaching.

What should be done in this preparation of the Sabbath? Of the Preparation of
the Sabbath:


1. We should so compass all our businesses in the six working days, that our
worldly affairs enter not, or incroach into the possession of the Lords day;
Not only willingly, but not so much as by any forgetfulness. As when through
want of foresight, or forecasting the payment of money due by obligation, or any
such businesses that might be prevented, shall fall out on that day.

2. We should sanctify our selves, and those that are under us, to keep that
day.

What is contrary to this?

The neglect of Preparation for the Sabbath before it come, and of fitting our
hearts for holy service, when it is come.

What are the parts of this Commandment?

They are two. The parts of the fourth Commandment.


First, to keep the Lords rest.

Secondly, to sanctify this rest: For it is not sufficient that we rest from
worldly businesses, but it is further required, that it be a holy rest. The
first shows, what works we are to decline upon this day; the other, what
duties we are to perform.

What are the works that we must decline, and leave undone on the Lords day?

Not only the works of sin, What Works ought to be declined.
which we ought to leave undone every day, but also the works of our ordinary
callings concerning this life, and bodily exercise and labors, which upon
other days are lawful and necessary to be done, Mark 3. 4. Ezekiel. 23. 37,
38. Number. 15. 32, 33. Exodus 31. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and 34. 21. Nehem. 13. 15,
etc. Esa. 58. 13.

What instances have you in Scripture of the performance hereof?

The Israelites ceased both from those works which were of the least
importance, as gathering of sticks, Number. 15. 32. and from such also as were of
greatest weight, as working at the Tabernacle, and building the Temple on the
Sabbath day; and consequently all other works betwixt these extremes, as
buying and selling, working in seed time, or harvest, were forbidden unto them.

Are we as strictly bound to rest from all our outward businesses, and to
forbear all worldly labor upon this day, as the Israelites?

Yea, so far forth as the morality of the Commandment reaches, but by the
Ceremonial Law, there was enjoined unto the Jews a more exact observation of
outward rest, which to them was a part of their Ceremonial worship: whereas
unto us the outward rest is not properly any part of the sanctification of the
day, or of the service of God: but only a means tending to the furtherance of
the same; even as in Fasting and Prayer; Fast is of it self no part of Gods
service, but a thing adjoined thereunto, and so far forth only acceptable in
the worship of God, as it makes a way and readier passage for the other, 1
Cor. 8. 8.

What did that most strict observance of outward rest signify unto the Jews?

Their continual Sanctification in this world, Exodus 31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12.
and their endless rest in the world to come; whereof this was a Type no less
then the land of Promise, Heb. 4. 4, 5. 10.

How was the latter of these specially typified?

In this world, Gods Children are subject to the fiery trial, but after these
troubles, rest is provided for them, 2 These. 1. 7. and no fire to be feared in
that after world. For a more lively representation of that, there was a charge
laid upon the children of Israel, that no fire might be kindled throughout all
their habitations upon the Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3. though it were for the
very preparing of the meat which they should eat, Exodus 16. 23. which was
allowed unto them, even in the two great solemn days of the Passover, Exo.
12. 16.

Is it then lawful for us to make a fire and dress meat upon the Lords day?

Yea certainly; because these were proper to the Pedagogy, or manner of
government of the Children of Israel under the Law, as may appeate by this,
that there was no such thing commanded before the Law was given by Moses; and
consequently being not perpetual, must necessarily follow to be Ceremonial.
Now after the Sabbath that Christ our Lord rested in the grave, the Ceremonial
Sabbath lies buried in that grave, together with those other Rites which were
shadows of things to come, the body being in Christ, Col. 2. 16, 17. Therefore
we being dead with Christ, from these Ceremonies, are no more to be burdened
with such Traditions, ibid. verse 20. Nor to be brought under the bondage of
any outward thing: It is a liberty purchased unto us by Christ, and we must
stand fast unto it, that blessed hour being come, wherein the true worshippers
are to worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, John 4. 23.

To leave then the Ceremonial Sabbath, and to come to the Moral; How is the
Rest required therein laid down in the fourth Commandment?

By a Declaration: What rest required in the fourth Commandment.
First, of the Works from which there must be a cessation. Secondly, of the
persons that must observe this Rest.

How is the former of these expressed?

In these words: In it thou shall not do any Work, Exodus 20. 10.

What is required of us hereby?

That for the space of that whole natural day, we cease in mind and body from
all our worldly labors; yea from the works of our lawful Calling, and all
other earthly businesses whatsoever, more then needs must be done, either for
Gods glory, or man's good.

What gather you of this?

That all exercises which serve not in some degree to make us fit to the Lords
work, are unlawful upon the Lords day.

Why do you say, that we must rest in mind and body?

Because this rest must be of the whole man, in thoughts, words, and deeds,
Esa. 58. 13.

Is it merely unlawful to do any bodily, or outward business on the Lords
day?

No. First, for such works are excepted as are presently necessary, either for
common honesty, or comeliness.

Secondly, the actions of Piety requisite for the performance of Gods service
on that day, Acts 1. 12. Mat. 12. 5.

Thirdly, extraordinary exigents of Charity, for the preservation of the
Commonwealth, 2 Kings 11. 9.

Fourthly, the preservation of our own and others life, health, and goods, in
case of present necessity, or great danger of their perishing, if they were not
saved on that day, Mat. 12. 10, 11. Mark 3. 4. Luke 13. 15, 16.

What be the special breaches of this part of the Commandment?

1. The making of the Sabbath a common day through common labors in our
ordinary callings, The special breaches opposite to an holy rest.
Neh. 13. 15. vain speech, and talking of our worldly affairs, Esa. 58. 13.
thinking our own thoughts, and no other but a common use of the Creatures.

2. The making it a day of carnal rest unto idleness, feasting, pastimes,
etc. which draw our minds further from God then our ordinary labors, Exodus
32. 6. Whither are referred all recreations, which distract us, as also
excessive eating and drinking, which causes drowsinesse, and unaptnesse unto
Gods Service and Worship.

3. The making it a day of sin, or the Devils holy day, by doing that on the
Lords day which is no day lawful, Mar. 3. 4. but then most abominable, Ezekiel.
23. 37, 38.

4. The keeping a piece of the day, not the whole; or giving liberty to our
selves in the night, before the whole Sabbath be ended.

5. The forbearing our selves, but employing others in worldly businesses; for
preventing of which sin, God is so large in naming of the persons, which in
this Commandment are forbidden to work.

Why is there a particular rehearsal of these persons in this Commandment?

To take away all excuses from all persons in this Commandment; for the Lord
did see, that such was the corruption of men, that if they themselves did rest
upon this day from labors, they would think it sufficient, not caring how
they toyled out and wearied their servants at home with continual labor, as
many do; so that it were better to be such men's Oxen then their servants, so
small care they have of their souls.

What is the special use of this rehearsal?

To teach us, that all sorts and degrees of persons are bound to yield this
duty unto God; and that the Sabbath is to be kept both by our selves, and those
that do belong unto us.

Was it not ordained also for the rest and refreshing of men and beasts;
especially Servants, which could not otherwise continue without it?

That also was partly intended, as may appear by Deuteronomy. 5. 14. but not
principally, for the things here contained do concern the worship of God; but
that wearing and toyling out of servants and beasts, is against the sixth
Commandment; and working is here forbidden, that men might be the more free
for the worship of God; and therefore though servants had never so much rest
and recreation upon other days, yet they ought to rest upon this day in that
regard.

Why is there mention made of allowing rest to the beasts?

First, that we may show mercy even to the beasts, Prove. 12. 10.

Secondly, to represent after a sort, the everlasting Sabbath, wherein all
Creatures shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8. 20, 21.

Thirdly, because of the whole employment of men in the Lords service: for
beasts cannot be traveled or used in any work upon that day, unless man be
withdrawn from Gods service; yea, though the beast could labor without man's
attendance, yet his mind would some time or other be carried away and
distracted thereby, that it would not be so fit as it ought to be for Gods
service.

To whom especially is the charge of this Commandment directed?

To Householders and Magistrates, To whom this Commandment is chiefly directed.
who stand charged in the behalf, both of themselves, and of all that are
under their roof and Government, Jos. 24. 15. Neh. 13. 15. Heb. 13. 15.

What is the charge of the Householder?

That not only himself keep the Lords day; but also, his Wife, Children and
Servants, as much as may be. For as they serve him in the week days: so he
must see that they serve God on the Lords day.

What gather you of this?

That a Householder should be as careful of the Lords business, as of his
own; And if he will not keep such a servant as is not careful in his ordinary
work, much less should he keep any that will not be careful in the Lords
work, how skillful soever he be in his own.

What is the Magistrates part?

To see that all within his gates keep the Lords day, Jo. 24. 15. even
strangers, though Turks and Infidels, Neh 13. 15. causing them to cease from
labor, and restraining them from all open and public Idolatry, or false
Worship of God; much more all his own Subjects, whom he ought to force to
hear the Word, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.

So much of the first part of this Commandment, touching our rest from all
worldly businesses: What follows in the next place?

The second and greater part of this Commandment, The second part of this
Commandment, which is the sanctifying of the Rest.
which is the sanctifying of this Rest, and keeping it holy unto the Lord, by
exercising of our selves wholly in the service of God, and performing the
duties of that day.

Are we as strictly bound to these duties as the Jews?

Yes verily, and more then they, because of the greater measures of Gods graces
upon us, above that which was upon them.

What is required of us herein?

To make the Sabbath our delight; to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord,
Isa. 58. 13. and that with joy, and without weariness, Amos 8. 5. with Mal. 1.
13. and that also with care and desire of profit we bestow the whole day (as
nature will bear) in holy Exercises.

What are these Exercises?

They are partly duties of Piety, The Exercises and Duties required on the
Sabbath.
Acts 13. 13. 15. 20. 7. Psalm. 92. 1. as hearing and reading the Word, Prayer,
singing of Psalms, and feeding our selves with the Contemplations of the
heavenly Sabbath; partly of mercy, 1 Cor. 16. 2. Neh. 8. 12. as visiting and
relieving the sick and needy, comforting the sad, and such like.

How are these duties to be performed?

Hartly public, in the Church, where the solemn worshipping of God is the
special work, and proper use of the Sabbath: Partly private, out of the
Church; and that either secretly, by our selves alone, or jointly with others.

What if we cannot be suffered to use the public means?

Such as are necessarily debarred from the public duties, must humble
themselves before God, mourning and sorrowing for this restraint, Mat. 24. 20.
Psalm. 42. 6. and 84. 1, 2, 3. and with so much more care and earnestness use
the private means, Psalm. 53. 1, 2.

What is the first duty we are to perform in the public Assembly?

To join in Prayer with the Congregation, Prayer with the Congregation.
which is an excellent duty; for if, as Christ says, When two or three are
gathered together in his Name, he will grant their requests; how much more will
he hear his servants, when two or three hundred are gathered in his Name?

What is the second?

To hear the Word read, Hearing the Word.
Luke 4. 16. Acts 3. 16. and 15. 20. for blessed is he that reads, and they
that hear the Word, Rev. 1. 3.

What is the third?

To hear the Word preached, Luke 4. 16. 22. Acts 13. 14, 15. and 15. 21. and
20. 7.

What is the fourth?

To communicate in the Sacraments by being present when the Sacrament of
Baptism is administered unto others; Receiving the Sacrament.
and by receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper our selves, after a decent
order in the appointed time, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 20.

Why should a man be present at Baptism?

First, that he may give thanks to God for adding a Member to his Church.

Secondly, that he might be put in mind of his own Vow made to God in Baptism
by seeing the child baptized.

What is the fifth duty to be performed in the Congregation?

Singing of Psalms.

What is the sixth?

Exercise of the Discipline of the Church against offenders, 1 Cor. 5. 4.

What is the seventh?

Collection for the poor, and Contribution for relieving the necessities of
the Saints of God, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. where we are to give according to our
wealths, and the blessing of God upon the week going before.

What are the private duties that are to be performed out of the Church?

Such as we perform either in secret by our selves alone, Private duties of
the Sabbath.
or in common with our families at home, or others abroad, both before the
public exercises in the Church, the better to perform them, and after, the
more to profit by them.

What be they in particular?

First, Private Prayer.

Secondly, Reading of the Word.

Thirdly, holy Conference touching the Word of God, and familiar talk of
things belonging to the Kingdom of heaven Luke 14. 7. 16.

Fourthly, Examination of our selves, and those that belong to us, what we have
profited by the hearing of the Word, and other exercises of Religion.

Fifthly, Catechizing of our families.

Sixthly, Meditation upon Gods Word, Properties, and Works, as well of Creation
as of Providence; especially that which he exercises in the government of the
Church, Psalm. 80. 88. 92.

Seventhly, reconciling such as are at variance, and visiting the sick,
relieving the poor, etc. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Neh. 8. 12. For these also are works of
the Sabbath.

What proof have you of this continual exercise and employment?

1. In the Law; every evening, and every morning were Sacrifices, which on the
Sabbath were multiplied, Numb. 28. 9.

2. The 92. Psalm (entitled, A Psalm for the Sabbath) to be sung that day,
declares, that it is a good thing to begin the praises of God early in the
morning, and to continue the same until night.

That we may know then, how to spend a Sabbath well, declare more particularly
how we may bestow the whole time in exercises of holiness; and first begin with
the evening preparation.

Our care must be over night, Of the evening preparation.
that having laid aside all our earthly affairs, we begin to fit our selves
for the Lords service: that so we may fall asleep, as it were, in the Lords
bosom, and awake with him in the morning.

What must be done in the morning when we awake?

We are to put away all earthly thoughts, The first duties of the morning.
and to take up such Meditations as may most stir up our hearts with
reverence and cheerfulness to serve the Lord the whole day after: wherein,
first, we are to consider the great benefit of the Lords Sabbath, and so cheer
up our hearts in the expectation to enjoy the same. Secondly, to covenant with
the Lord, more religiously to sanctify the whole day after.

In making of our selves ready, what are we to do?

Rising as early for the Lords service, as we do for our own businesses; and
bestow no more time nor care about our apparel, and such like, then needs
must: we may then occupy our mind about such matters as be most fit for that
time; which ordinarily may be these two.

1. To think upon Gods goodness in giving us such apparel, and other
necessaries, which many others want: so that we may judge all things we have
rather too good for us, then be discontented with any thing we enjoy.

2. Considering how well our bodies be apparelled, and provided for; to seek
more to have our souls better apparelled with Christ Jesus.

Being up and ready, what are we to set our selves to?

We must set our selves to our morning sacrifice, either alone, or with
others, if it may be, some short Prayer for our preparation being used.

What Meditations must we here enter into?

Two especially: the one, for that which is past; the other, for that which is
to come.

What for that which is past?

To cast our weeks account at least how God has dealt with us in benefits and
chastisements, and how we have dealt with him in keeping or breaking his
Commandments, that by both we may find matter to comfort and humble us, to
move us to thankfulness for mercies received, and to earnest suit and labor
for pardon of our trespasses, and supply of all our necessities.

What for that which follows?

To prepare our selves for the public Ministry, and as it were to apparel
our selves, and make our selves fit to go to the Court of the Lord of Hosts
with his children, and before his Angels.

What things are necessary hereunto?

1. A due regard whither we go, before whom, what to do, and what ends,
wherewith to honor God, and to receive grace from him.

2. An earnest hunger, so to use the means to Gods honor, and our good.

3. True faith, that we shall enjoy our desire.

4. Joy and Thankfulness, in the hope of such Blessings.

5. Humility, in regard of our unworthiness.

6. Unfeigned purpose of amendment of life.

What must be added unto these?

To the Meditations, fervent Prayer must be joined, and Reading, for our
furtherance in Gods service; and such as conveniently can, are to join
together in a Christian Family, to read, pray, and confer, and Governors to
instruct their Families in such matters as are then befitting.

Having thus spent the time privately, Of the public duties of the Sabbath.
what is to be done in public?

We are to go to Church in all comely sort, before the public Ministry is
begun, and then with all diligence to attend, and to give consent thereunto,
and so to take to heart whatsoever shall be brought unto us, that by all the
holy exercises we may be edified in all needful graces.

The public Ministry ended, what are we to do?

We are to occupy our minds on that we have heard, and when we come to place
and time convenient, What is to be done after the public Ministry.
to set our selves more especially to make use of it, to our selves and others
pertaining to us, and to water it with our prayers, that it may grow and bring
forth fruit.

What say you to our diet, and refreshing of our nature on this day?

Care would be had, that it be such as every way may make us fitter for holy
duties; And to this end, we are to season it with Meditation, and speeches of
holy things.

How is the afternoon to be spent?

1. The time before the Evening Sacrifice, we are to bestow, either alone, or
with others, in such Exercises as may best quicken in us Gods Spirit.

2. For the Evening Sacrifices* in all respects to behave our selves as in the
Morning, and to continue to the end.

3. This public Ministry fully ended, to keep our minds (in like sort as
before) on that we have heard; and so being come home, either alone, or with
others, to enter into an examination of our selves for the whole day.

How are we to end the day?

1. With thanks for Gods blessings on our labors.

2. Humble suit for pardon of all our faults escaped.

3. Earnest desire of grace, to profit by all, that we may persevere unto the
end, and be saved.

Do you make any difference betwixt the Sabbath nights, and other nights?

Yes: we should lay our selves down to rest in greater quietness that night,
upon the sense and feeling of the former Exercises; so that our sleep should be
the more quiet, by how much the former Exercises of that day have been more
holy; otherwise we should declare, that we have not kept the whole day so holy
to the Lord as we ought.

What be the sins condemned in the second part of this Commandment?

Generally, Sins to be condemned in respect of the second part of this
Commandment.
the omission of any of the former duties; and in particular,

1. Idleness, which is a sin every day, but much more on the Lords day.

2. Profane absence from, or unfaithful presence at Gods Ordinances.

3. Neglect of calling our selves to a reckoning after holy Exercises.

4. Being weary of the duties of the Sabbath, thinking long till they be ended,
Amos 8. 5. Mal. 1. 13.

What are the helps or hindrances to the keeping of this Commandment? Helps
and hindrances to the keeping of this Commandment.


We must add to the forementioned duties of remembrance, an ardent endeavor to
taste the sweetness of holy Exercises, Psa. 24. 2, 3. and 84. 1. etc. that so
we may come to make the Sabbath our delight.

2. We must avoid and abhor all profane opinions, either disanulling the
necessity of the Sabbath, or equalling any other day to it, together with such
meetings, and Companies, Exercises and occasions, whereby we shall be in danger
to be drawn to the unhallowing of the Sabbath day, Ezekiel. 22. 26.

So much of the Commandment: Of the Reasons enforcing obedience to this
Commandment.
What reasons are used to enforce the same?

Four.

Whence is the first taken?

From equality, 1. Reason.
by a secret reason of comparison of the less; That forasmuch as God has
allowed us six days of seven for our affairs, to do our own business in;
whether it be labor, or honest recreation, and reserved but one for himself,
when as he might most justly have given us but one of seven, and have taken six
to himself; we ought not to think it much, to spend the whole seventh day in
the service of God.

What learn you from hence?

The unequal and wretched dealing of most men with God, who by the grant of
this Commandment urge usually at their servants hands, the work of a whole
day, in every of the six days; yet upon the Lords day, think it enough, both
for themselves, and those under them, to measure out unto the Lord three or
four hours only for his service, using one measure to mete the service due
unto themselves, and another to mete the service due unto God; which is a thing
abominable before God, Pro. 11. 1. And so much the more as the things are
greater, and of more value, which they mete with lesser measures.

Whence is the second Reason taken?

From Gods own right, 2. Reason.
who made the Sabbath, and is Lord of it. For the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God; This day is his, and not ours.

Whence is the third?

From the example of God; 3. Reason.
That as God having made all things in the six days, rested the seventh day
from creating any more: so should we rest from all our works: God himself
ceasing from his work of Creation on that day, and sanctifying it, with what
joy ought we to imitate our God herein? Genesis 2. 2, 3. Exodus 31. 17.

Did God cease from all works on the seventh day?

No verily; he did then, and still continues to do a great work in
preferring the things created, Ioh. 5. 17.

What learn you from this?

1. That we be not idle on the Lords day, seeing Gods example is to the
contrary, but attend upon the Lords service.

2. That as the Lord preserved on the Sabbath day things created in the six
days before, but created none other new: so by his example, we may save things
on that day, which otherwise would be lost; but we may not get or gain more.

Whence is the fourth and last reason drawn?

From hope of blessing; Fourth reason:
because God ordained not the Sabbath for any good it can do to him, but for
the good of unthankful man; and therefore he blessed and sanctified it, not
only as a day of service to himself, but also as a time and means to bestow
increase of grace upon such as do continually desire the same; Exodus 31. 13.
Esa. 56. 6, 7.

What is meant by Sanctifying it?

The setting it apart from worldly businesses, to the service of God.

What by Blessing?

Not that this day in it self is more blessed then other days; but as the
acceptable time of the Gospel is put for the persons that receive the Gospel
in that time: so by blessing this day, he means that those that keep it shall
be blessed; and that by setting it apart, and separating it by this
Commandment from other days to be kept holy by public exercises of his holy
worship and service, God has made it an essential means of blessing to them
that shall sanctify it as they ought.

Wherein shall they be blessed that keep the Sabbath day?

1. In all the holy exercises of the Sabbath, which shall serve for their
further increase both of the knowledge and fear of God, and all other
spiritual and heavenly graces accompanying salvation.

2. In matters of this life, we shall not only not be hindered by keeping the
Sabbath, but more blessed then if we did work that day: as on the other side,
the gain on the Lords day shall by the curse of God melt and vanish away, what
show of profit soever it have, and bring some curse or other upon our labors
in the week days, which in themselves are lawful and honest.

So much of the first Table, concerning our duties to God, the due performance
whereof is called Piety: wherein God (as a King or as a Father of an household)
does teach his Subjects or Family their duties toward himself. What is taught
in the second Table?

Our duties to our selves and our neighbors: The second Table.
the performance whereof is commonly called Justice, or Righteousness; wherein
God teaches his Subjects and Family their duties one toward another.

What is the sum of the Commandments of the second Table?

Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The sum of the second Table.
Lev. 19. 18. Mat. 22. 39. Or, As you would that men should do unto you, do
you unto them likewise, Mat. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31.

What general things do you observe belonging to this Table? The generals to
be observed in this Table.


1. That it is like unto the first, Matthew. 12. 39. and therefore that according
to the measure of our profiting in the first Table, we profit also in this. In
which respects the Prophets and Apostles do commonly try the sincerity and
uprightness in profiting under the first Table, by the forwardness in the
second.

2. That the works thereof are in higher or lower degree of good or evil, as
they are kept or broken toward one of the household of faith, rather then
toward a neighbor, simply, 1 Cor. 6. 8. and 10. 32. Gal. 6. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 2,
3.

3. That out of our bond to our neighbor we draw all our duties to all men, 1
These. 3. 12. and 5. 15. reaching them even to the wicked, so far forth as we
hinder not Gods glory, nor some great duty to others, especially the household
of faith; for sometime it may so fall out, that that which men require, (and
that otherwise are right) may not be given; as Rahab, though subject to the
King of Jericho, might not revile the Spies, but should have failed in her
duty, if she had betrayed them at the Kings Commandment; and therefore in this
case she did well in preferring the obedience she owed to God, before the duty
she owed to man, Josh. 2. 3. In like case also Jonathan revealing his Fathers
counsel unto David, and preferring the greater duty before the lesser, did
well, 1 Samuel 19. 3. So we owing a greater duty to our Country, then to our
natural kindred, must rather refuse to relief them, if they be Trayters, then
suffer any hurt to come to our Country.

But what if two have need of that which I can give but to one only?

I must then prefer those that be of the household of faith, before others,
Galat. 6. 10. and my kinsemen, and those that I am tied unto by a special
bond, before strangers, John, Chap. 1. v. 14. Acts 10. 24.

What are we specially forbidden to do by the Commandments of the second
Table?

To do any thing that may hinder our neighbors dignity, in the fifth; Life, in
the sixth; Chastity, in the seventh; Wealth, in the eighth; or good Name, in
the ninth; though it be but in the least secret motions and thoughts of the
heart, unto which we give no liking nor consent: for unto that also the last
Commandment does reach.

How are these six Commandments of the second Table divided?

Into such as forbid all practice, Division of the second Table.
or advised consent to any hurt of our neighbors; and such as forbid all
thoughts and motions of evil toward our neighbor, though they never come to
advised consent of the Will. The first five Commandments do concern such
things as come unto consent, and further; the last, such as come not unto
consent at all.

How are those five Commandments of the first sort divided?

Into those that concern special duties to special persons: and those that
concern general duties, to all those duties which concern special persons,
are commanded in the first; those that generally concern all men, either in
their life, chastity, goods, or good name, are enjoined in the four
Commandments following.

What gather you hence?

That we are to distinguish between duties and duties; between sin and sin,
done toward men; and that to offend principal persons, and such unto whom we
are in special manner obliged, is greater sin, because God has singled out
this one Commandment for these persons.

What are the words of this Commandment, which is the fifth in order?

Honor thy Father and thy Mother, The fifth Commandment.
that thy days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee,
Exodus 20. 12.

What is to be considered in these words?

1. The Commandment.

2. The Reason.

What is the meaning and scope of this Commandment?

That the equality of men's persons and places in whatsoever estate, Natural,
The meaning and scope of the fifth Commandment.
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, and with whatsoever relation to us, be duly
acknowledged and respected; for it requires the performance of all such
duties, as one man owes unto another, by some particular bond, in regard of
special callings and differences, which God has made between special persons.

What be these special persons?

Either in Equals, or Superiors and Inferiors; for this Commandment
enjoyneth all due carriage of Inferiors to their Superiors; and by consequent
also of Superiors to their Inferiors; and likewise by analogy, of equals
among themselves, under the sweet relation betwixt Parents and Children, or
betwixt brethren of the same family, and the general duty of honor.

What are Equals?

They be equal in gifts, either of Nature or Industry, as brethren in a
family, Citizens in a Commonwealth, Pastors in a Church, etc.

What is required of Equals?

That they live equally amongst themselves, The duty of Equals.
loving one another, and affording due respect to each other, Romans 12. 10. that
they live together sociably and comfortably, preferring each other before
themselves, and striving to go one before another in giving honor, 1 Pet. 2.
17. and 5. 5. Ephesians. 5. 21. Phil. 2. 3. that they be faithful one to another.

What is here forbidden?

Want of Love, Incivility, Strife, and Vainglory; whereby they seek to
advance themselves one above another, and to exalt themselves above their
fellows, Phil. 2. 3. Matthew. 23. 6.

What are Superiors?

They be such as by Gods ordinances have any preeminency, What are Superiors.
preferment, or excellency above others, and are here termed by the name of
Parents, 2 Kings 2. 12. and 5. 13. and 6. 21. and 13. 14. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Col. 3.
22. to whom the first and principal duties required in this Commandment do
appertain, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.

Why are all Superiors here called by the name of Parents?

1. For that the name Parents being a most sweet and loving name, men might
thereby be allured the rather to the duties they owe, whether they be duties
that are to be performed to them, or which they should perform to their
inferiors.

2. For that at the first and in the beginning of the world, Parents were also
Magistrates, Pastors, Schoolmasters, etc.

How does this agree with the Commandment of Christ, Mat. 23. 7, 8, 9. that we
should call no man Father or Master upon earth?

Very well; for there our Savior means only to restrain the ambitious
Titles of the Pharisees in those days, who desired not only so to be called;
but that men should rest in their authority alone for matters concerning the
soul.

Who are Inferiors; comprehended here under the name of Children?

Such as (by the Ordinance of God) are any way under Superiors, Who are
Inferiors.
who are principally and in the first place, to perform the duties required in
this Commandment.

Why is the Commandment conceived in the name of Inferiors?

Because their duties are hardest obeyed in all estates.

What is here contained under the name of Honor?

Not only Cap and Knee, What it is to honor.
but every particular duty, according to their particular estates, Mal. 1. 6.

Why are these duties comprehended under the word Honor?

Because it adds an ornament and dignity unto them.

What is the Honor that Inferiors owe to all Superiors in general?

1. Reverence in heart, word, and behavior, Lev. 19. 3. Ephesians. 6. 1. 5. For the
reverence of the mind is to be declared by some civil behavior, or outward
submission; as of rising before them, and of giving them the honor of speaking
first, etc. Lev. 19. 32. Job 29. 8. and 32. 6, 7.

2. Obedience to their counsels.

3. Prayer to God for them, with giving thanks, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

4. Imitation of their Virtues and Graces, 2 Timothy 1. 5. and 4. 9. and 8. 9.

What contrary sins are here forbidden?

1. Want of Reverence, inward, or outward.

2. Despising of Superiors, Jude v. 8, 9, 10. Prove. 30. 11.

3. Neglect of Prayer and other duties.

What is the duty of all Superiors toward their Inferiors?

That they answerably afford unto them love, Duties of Superiors.
blessing according to the power they receive from God, Heb. 7. 7. and 11. 20.
Genesis 9. 25, 26, 27. good example for their imitation, Titus 2. 7. and that they
so carry themselves, as that they may be worthy of the honor that is given
them, Ephesians. 6. 4. 9.

What are the contrary vices?

Want of love, failing in Prayer, and in giving good example, dishonouring
their places by unseemly and indiscreet carriage, Tit. 2. 15. 1 Samuel 2. 23.

How many sorts of Superiors are there?

Two: The diverse sorts of Superiors.
Without Authority; and with Authority.

Who are Superiors without Authority?

Such as God has by age only, or by some supereminent gifts lifted above
others; whether they be of the body, as strength and beauty; or of the mind,
as wit and learning; (which are most to be honored) or of outward state and
wealth, 1 Samuel 25. 8. and Nobility; in which respect, although brethren be
equal, yet by age the elder is superior to the younger; and the man, in
regard of Sex, is above the woman; and he that is skillful, before him that
has no skill.

Who are inferior to such?

They who are younger and of meaner gifts, The duties of aged persons.
whether of nature, or of grace, or of such as are gotten by exercise.

What is our duty toward such Superiors?

To acknowledge the things wherein God has preferred them before us; and to
respect and regard them, according to their graces and gifts.

What is the duty of them that are Superiors in years?

They are by grave, wise, and godly carriage of themselves, to procure
reverence unto themselves; on the one side, avoiding lightness and
variableness; on the other, too much severenesse and austerity.

What are the duties to be performed toward Aged persons?

To rise up before the hoary head, Duties of the younger unto them.
and honor the person of the aged, Lev. 19. 32. to give them the way, etc. in
regard their age is honorable; yet men that have a place of pre-eminency given
them of the Lord, may keep their places.

What is the contrary sin forbidden?

Despising, or disregarding of the Aged.

What is the duty of such as are Superiors in knowledge, and other graces?

To use their skill, Superiors in knowledge.
and other graces so, as others may be benefited by them, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

What is our duty toward them?

To give them the due approbation; to wait for their words, and give ear unto
their speeches, Job 32. 11. 16. as being wiser then our selves; to profit by
their gifts, and to make our benefit of their good graces, so far as our
calling will suffer.

What is the contrary sin?

Not acknowledging, nor reverencing, nor imitating the graces of their
Superiors.

Who are the Superiors with Authority? Superiors in Authority.


Such as by special Office, and Calling, have charge over others.

What are the Inferiors?

Such as be committed unto their charge.

What general duty is there between the Superiors and Inferiors of this sort.

To pray more especially one for another, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Psalm. 20. Psalm. 21. Genesis
24. 12. Psalm. 3. 8. and 25. 22. and 28. 0. Duties of Inferiors to those that
are in Authority.


What is required of the Inferiors?

Besides thankfulness, fidelity, Tit. 2. 10. there is specially required
subjection and obedience, Romans 13. 1.

What is Subjection?

An humble and a ready mind to submit our selves to their Government, who are
set over them, in acknowledging the necessity of their power in governing them,
Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 6. 1.

What is Obedience?

A voluntary and hearty doing of that which the Superiors command, Ephesians. 6. 1.
5, 6, 7. Col. 3. 20. Heb. 13. 7. or patient suffering, that they shall inflict
upon them; albeit it should be either without just cause, or somewhat more
excessively then the cause requires, Heb. 12. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20.

Is there no restraint of this obedience?

None, saving that which we owe unto God; in regard whereof, our obedience to
them must be in the Lord; that is, only in lawful things; otherwise we are in
reverence to refuse and allege our duty unto God for a warrant. Romans 1. 30.
Ephesians. 5. 24. and 6. 1. 1 Samuel 22. 17. Judge. 8. 6. and 8, 9.

What contrary sins are here condemned?

Disobedience, and neglect of humble submission to our Superiors commandments
and corrections, Romans 1. 30. Judge. 8. 6. 8, 9.

What is the duty of Superiors in Authority toward their Inferiors?

To protect and support such as are committed unto them, Duties of Superiors
in authority.
Epes. 5. 23. Romans 13. 4. To provide good things for the body and the soul,
Matthew. 7. 9, 10. To command things that are good and profitable for the
Inferiors, governing them prudently, and after an holy manner, not as Tyrants,
but as those that have a Governor above them, to whom they shall give an
account, Ephesians. 6. 9. and as those who rule over such as have a title unto, and
shall be partakers of the same glory which themselves look for, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

In what things does this government consist?

In two: Direction, and recompense of Reward.

Wherein consists Direction?

In Word and in Deed.

What must be done by word?

They must instruct and command them in the things which pertain to God, and to
their special callings, Ephesians. 6. 4. Genesis 18, 19.

Must every Superior in authority be careful for the instruction of those
that be under him in the things of God?

Yes verily: and herein God has declared his singular care of the everlasting
good of men, who has therefore commended the care of Religion to so many, to
the end they might be so much the more assuredly kept in the fear of God.

What is direction by Deed?

Good example; whereby in their life, conversation, and experience, they are to
go before their Inferiors, that thereby they may be provoked to follow them.

What is Recompense?

It is either a cheerful reward for well-doing, or a just chastisement for
evil; both which should be answerable in proportion to the deed done.

What is the sin contrary hereunto?

Abuse of this Authority, through too much lenity, 1 Samuel 2. 23. or severity,
Ephesians. 6. 4. 9.

How many kinds of Superiors are there with Authority? Kinds of Superiors in
Authority.


Two: private and public; and consequently, so many inferiors.

Who are private Superiors and Inferiors?

They are either in the Family, or in the Schools.

What is the duty of Superiors in the Family?

1. To provide for the Household, Superiors in the Family, and their duties.
the things belonging to their soul, by a familiar chatechising, and
examination, and to go before them in prayer accordingly; the Householder being
therein to be the mouth of his Family.

2. To provide the necessaries belonging to this present life; as food and
raiment, both sufficient and agreeable to every ones place, and estate, Genesis
18. 6, 7, 8. Prove. 27. 23, 24, 25. and 31. 15. 1 Timothy 5. 8. with convenient
government.

What is the duty of Inferiors in a Family? Inferiors in the Family, and their
duties.


To submit themselves to the order of the House, and according to their places
and gifts, to perform that which is commanded by the Governors thereof, for
the good of the Household, Genesis 39. 2, 3, 4.

What are the differences of Superiors and Inferiors in a Family?

They are either natural, as Husband and Wife, Parents and children; or
otherwise, as Masters and servants.

What are the common duties of the Husband and Wife one toward another?

Mutual and conjugall love one toward another; Duties of Husbands and wives.
yet so, as the Word presses love at the Husbands hands, more then at the
Wives, because men are commonly more short of that duty, Ephesians. 5. 25.

Wherein must this Conjugall Love be declared?

1. By mutual help, Genesis 2. 18.

2. By due benevolence, 1 Cor. 7. 3. except by consent for a time, that they
may give themselves to Fasting and Prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 5. 2 Samuel 11. 11.

What are the sins common to the Husband and the Wife?

1. Want of Love.

2. Bewraying one another infirmities.

3. Discovering each others secrets.

4. Jealousy.

5. Contention.

What is the duty of the Husband toward his Wife? Duties of the Husband.


1. In an entire love unto her, to cherish her, as he would cherish his own
flesh, and as Christ does his Church, Ephesians. 5.

2. To provide for her that which is meet and comely, during his life; and then
also, that she may be provided for after his death, if it so fall out.

3. To protect her, and defend her from all evil.

4. To dwell with her, as one of knowledge, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

5. To give honor to her, as the weaker vessel, ibid. that is, to bear with
her infirmities.

6. To govern and direct her.

What be the special sins of the Husband?

1. Not to dwell with his Wife.

2 Neglect of edifying her by instruction and example.

3 Denying her comfortable maintenance, and employment.

What is the duty of the Wife to the Husband? The duties of the wife.


1 Subjection in a gentle and moderate kind, and manner, Ephesians. 5. 22. For
albeit it be made heavier then it was from the beginning, through their
transgressions, yet that yoke is easier then any other domestical subjection.

2 Obedience, wherein Wives are often short, as Husbands in love, Ephesians. 5. 33. 1
Pet. 3. 1. 6.

3 She must represent (in all godly and commendable matters) his Image in her
behavior, that in her a man may see the wisdom and uprightness of her
husband, 1 Cor. 11. 7.

4 She must be an helper unto him, Genesis 2. 18. as otherwise, so by saving that
which he brings in, Prove. 31. 11, 12. 1 Timothy 3. 11.

Finally, she must recompense her husbands care over her, in providing things
necessary for his household, and do good for her husband all the days of her
life, Prove. 31. 12. that so he may be unto her, as it were a veil and
covering before her eyes, Genesis 20. 16.

What be the sins of the Wife, in respect of her Husband?

1 Failing in reverence, which appears in froward looks, speeches or
behavior.

2 Disobedience in the smallest matters.

3 Disregard of her husbands profit.

What duties come in the next place to be considered?

Those of natural Parents, Duties of Parents.
who are specially mentioned in this Commandment: whereunto also, are to be
reduced, all in the right line ascended, and their Collateralls, as also
Fathers in law, and Mothers in law.

What are the duties of natural Parents toward their Children?

They are either common to both Parents, or particular to either of them.

What are the common duties of both Parents?

They do either respect the things of this life, or of that which is to come.

What care are they to have of the Souls of their Children, to fit them for
the life to come?

1 To make them Members of the visible Church by Baptism.

2 They are to Catechize and instruct them in religion, as they are able to
receive it, and to bring them up in Nurture, and the fear of God, Ephesians. 6. 4.

3 They are to pray to God for to bless them, and guide them in his fear.

What is required of them for the things of this life?

1 To mark the wits and inclinations of their Children, and as far as their
own ability will reach, to apply them accordingly in due time, to some good
honest and godly calling, that so being trained up in such a trade, as they are
fittest for, they may not afterward live idly without any calling, Genesis 4. 2.
Prove. 20. 11. 22. 6.

2 To provide for them a godly marriage (if it please God) in time convenient,
1 Corinthians 7. 36.

3. Not only to maintain them during their abiding in their house, but also
to lay up and provide somewhat for them, that they may live honestly
afterward: and therefore are they to distribute their goods among their
children; and what they have received from their Ancestors, to leave the same
(where it may be done lawfully) to their posterity, 2 Cor. 12. 14. 2 Chro. 12.
3. Prove. 19. 14.

What special regard is here to be had by Parents to the eldest Son?

That since God has honored him with that dignity, as to be their strength,
Genesis 49. 3, 4. he should also be honored by them (at the least) with a double
portion, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. as by the rest of the brethren with honor, yet so as
he fall not from his honor by some horrible sin, Genesis 49. 4.

What be the common sins of Parents?

1. Negligence in not instructing their children betimes.

2. Not correcting them till it be too late, Sins of Parents.
or doing it with bitterness, without compassion, instruction, and prayer.

3. Giving them ill example.

4. Neglect in bringing them up in some lawful calling.

5. Not bestowing them timely and religiously in marriage.

6. Light behavior toward them, and too much familiarity with them, whereby
they become vile in their eyes.

7. Loving beauty, or any outward parts, more then Gods Image in them.

What is required of the Father in particular?

To give the name unto the child, Genesis 35. 18. Luke 1. 62, 63. For
notwithstanding the mothers have sometimes given the names, yet that has been
by the Fathers permission.

What special duty is laid upon the Mother?

To nurse the child, if she be able, Genesis 21. 7. 1 Samuel 1. 23. Lam. 4. 3, 4. 1
These. 2. 7, 8. 1 Timothy 2. 15. and 5. 10.

So much of the duty of Parents to their children: What is the duty of
Children toward their Parents?

It is either general, or special, viz. in the case of marriage.

What are the general duties? Duties of children toward their Parents.


1. To reverence them, and to perform careful obedience to them in all things
that they command; by the example of our Savior, who was subject to his
Parents, Luke 2. 51.

2. To pray for them.

3. To carry themselves, while they are under their Parents tuition, and after
they are parted from them, as they may cause their Parents (in their good
bringing up) to be commended, Prove. 10. 1. and 17. 25. and 31. 28.

4. To be an aid unto them as well as they be able, and to help them with
their bodies when they are in distress, Ruth, Chap. 1. ver. 16. 17, 18.

5. To repay their Parents care over them, by being ready to relieve them, if
they stand in need of relief, and want any thing wherewith God has blessed
them, 1 Timothy 5. 4. Genesis 45. 11. and 47. 12.

What be the contrary sins of Children, in respect of their Parents?

1. Disobedience.

2. Murmuring at their Parents chastisements.

3. Contemning them for any default of body or mind.

4. Unthankfulness, in not relieving them, not standing for their deserved
credit, etc.

What is the special duty of Children to their Parents in case of marriage.

That they ought not so much as attempt to bestow themselves in marriage
without their Parents direction, and consent, especially daughters, Genesis 24.
and 21. 21. and 27. 46. and 28. 9. Judges 14. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 36, 37, 38.

What reason have you to persuade children to this duty?

That seeing their Parents have taken such great pains and travel in bringing
them up, they should reap some fruits of their labors in bestowing of them.
Besides, they should give them this honor to esteem them better able, and
more wise to provide for their comfortable marriage then themselves are.

Is this duty required only of Children to their natural Parents that begat
them?

No; It is also in some degree required of children to their Uncles and Ants,
or to any other under whom they are, and that be in stead of Parents unto
them, when their Parents are dead, Esther 2. 10. 20. Ruth 2. 18. 23.

What is the duty of Masters toward their servants?

1. To deal honestly and justly with them, Duties of Masters toward their
Servants.
leaving off threatening, remembering they have a Master in heaven, Col. 4. 1.
Ephesians. 6. 9.

2. To have a care to instruct and catechize them, and to teach them the fear
of the Lord.

3. To teach them their Trades and Occupations, that they may be bettered for
being in their family.

4. To allow them fit wages for which they have covenanted with them, that they
may live honestly; for the labourer must have his hire.

5. To reward them plentifully, and to recompense their service when they part
from them, according as the Lord has blessed them by their labor, Deuteronomy. 15.
13, 14. and 24. 14, 15.

What are the sins of Masters?

1. Unadvised entertainment of sinful servants.

2. Negligence in not instructing them, in the fear of God, and in some
lawful calling, and not using religious exercises with them.

3. Not admonishing or correcting them, or doing it in an ill manner, grieving
more when they fail in their business, then when they are slack in Gods
service.

4. Giving them ill example, and using light behavior before them.

5. Detaining their wages from them, and not recompencing their labors by
giving them a due reward when they are with them, and when they part from them.

6. Neglect of them in sickness, unjust stopping of their wages for that time.

7. Not relieving them (if they be able) in their age, who have spent their
youth in their service.

What is the duty of Servants to their Masters?

1. To reverence and obey them in all things agreeable to the word. Duties of
servants toward their Masters.


2. To pray for them that God would guide their hearts.

3. To learn all good things from them.

4. To be faithful, and not prodigal in spending their goods.

5. With care and faithfulness, (as in the presence of God) to bestow
themselves wholly (at the times appointed) in their Masters business, doing
their work not only faithfully, and with a single eye, but also diligently,
Genesis 24. 10, 11, etc Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7.

What are the sins of Servants in respect of their Governors?

1. Contempt, and Disobedience.

2. Murmuring at their corrections, though unjust.

3. Idleness in their Calling.

4. Unthriftiness, and unfaithfulness in dealing with their Masters goods and
affairs.

5. Stealing and privy defrauding of them.

6. Eye-service, Ephesians. 6. 6.

Who are Superiors and Inferiors in the Schools?

Tutors and Schoolmasters are the Superiors; Pupills and Scholars the
Inferiors; whose duties are to be gathered by proportion out of those of
Fathers and Children, Masters and Servants in the Family.

Hitherto of Superiors and Inferiors, which are more private: who are the
public?

Such as govern, Public Superiors, and their duties.
and are governed in the Church and Commonwealth.

What is the duty of such Superiors?

To procure the common good of those, of whom they have received the charge;
forgetting (to that end) themselves, and their own private good, so often as
need shall require, Exodus 18. 13. 2 Samuel 24. 17. Matthew. 11. 2. 1 These. 2. 7, 8,
11.

What is the duty of Inferiors to their public Superiors?

To minister charges, and other things necessary for the execution of their
offices, and to their power to defend them in the same, Romans 13. 6, 7. Gal. 6.
6. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 9. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13.

How many sorts be there of public Superiors?

Two; The sorts of public Superiors.
Ecclesiastical, and Civil: the former whereof are (as it were) Divine, the
other are called Humane Creatures, 2 Kings 2. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

Why do you call the Ministers of the Church Divine Creatures?

Because they are precisely in their kinds, number, and orders, set down in
the word of God.

Why call you the other Humane Creatures?

Because, notwithstanding they are appionted of God, and such as without them
neither Church nor Commonwealth can stand; yet are not their kinds, and
number, and Order so appointed of God, but that men may make more or fewer, of
greater authority or less, according as the occasion of places, times, or the
disposition of peoples, do require.

Who are the Superiors in the Church? Superiors in the Church and their duties.


All Ecclesiastical Governors, and the Ministers of the Word especially, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Who are under the Government?

All Christians and Professors of Religion.

What is the Ministers duty to the people?

1 To be faithful and painful in dispensing to them the will of God, (and
not their own fancies, or the inventions of men) instructing them sincerely in
the way of salvation, and breaking unto them the daily bread of life, 2 Timothy 4.
1, 2. Acts 20. 26.

2 To comfort and strengthen the weak.

3 To be an example unto all, in life and conversation.

What be the sins of Ministers?

1 Slacknesse in Preaching.

2 Unprofitable or hurtful teaching.

3 Giving ill example.

What is the duty of the people to their Ministers? The peoples duty to their
Ministers.


1 To hear them willingly, Mat. 10. 14.

2 To submit themselves to all that they shall plainly and directly teach them
out of the Word of God. Heb. 13. 7. 17.

3 Frankely and freely to make provision for them, that there be no want, Gal.
6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 9. 4, 5. etc.

What be the sins of the people, in regard of their Ministers?

1 Disobeying and opposing against their Doctrine.

2 Denying them competent maintenance.

3 Not standing for them when they are wronged.

Who are Superiors in the Commonwealth? Superiors in the Commonwealth.


All Civil Magistrates, whether they be Supreme, as Emperors and Kings, or
inferior Governors under them, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 15. whereunto are to be referred
the General in the Field, and Captains in War, as also in Courts, Advocates
are Fathers to their Clients.

Who are under the Government of the Civil Magistrates?

All persons and Subjects in the Realm, City or State, where they are
Governors, Romans 13. 1.

What are the duties of Kings and inferior Magistrates in the Commonwealth?

They are twofold; First, in respect of Gods matters; Secondly, in regard of
civil affairs, 1 Timothy 2. 12. The former whereof regards the good of the
souls, the latter, of the bodies of their Subjects.

What is the Civil Magistrate to do in Gods matters, and for the Souls of
the Subjects?

1 He should pray for them that God would make their hearts obedient unto him.

2 He should see that God be honored in his Dominions, that abuses in Religion
be reformed, and the truth promoted and maintained, after the example of David,
Solomon, Hezekiah, Josias, and other good Kings, 2 Cro. 14. 3, 4. and 15. 12,
15. and 17. 6, 9.

3. He should plant the sincere preaching of the Word among his subjects; that
so they may be more obedient unto him: And take care that the good things
already taught and established, may be done as God has appointed. He is not to
make new Laws of his own for Religion; but to see those Ordinances of
Religion which are grounded upon the Word of God, duly established and
preached, that so God may be truly served and glorified; and the Church within
his Realms, and under his government, may under him lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all goodlinesse and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. For he who
neglects this duty unto God, shall never perform his duty to man, how
politic soever he seem to be.

What is the Magistrate especially to perform, The Magistrates duty in civil
affairs.
in respect of civil affairs?

1. He must look to the peace of the Commonwealth, over which he is set, 1 Timothy 2. 2. defending his subjects from their enemies, and preserving their
lives in war and peace, and suppressing murderers, robbers, and all outrageous
persons.

2. He must not only maintain peace, but also honesty; that by him we may not
only lead a peaceable life, but also an honest, 1 Timothy 2. 2. where specially he
is to provide, that all uncleanness be removed.

3. He must see that justice be duly executed, Psalm. 72. 2, 4. and that the
Ministers thereof give judgment speedily in matters belonging to their
judgment.

4. He must take order, that every man may enjoy his own, Psalm. 72. 4.

5. He must cherish the good, and discountenance the bad, and take order that
Malefactors may be punished, and well doers may be encouraged, Psalm. 72. 4, 7.
Romans 13. 3, 4.

What is the sin of Magistrates?

Carelessness in performing those former duties.

What is the duty of Subjects to their Magistrates? The duties of Subjects
toward their Magistrates.


1. To pray for them, that God would rule their hearts by his holy Spirit, that
under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

2. To help them with our goods, paying willingly, customs, tax, and tribute,
due to them, Mat. 22. 17, 21. Romans 13. 6, 7. which condemns the popish
Clergy, that detract this Tribute.

3. To adventure our lives for them in war and peace, 2 Samuel 21. 16, 17. and
23. 15, 16.

4. When they do us wrong not to rebel, but endure it patiently; for it is
better to suffer for well doing then for evil.

5. To be obedient and dutiful unto them, and to obey their Laws in the Lord.

Do their Laws bind the Conscience?

As far as they are agreeable with the Laws of God, the do; but otherwise
they do not: for there is but one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to
destroy, Jam 4. 12.

What learn you out of the former?

That Drunkards, Thieves, Murderers, etc. break both this Commandment, and
that other under which those sins are principally contained.

What out of the latter?

That the Papists are to be condemned, who hold that the Popes Laws do bind
the conscience.

What be the sins of Subjects?

1. Disobedience, and Rebellion.

Refusing and repining to pay dues.

Hitherto of the duties of Superiors, Of the helps and means inabling us to
keep this fifth Commandment.
Inferiors, and Equals: Show now what are the helps of the obedience of this
Commandment.

They are either common to all, or proper to Inferiors and Superiors.

What is common to all?

There must be endeavor to nourish and increase a natural Affection, Romans 12.
10. Humility, Romans 12. 16. and Wisdom to discern what is good and fitting
for our own and others places, Romans 13. 7.

What is proper to the Inferiors?

He must see God in the place and authority of his superiors, Romans 13. 1.
setting before his eyes the dreadful threatenings, and example of Gods
vengeance on the seditious and disobedient, Eccles. 10. 8.

What is proper to the Superiors?

He must be the same to his Inferiors that he would have Christ to be unto
himself, Ephesians. 6. 9. remembering the tragical ends of Tyrants and Usurpers.

What hindrances of these duties are to be avoided?

1. Self-love, Hindrances to these duties here commanded.
which makes men unfit, either to rule, or to obey; 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4.

2. Partial inquiry into the the duties of others toward us, joined for the
most part with the neglect of our own, Eccles. 7. 23, 24.

3. The fury of the Anabaptists.

4. The company of seditious persons, and despisers of government. Prove. 24.
21, 22.

What is the reason annexed to this Commandment? Of the reason annexed to the
fifth Commandment.


That thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee in the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, Deuteronomy. 5. I6.

What is taught in this reason?

That God moves the hearts of Superiors, to promote the good estate of
Inferiors; for so also do the words sound, Exodus 20. 12. that they may
prolong thy days: besides the providence of God to the obedient, which is
far above all experience of men's provision.

What is the sum of this promise?

The blessing of long life and prosperity to such as by keeping this
Commandment shall show that they regard the Image and Ordinance of God, Ephesians.
6. 1, 2, 3. Romans 13. 1, 2.

Have not the other Commandments this promise?

No, not expressly; which shows that a more plentiful blessing in this kind
follows from the obedience of this Commandment then of the other that
follow. Hence it is called by the Apostle, the first Commandment with promise;
Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. it being the first in order of the second Table, and the only
Commandment of that Table, that has an express promise, and the only
Commandment of the Ten, that has a particular promise.

But how is this promise truly performed, seeing some wicked men live long, and
the godly are taken away in the midst of their time?

1. The Lord performs all temporal promises, Of the promise of long life,
and how performed
so far forth as it is good for us; and therefore, the godly are sure to live
so long as it shall serve for Gods glory, and for their own good; but the
wicked live to their further condemnation, Isa. 56. 20.

2. It is enough, that the promises of this life be performed for the most part.

3. What loses the obedient child? what injury is done unto him, who being
taken out of this life, is recompensed with a better? or what breach of promise
is in him that promises silver, and pays with gold, and that in greater
weight and quantity? As for the wicked, they gain nothing by their long life,
receiving by means thereof, hereafter, judgment in hell.

Does not the Lord oftentimes revenge the breach of his Commandment, even in
this life?

Yes: 1. Upon the Parents, who have been ungracious themselves, in giving unto
them ungracious and disobedient children.

2. Upon the Children themselves, who are sometimes immediately stricken from
Heaven, and sometimes punished by the Law of the Magistrate.

So much of the fifth Commandment, concerning all special duties to special
persons: What are the general duties in the Commandments following, which
come at least to consent?

They are either such as concern the person it self of our Neighbor in the
sixth, or such as concern the things that belong to his person: as his
chastity in the seventh, his goods in the eighth, and his good name in the
ninth Commandment.

What are the words of the sixth Commandment? The sixth Commandment.


Thou shall not murder, Exodus 20. 13.

What is the sum and meaning of this Commandment?

That the life and person of man (as being the Image of God) be by man not
impeached, The sum and meaning of the sixth Commandment.
but preserved, Genesis 9. 5. And therefore, that we are not to hurt our own
persons, or the person of our Neighbor, but to procure the safety thereof, and
to do those things that lie in us, for the preservation of his, and our life
and health, 1 Timothy 5. 23.

What is forbidden in this Commandment?

All kind of evil, The Negative part.
tending to the impeachment of the safety, and health of man's person, with
every hurt done, threatened, or intended, to the soul or body, either of our
selves, or of our Neighbors.

What is required in this Commandment?

All kind of good, The Affirmative part.
tending to the preservation of the welfare of man's person; that we love and
cherish both the soul and body of our Neighbor, as we would and ought to do
our own, Heb. 3. 13. Jam. 1. 27. Phil. 2. 12. Ephesians. 5. 29. For some of the
duties here enjoined, concern our own person, some the person of our neighbor.

What be those duties that do concern our own persons? The duties respecting
our persons.


They are either such as ought to be performed by us in our own life time, or
when we are ready to depart out of this world.

What are the duties we are to perform toward our own selves in our life
time?

They respect either the welfare of our souls, or of our bodies.

What are the duties that respect the welfare of our souls?

1. To use the means of grace, Duties respecting our souls,
1 Pet. 2. 2.

2. Diligence to finish our salvation, Phil. 2. 12. and to make our election
sure by the fruits of faith, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

3. To reject evil, and approve that which is good, Psalm. 1. 11. Prove. 1. 10.
15.

4. To imitate the example of good men, and not to take scandals given by
others.

5. To follow our vocation diligently.

What be the contrary vices forbidden?

Cruelty to our own souls; The contrary vices forbidden.
by,

1. Rejecting the food of spiritual life, by not hearing, Prove. 28. 9. or not
obeying the Word, Jam. 1. 22.

2. Corrupting, or perverting it by itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3. or unstable
minds, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

3. Want of knowledge, Prove. 4. 13. and 8. 35, 36. Hos. 4. 6. especially when
people have had the ordinary means appointed of God for obtaining the same,
either of their own, or of others, which they might have been partakers of.

4. Sin, especially gross sins, Prove. 6. 32. and 8. 36. and obstinacy in
sinning, Romans 2. 5. Tit. 3. 11.

5. Following of evil counsel, and evil examples, and taking of scandals.

6. Neglecting of our vocation.

What be the things that respect the welfare of our bodies?

1. Sober and wholesome diet, Duties respecting our bodies.
1 Timothy 5. 23.

2. Help of Physic, when need is: so that it be after we have first sought
unto God, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.

3. Using honest recreation, whereby health may be maintained, Judge. 14. 12.

4. Preventing unnecessary dangers.

5. Giving place to the fury of another, as Jacob did to Esau, by his mothers
counsel, Genesis 27. 43, 44.

What be the contrary sins forbidden? The contrary vices forbidden.


1. Immoderate worldly sorrow, as the Apostle says, works death, 2 Cor. 7.
10.

2. Malice and envy, which makes a man a murderer of himself, as well as of
his Neighbors; for (as the Wise man notes) Envy is the rottenness of the
bones, Prove. 14. 30.

3. Neglect either of wholesome diet, or of exercise, and honest recreation, or
of physic, to preserve or recover health: For we must not think, that there
are no more ways to kill a man's self, but with a knife, etc.

4. Drunkenness and surfeiting, eating and drinking out of time, Prove. 25. 16.
Eccles. 10. 16, 17. or spending ones self by unchaste behavior, Prove. 5. 11.
and 7. 22, 23. All which are enemies to the health and life of man.

5. Launcing or whipping our flesh, 1 King. 18. 28. Colos. 2. 23. Ephesians. 5. 29.
as Idolaters use to do, or otherwise wounding our selves.

6. Capital crimes, 1 King. 2. 23.

7. Unnecessary dangers.

8. Not giving place to the fury of another.

9. Refusing the means of life.

10. Self-murder, 1 Samuel 31. 4. 2 Samuel 17. 23. Mat. 27. 5. Acts 16. 27, 28.

What are we to do at the time of our departure out of this life? Duties
respecting the time of our departure.


1. With willingness we must receive the sentence of death, when God shall
utter it, 2 Cor. 1. 9.

2. We must then resign our charge in Church and Commonwealth, or Family,
into the hands of faithful men, Numb. 27. 16. 2 Chronicles. 28. 1, etc.

3. We must resign our souls to God in Christ, Psalm. 31. 5. with confidence
of his love, though he kill us, Job 13. 15. of the remission of our sins, and
our resurrection unto immortality, Job 19. 25. etc.

2 We must leave our body to the earth, as a pledge, in time to be resumed,
giving order for the comely and Christian burial thereof, Genesis 49. 29. 1 King.
13. 31.

Hitherto of the duties that concern our own persons: What are they that do
respect our Neighbor?

They likewise are to be performed unto him, Duties respecting our Neighbor
while he lives.
either while he is alive, or after his death.

What are the duties belonging to our Neighbor while he lives?

They are partly inward, partly outward.

What are the inward?

To love our neighbors as our selves, Inward duties respecting our affections.
to think well of him, to be charitably affected toward him, and to study to
do him good, in respect that we are all the creatures of one God, and the
natural children of Adam; for which end we are to cherish all good affections
in our hearts:

What be those good affections here required?

1. Humility and kindness, proceeding from a loving heart to man, as he is
man, Romans 12. 10. Ephesians. 4. 32.

2. A contentment to see our brother pass and exceed us in any outward or
inward gifts or graces, with giving of thanks to God for endowing him with such
gifts.

3. Compassion and fellow-feeling of his good and evil, Romans 12. 15, 16. Heb.
13. 3.

4. Humility.

5. Meekness.

6. Patience, long-suffering and slownesse to anger, Ephesians. 4. 26. 1 These. 5. 14.

7. Easiness to be reconciled, and to forget wrong done unto us, Ephesians. 4. 32.

8. A peaceable mind, careful to preserve and make peace, Romans 12. 18. 1
These. 5. 13. Matthew. 5. 9.

What is required for preservation of peace? Duties respecting the preservation
of peace.


1. Care of avoiding offenses.

2. Construing things in the best sense, 1 Cor. 13. 7.

3. Parting sometime with our own right, Genesis 13. 8, 9.

4. Passing by offenses, and patiently suffering of injuries lest they break
out into greater mischief.

What are the inward vices here condemned?

The consenting in heart to do our neighbor harm, Evil passions opposite to
these duties.
with all passions of the mind, which are contrary to the love we owe to him.

What be those evil passions?

1. Anger, either rash, or without cause; or passing measure, when the cause is
just, Matthew. 5. 21. 22. Ephesians. 4. 26. 31.

2. Hatred and malice, which is a murder in the mind, 1 Ioh. 3. 15.

3. Envy, whereby one hates his brother, as Cain the murderer did, for some
good that is in him, James 3. 14. Prove. 14. 30. 1 John 3. 12.

4. Grudging and repining against our brother, which is a branch of envy, 1 Timothy 2. 8.

5. Unmercifulness and want of compassion, Romans 1. 31. Amos 6. 6.

6. Desire of revenge, Romans 12. 19.

7. Cruelty, Psalm. 5. 6. Genesis 49. 5. 7.

8. Pride, which is the mother of all contention, Prove. 13. 10.

9. Uncharitable suspicions, 1 Cor. 13. 5. 7. 1 Samuel 1. 13, 14. yet godly
jealousy over another is good, if it be for a good cause.

10. Frowardness, and uneasinesse to be entreated, Romans 1. 31.

What use are we to make of this?

That we should kill such affections at the first rising, and pray to God
against them.

So much of the inward: Outward duties respecting the souls of our neighbors.
what of the outward?

They respect the soul principally, or the whole man, and the body more
specially.

What duties are required of us for preservation of the souls of our
neighbors?

1. The ministering of the food of spiritual life, Esa. 62. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Acts 20. 28.

2. Giving good counsel, and encouraging unto well-doing, Hebr. 10. 24, 25.

3. Walking without offense: which the Magistrate ought to be careful of in
the Commonwealth, the Minister in his Church, and every one in his calling;
for the rule of the Apostle reaches to all, Give no offense neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32.

4. Giving good example, and thereby provoking one another to love good works,
Matthew. 5. 16. 2 Cor. 9. 2. Heb. 10. 24.

5. Reproving our brothers sins by seasonable admonition, Lev. 19. 17. 1
These. 5. 14. Psalm. 141. 5.

6. Comforting the feeble mind, and supporting the weak, 1 These. 4. 18. and 5.
14.

What are the contrary vices here condemned? The contrary vices to the former
duties.


1. When the food of spiritual life is withheld, Prove. 29. 18. Amos 7. 13.
which charge specially lies upon such Ministers as are ignorant shepherds,
and cannot, or idle, and will not feed the flock committed to their charge, or
for the most part neglect their own, and busy themselves elsewhere, without any
necessary and lawful calling, Ezekiel. 3. 18. and 13. 19. Jer. 48. 10. Isa. 56.
10. Acts 20. 26, 27, 28.

2. When the Word is corrupted by erroneous, or vain and curious expositions,
1 Timothy 1. 4.

3. When Magistrates procure not so much as in them lies, that the people
under their government do frequent the hearing of the Word read, and preached,
and receiving of the Sacraments in appointed times.

4. When men command, or tempt others to things unlawful, 1 King. 12. 28.

5. When men give offenses, either by evil example of life, Prove. 29. 12. or
by unseasonable use of Christian liberty, 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11.

6. When we rebuke not our neighbor when he is in fault, but suffer him to
sin, Lev. 19. 17.

7. When the blind lead the blind, Mat. 15. 14. and those that be seduced
seduce others, Mat. 23. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 13.

So much of that which concerns the soul of our neighbor principally:
Duties respecting the whole person of our Neighbors.
Wherein consists that which respects his whole person, and his body more
specially?

In gesture, words and deeds.

What is required in our gestures?

A friendly countenance, Gestures.
that we look cheerfully upon our neighbors, and an amiable behavior, Phil.
4. 8. Jam. 3. 13.

What is here forbidden?

All gestures, which declare the scornfulnesse, anger, or hatred of the heart,
with all froward and churlish behavior, 1 Samuel 25. 17. So that here is
condemned, 1. A scornful look, and any disdainful sign, expressed by the
gestures of the head, nose, tongue, fingers, or any other member of our body;
as nodding the head, putting out the tongue, pointing with the finger, and all
manner of deriding of our neighbors, 27. 39. Genesis 21. 9. Compare Gal. 4. 29.
2. A lowering countenance, such as was in Cain, Genesis 4. 5, 6. snuffing, Psalm.
10. 5. frowning, etc. which as sparks come from the fire of wrath and hatred.

What does this teach us?

That we are to look to our own countenance, that it bewray not the
filthiness of our hearts: for God has so adorned the countenance and face of
man, that in it may be seen the very affections of the heart, 1 Cor. 11. 7.

What is required in our words?

That we salute our neighbor gently, Duties required in words.
speak kindly, and use courteous amiable speeches; which according to the
Hebrew phrase is called, a speaking to the heart one of another, Ephesians. 4. 32.
Ruth. 2. 13.

What are the contrary vices here forbidden?

1. Evil speaking of a brother, The opposite vices.
although the matter be not false in it self; when it is not done either to a
right end, or in due time, or in a right manner.

2. Disdainful speaking, when words are contemptuously uttered, whether they
carry with them any further signification or no, as to say, Tush, or to call
our brother, Raca, Mat. 5. 22, and such like.

3. Bitter and angry words or speeches, wrathfully uttered by any evil or vile
terms, as Fool, and such like, Mat. 5. 22.

4. Mockings for some want of the body, Lev. 19. 14. especially for piety, Genesis
21. 9. 2 Samuel 6. 20. In stead that they ought to be an eye to the blind, and a
foot to the lame, Job. 29. 15. yet Gods children may sometimes use mocking in a
godly manner, as Elias did to the Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18. 27.

5. Grudges and complaints one of another, Jam. 5. 9.

6. Brawling, threatening, and provoking of others, Tit. 3. 2.

7. Crying, which is an unseemly lifting up of the voice, Ephesians. 4. 31.

8. Despightfull words, reviling and cursed speakings, Prove. 12. 18. yet men in
authority may use such terms, as the sin of those with whom they deal does
deserve.

What use are you to make of all this? The use.


That according to the counsel of Saint Paul, we see that no corrupt
communication proceed out of our mouth, but that which is good, to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29. that our
speech be always gracious, seasoned with salt, that we may know how we ought
to answer every man, Col. 4. 6. For as flesh in Summer, if it be not poudred
with salt, will smell: so will it be with them that have not their hearts
seasoned with the word of truth. And thence for want of care, proceed angry,
wrathful and loathsome speeches against our brother, which are in the
Scripture compared to Juniper coals, which burn most fiercely, Psalm. 120. 4.
or to the pricking of a sword, or a razor, which cutteth most sharply, Prove.
12. 18. Psalm. 52. 2. Whereupon the tongue is by Saint James said to be an
unruly evil, set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3. 6, 8. We ought therefore to govern
our tongues by the Word of God, and take heed of vile speeches.

So much of our Gestures and our Words: Duties required in our deeds.
what is required in our deeds?

1. That we do good to our Neighbors, so far as our power and calling will
suffer.

2. That we visit and comfort him in sickness and affliction, Mat. 25. 36.
Jam. 1. 27.

3. That we give meat, drink and cloth, to the poor and needy.

4. That we give relief to the distressed, and succor to the oppressed, Job
29. 15, etc.

5. That we foresee and prevent mischiefs before they come.

6. That we rescue our Neighbor from danger, and defend him with our hands, if
we can, if we may.

What be the contrary sins forbidden? The contrary vices to the former duties.


1. Oppression and cruelty, in withdrawing the means of life, Iam. 5. 4. as by
usury, and by letting out of land, so that men cannot live by it, etc.

2. Not looking unto the sick, and those that be in distress.

3. Neglect of Hospitality, especially to the poor, which by the Commandment
of God must be provided for.

4. Not preventing mischief, and turning away all strokes from our Neighbors,
so much as in us lies.

5. Extremity and Cruelty in punishing where the correction is excessive, Deuteronomy.
25. 3. 2 Cor. 11. 29. or is not inflicted in love of Justice, Deuteronomy. 16. 19, 20.

6. All angry and despitefull striking, how little soever it be.

7. Fighting, smiting, wounding, or maiming of the body of our brother, or
neighbor, Iam. 4. 1. Lev. 24. 19, 20.

8. The indangering or taking away of his life.

How is this done?

Either directly, or indirectly.

How indirectly?

1. When one defends himself with injury or purpose of revenge, How we do
indirectly endanger our neigbours life.
or to hurt his adversary, and not only to save himself, Romans 12. 21. Exodus
22. 2, 3.

2. When women with child, either by mis-diet, or streine by reaching, violent
exercise, riding by Coach, or otherwise, and much more by dancing, either hurt
the fruit of their womb, or altogether miscarry.

3. When children begotten in Fornication or Adultery are committed to them to
keep, which have no care of them.

4. When those to whom it appertains do not punish the breach of this
Commandment, Number. 35, 31, 32. Prove. 17. 15.

5. Keeping of harmfull beasts. Exodus 21. 29.

6. All dangerous pastimes.

7. When things are so made, that men may take harm by them, or such care is
not had of them that ought to be; as when the highways and bridges are not
mended; or when stairs are so made, that they are like to hurt either
children, servants, or others; when Wells and Ditches (or any such like
dangerous places) are not covered or fenced, Exodus 21. 33. whereunto belongs
that the Lord commanded the Israelites to have Battlements upon their houses,
Deuteronomy. 22. 8.

How directly? How we do directly take away our neighbors life.


When a man without a Calling does actually take away the life of his brother,
Genesis 9. 6. otherwise then in case of public Justice, John 7. 19. just war,
Deuteronomy 20. 12, 13. or necessary defense, Exodus 22. 2.

How many sorts of this direct killing are there?

Three.

First, Chance-medly.

Secondly, Manslaughter.

Thirdly, Wilful murder.

What is that which we call Chance-medley.

When it is simply against our will, Chance-medly, and how proved to be a sin.
and we think nothing of it, as he which felleth a tree, and his Axe head
falls and hurts and kills a man, Deuteronomy: 19: 4: 5: which is the least sin
of the three, and by man's Law deserves not death, and therefore by the Law of
Moses in this case the benefit of Sanctuary was granted, Exodus 21. 13.

But how appears it to be a sin at all?

1. Because by the Law of Moses the party that commits this ^act was to lose
his liberty, until the death of the high Priest; to signify that he could not
be freed from the guilt thereof, but by the death of Jesus Christ, the great
high Priest.

2. Because it is a fruit of the sin of our first Parents, who if they had
stood in that integrity wherein God created them, such an act as this should
never have happened.

3. Because there is some impudency in him that does it, and want of
consideration.

What should this teach us?

To take heed of all occasions that may make us guilty of this sin.

What do you account Manslaughter? Of Manslaughter.


When one kills another in his own defense: whereunto also may be added: If
one should kill a man at unawares, in hurling stones to no use; Or if a
drunkard in reeling should fell another, whereof he should dye; for this is
different from that which comes by chance-medley, when a man is employed in a
good and lawful work.

What think you of killing one another, and challenges to the field?

It deserves death by the law of God and man. Of Duels.


What is wilful Murder?

When a man advisedly, wittingly, and maliciously, does slay or poison his
Neighbor, which is a sin of a high nature, and at no hand by the Magistrate to
be pardoned, because thereby the Land is defiled, Genesis 9. 5, 6. Hos. 4. 2, 3.
Numb. 35. 31, 33, 34. Deuteronomy. 21. 2, 7, 8, 9.

What reasons are there to set out the detestation of this sin?

1. If a man deface the Image of a Prince, Reasons persuading to the
detestation of this sin.
he is severely punished; how much more if he deface the Image of God? Genesis 9.
6.

2. By the law of Moses, if a beast, an unreasonable creature, had killed a
man, it should be slain, and the flesh of it (though otherwise clean) was not
to be eaten, Exodus 21. 28.

3. By the same law, if this sin go unpunished, God will require it at the
place where it was committed, and at the Magistrates hands, Numb. 35. 33.

Hitherto of the duties of this Commandment, belonging to the person of our
Neighbor while he is alive: What are they after his death?

They either concern himself, or those that pertain to him.

What are the duties that concern himself? Duties to be performed to our
Neighbor after his death.


1. Friends and Neighbors should see that his body be honestly buried, and
Funerals decently performed, Genesis 23. 4, 19. and 25. 9. 1 Samuel 25. 1. Psalm. 79.
3. Romans 11. 9.

2. Moderate mourning is to be used for him, Eccles. 12. 7. 1 These. 4. 13.

3. We are to report well of him, as he has deserved.

4. We are to judge the best of him.

What is that which concerns those that belong to him?

To provide for his wife, children and posterity, that he may live in them,
Ruth 2. 20. 2 Samuel 9. 7.

So much of the respect which we owe unto our Neighbors. Is it not required
also, Duties respecting beasts.
that we should show mercifulness unto our beasts?

Yes: A righteous man is to regard the life of his beast, Prove. 12. 10. and all
hard usage of the creatures of God is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 22. 6, 7. and 25. 4. yet
not so much in regard of them, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. as that thereby the Lord would
train us forward, to show mercy to our Neighbor: For it being unlawful to
use the dumb creatures cruelly, it is much more unlawful to use men so.

What are the breakers of this Commandment to expect?

The Apostle James teaches that, when he says, Judgment without mercy shall
be upon those that are merciless, James 2. 13.

Of how many sorts are those judgments? Of punishments due to the breakers of
this Commandment.


They either concern this life, or that which is to come.

What be those that concern this life?

1. Severe punishments, (by the Law) are to be inflicted upon the body, as
limb for limb, eye for eye, hand for hand, tooth for tooth, wound for wound,
blood for blood, life for life, Exodus 21. 23. Judge. 1. 5, 6, 7. although it
were a beast, if it were known to be a striker, Exodus 21. 28.

2. Short life, Psalm. 55. 23. bloodthirsty men that live not out half their
days.

3. Magistrates that should punish murderers; if they spare them, their lives
are in danger to go for the offender, as Achabs did for Benhadads, 1 Kings 20.
42. David was exceedingly punished for sparing bloodthirsty men, (such as was
his son Absalom) and not punishing them, 2 Samuel 13. 28, 29. and 14. 33. and 16.
11.

4. God threatens that he will not only revenge the blood of the slain upon
the murderer himself, but also upon his issue, and posterity in unrecoverable
diseases, 2 Samuel 3. 29.

What is the punishment that concerns the life to come?

1. That their prayers are not heard, Esaias 1. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 8.

2. Everlasting death both of body and soul in the bottomless pit of Hell;
and as the degrees of sin are, so shall the punishment be.

What means are we to use for furthering us to the obedience of this
Commandment?

It behooves us to consider, Means furthering us in the obedience of this
Commandment.
that first, all men are made in the Image of God, Genesis 9. 6. and of one blood
with us, Acts 17. 26. and all Christians in the Image of Christ also, in whom
we are all one body, 1 Cor. 12. 17.

2. God has appointed the Magistrate also to punish proportionably every
offender in this kind, Genesis 9. 6. Lev. 24. 20, 21. Yea himself also
extraordinarily bringing murderers to light and punishment, Genesis 4. 9. Prove.
28. 17. Acts 28. 4.

What must we avoid as hindrances to the obedience of this Commandment?

1. The false opinion of the world, Hindrances of our obedience to this
Commandment.
in placing manhood in revenge and bloodshed, Genesis 4. 23, 24.

2. The company of furious and unmercifull men, Proverbs 22. 24, 25.

3. Greedy desire of gain, Prove. 1. 19. Mic. 3. 3.

4. Pride, Prove. 13. 10.

5. Riot and drunkenness, Prove. 23. 29.

Hitherto of the general duties that belong to the person of man contained in
the sixth Commandment: what follows?

The duties which we owe to man in regard of the things which belong unto him:
the first whereof concerns those that be most dear unto him; namely, his
family, and his wife especially, who is nearest unto him, and as himself,
being one flesh with him. In respect whereof, temperance and chastity is
required in the next Commandment.

What are the words of the seventh Commandment?

Thou shall not commit Adultery, The seventh Commandment.
Exodus 20. 14.

What is comprehended under this name of Adultery?

All sins of that sort committed, either in the body, or in the mind of
persons, whether married or unmarried, are signified by this name, to signify
the vileness of the breach of this Commandment.

What then is the meaning and scope of this Commandment? The meaning and scope
of the seventh Commandment.


That all uncleanness and impurity be avoided, and chastity by all means
preserved, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 1 These. 4. 3, 4, 5.

What is here forbidden?

All impurity and uncleannes, together with all means and provocations to lust.

What is here required?

All purity, honest behavior, continent and chaste usage toward our selves,
and toward our Neighbors, 1 These. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 34.

What are the special breaches of this Commandment?

They are either inward, or outward.

What is the inward?

The unchastity and dishonesty of the mind, Of inward impurity, and the
branches of it.
with all filthy imaginations, and inordinate lusts, Mat. 5. 28. Col. 3. 5.

What are the special branches of this inward impurity?

1. The desire of strange flesh, with resolution to have it if he could, Col.
3. 5. 1 These. 4. 5. For to lust after a strange woman with consent of heart, is
forbidden in this, Mat. 5. 28. as lust without consent is in the last
Commandment. Not that the bare affection is of it self a sin, being rightly
directed to a true and good object; but the abuse of the affection, the right
subject, manner and measure being not observed.

2. Inward boiling and burning in affection, whereby godly motions, as with a
fire are burnt up, and a man's mind is so carried away, that he is hindered in
all other things belonging to his Calling. This is an high degree of
corruption, which if it be not restrained, will break forth into further
mischief, Jam. 1. 15. And therefore we are earnestly to pray to God against it;
and if we can no otherwise prevail, we must use the remedy of Marriage
prescribed by God himself: For it is better to marry then to burn, 1 Cor. 7.
9.

3. Evil thoughts and cogitations in the mind arising from foolish and vain
talk, but first and principally from our own concupiscence, when a man
suffers, as it were, his soul to be trampled under foot with impure
imaginations, Jam. 1. 14, 15.

4. Jealousy in the mind betwixt two persons, upon no just occasion, or good
ground, which is contrary to that entire love and affection which a man should
have toward his wife, Numb. 5.

What is the inward virtue here commended?

The virginity and constancy of the mind, and the chastity and purity of the
heart, 1 Cor. 7. 34. 1 These. 4. 3, 4. and 5. 23.

What is the outward breach of this Commandment?

Such uncleannes, as being once seated in the mind, after shows it self
outwardly.

Wherein does it show it self?

Either in things that belong to the body, or else in the body it self.

How in those things that belong to the body?

In the abuse either of apparel, or of meat and drink.

How is this Commandment broken in the abuse of apparel, and the ornaments of
the body?

1. By excess, Abuse of Apparel.
when it is above our estate or ability, Mat. 11. 8. Isa. 3. 16.

2. By lightness, when it is wanton and lascivious; And hence some apparel is
called by the Holy Ghost, whorish, Prove. 7. 10. which is a great occasion of
lust and uncleanness.

3. By immodesty, and wearing of such attire, as does disfigure the body.

4. New-fanglednesse, when it is not according to the custom of the Country,
City, or Town where we dwell, 2 Samuel 13. 18.

5. When it is otherwise then belongs to the sex: As if a man put on woman's
apparel, or a woman a man's, which is abominable to God, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.

What are the Reasons hereof?

1. God would have every sex here maintained, that the man should not become
effeminate, nor the woman mannish.

2. To avoid a most notorious occasion of shameless and namelesse sin: For if
a man may be inflamed with a wanton Picture painted, much more with a lively
Image, and portraiture of the sex.

3. It is a dishonor for a man to belie his sex, and to spoil himself of
the dignity God has given him, and presumption for a woman to desire the
reputation of a better sex then God has set her herein.

May not women in their apparel submit themselves to please their Husbands?

They must seek to please them by lawful means; and therefore by clothing
themselves in decent apparel with sobriety, and for their success to put
their trust in God, who is able by modesty in apparel, without any such
indirect means, to maintain their Husbands love toward them, 1 Pet. 3. 5.

What Apparel are we then to use?

Such as comes under the rule of the Apostle; namely, such as may witness
our godliness and modesty, 1 Timothy 2. 9. Tit. 2. 3. And therefore, although
some (exceeding this measure) say they do it not to allure any; yet if others
be allured by it, it is a sin in them, although not so grievous and great as in
the other, who propound to themselves (by their wanton apparel) to allure.

How is this Commandment broken in the abuse of meat and drink?

Either in regard of the quality, Of the abuse of meat and drink.
or of the quantity thereof.

How in regard of the quality?

1. When we seek after too much daintiness, Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Luke 16. 19.

2. When we seek such kind of meat and drink which provoke this sin.

How in regard of the quantity?

By excess and intemperance in diet, when we feed to fullness, and give our
selves to surfeiting and drunkenness, Ezekiel. 15. 49.

What be the contrary duties here commanded?

1. Temperance, in using a sober and moderate diet, Eccles. 10. 16. according
to our ability, and the use of the Country where we be.

2. Convenient abstinence, 1 Cor. 9. 27.

So much of the breach of this Commandment in the abuse of those things which
belong to the body: Wherein consists the abuse of the body it self?

Partly, in the gestures and carriage of the body; partly, in speech and words;
partly, in act or deed.

How is the wantonness of the heart manifested by the countenance, gesture,
Wanton Gestures,
and carriage of the body?

1. By impudency, or lightness in countenance, gesture or behavior, Prove. 6.
13. and 7. 10, etc.

2. By wanton looks, when the eye (which is the seat of Adultery, or of
Chastity) is suffered to wander without regard; and either gives occasion to
others to commit Adultery, or is so fixed to behold the beauty of another, or
else lascivious and wicked Pictures (wherein many set their delight) and with
the like things wherewith the heart is inflamed to lust, and allured to
filthiness thereby, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Mat. 5. 28. Genesis 39. 7. Job 31. 1. Eze. 23. 14.

3. By uncovering of the nakedness of the breasts, and other parts of the
body, for the allurement of others: whereunto may be referred the Apostles
Commandment for women to be uncovered, 1 Cor. 11. 6. And the example of
Rebekah, who for modesty put a veil upon her face, Genesis 24. 65. not as many
do now adays, for other by respects.

4. By painting the face, and counterfeiting the complexion, as wicked
Jesabell did, who was afterward (by the just judgment of God) eaten up of
dogs.

5. By mincing and tinkling with the feet; by wanton dancing of men and women
together (which is a great inticement to this lust) and all other lascivious
motions, Isa. 3. 16. Mark 6. 22.

6. By dalliance, and abuse of any part of the body, to the provocation of
others unto lust, or suffering them to wander in wantonness.

What be the contrary virtues here commanded?

Chastity in the eyes, Chastity in the eyes, etc.
countenance, and all the parts of the body, modesty and gravity in behavior,
Tit. 2. 3. that we make a covenant with our eyes, Job 31. 1. and pray that the
I ord would turn them away from seeing vanity, Psalm. 119. 37. Finally, that we
so carry and direct all the members of the body, as that they be not weapons of
uncleannes, Romans 6. 13. 14. 19.

How is this Commandment broken by evil words?

1. By vain and wanton speeches, Wanton Speeches.
corrupt and rotten communication, whereby not only the speakers heart, but
also the hearts of the hearers are inflamed, Ephesians. 4. 29. and 5. 3, 4. 1 Cor.
15. 33.

2. By giving care to filthy words, and taking delight in hearing unhonest
things, although (for our credit) we will not speak them, 1 Cor. 15. 33.

3. By making of love Epistles, amorous Books, lewd Songs, and Ballads, and
such like.

4. By reading or hearing wanton Poems, naughty Songs, and bad Books, and much
more by learning of them, whereby the memory is cloyed, and so better things
kept forth.

What is contrary to this? Chastity in the tongue and ears.


Chastity in tongue and ears, speech savouring of sobriety and grace, 1 These.
5. 23. modest and chaste talk; where we are to follow the example of the Holy
Ghost, who (speaking by necessity) of matters unseemly to be spoken plainly of,
uses chaste speech, as, he knew her, he covered his feet, etc. Judge. 3. 24. 1 Samuel 1. 19.

What say you here to Interludes, and Stage Plays?

They offend against many branches of this Commandment, Stage Plays.
together both in the abuse of apparel, tongue, eyes, countenance, gestures,
and all parts almost of the body. For besides the wantonness therein used,
both in attire, speech, and action, the man puts on the apparel of the
woman, which is forbidden as a thing abominable, Deuteronomy 22. 5. much filthiness
is presented to the beholders, and foolish talking, and jesting, which are not
convenient. Lastly, Fornication, and all uncleanness (which ought not to be
once named amongst Christians) is made a spectacle of joy and laughter, Ephesians. 5.
3, 4. Therefore they that go to see such sights, and hear such words, show
their neglect of Christian duty, and carelessness in sinning, when as they
willingly commit themselves into the snare of the Devil, 1 Cor. 15. 33.

There remains now the breach of this Commandment in act and deed:

What is that?

Fleshly pollution, Breach of the seventh Commandment, in respect of action.
and impurity in action, of which the unlawful vows of continency are nurses,
Heb. 13. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3.

What is the contrary virtue?

The possessing of our vessels in holiness and honor, 1 These. 4. 4. For the
preservation of which purity, holy wedlock is commanded to such as have not
the gift of continency, 1 Cor. 7. 9.

How does a man exercise uncleanness in Act?

Either by himself, or with others.

How by himself?

By the horrible sin of Onan, Gen 38. 9. lustful dreams, and nocturnall
pollutions, Deuteronomy. 23. 10. rising from excessive eating, and unclean
cogitations, or other sinful means, 2 Pet. 2. 10. Gal. 5. 14. Col. 3. 5.

How is it with others?

Either in unlawful conjunction, or unlawful separation.

What be the kinds of unlawful Conjunction?

It is either with those that are of a diverse, or of the same kind.

What is the filthiness which consists in the conjunction of diverse kinds?

It is either Bestiall, or Diabolical.

What is the Bestiall?

When a man or woman commits filthiness with a beast, which is a most
abominable confusion, Lev. 18. 23. and 20. 15, 16.

What is the Diabolical?

When a man or woman has company with an unclean spirit, under the shape of a
man or woman. Thus Witches sometimes prostrate their bodies to the Devil, who
to fulfill their lusts, does present himself unto them in an humane form.

How is this sin committed betwixt those of the same kind?

When men do carnally company with others out of Marriage, or otherwise then
the Laws of holy Marriage do require.

What is common to those unlawful mixtures?

That they be all either voluntary in both, or by force in the one. To the
former may be referred the maintenance of Stews, Of Stews, and the
unlawfulness of them.
which are permitted and defended in Popery, to the latter, the case of Rape.

How do you prove the unlawfulness of Stews?

1. They are so far from being the remedies of uncleanness, that they be the
special nourishers thereof: For the acting of sin does not extinguish, but
increase the flame of concupiscence.

2. They are expressly forbidden in the Law of God, Levit. 19. 29. Deuteronomy. 23. 17.

3. The Kings are commended in Scripture, who took away such filthiness out
of their Land, 1 Kings 15. 12. 2 King. 23. 7.

4. By them, not Fornication only, but Adulteries; yea, Incests also were
committed, when as both married and unmarried came thither, and oftentimes some
of the same blood and Affinity committed villainy with one whore, Ezekiel 22. 11.

What do you say to the case of Rape? Of Rape.


Herein the party forced is to be holden guiltless, but the offense of the
other is highly aggravated hereby, Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26. 2 Samuel 13, 14.

Of how many sorts are those unlawful mixtures?

They are either of one sex with the same sex, or of both sexes, the one with
the other.

What is that of one sex with the same sex?

Sodomy, or Buggery, when man with man, or woman with woman commits
filthiness, Lev. 18. 22, 29. and 20. 13. Deuteronomy. 23. 17. Romans 1. 26, 27.

What be the unlawful mixtures of both sexes, the male and the female
together?

They are either more unnatural, or less contrary to nature.

What are the more unnatural?

1. When a man does keep company with his own wife, or other women, when it is
with them according to the manner of women, Lev. 18. 19. and 20. 18. Ezekiel. 18.
6. and 22. 10.

2. When there is a mixture of those bodies that are within the degrees of
kindred, or alliance, forbidden by the Law of God, Lev. 18. 6, etc. whether it
be in Marriage, Incest.
or otherwise, 2 Samuel 13. 14. Genesis 38. 16. which sin is called Incest.

Of what sorts are Incests?

They are either in degrees of Consanguinity, or Affinity.

What is the Incest of Consanguinity?

Confusion of blood, either in the right line upward, as father with daughter;
Collateral, as brother with sister; or overthwart and oblique, as son with
Aunt, daughter with Uncle.

May Cousin germans (being in the second degree) marry by the Law of God?

Yea, but in diverse respects it is unnecessary and inconvenient.

What are the Incests of Affinity?

There is the same prohibition of Affinity, as of Consanguinity, as for a man
to have his Sister in Law, etc.

What use make you of this?

It condemns the Pope, who dispenceth with the degrees prohibited by God; and
prohibiteth many degrees, which God allows, making that to be sin which is no
sin, and that which is no sin to be sin.

What be the unlawful conjunctions of man and woman, that are less contrary
to nature?

They are either betwixt strangers, or betwixt man and wife.

What be the kinds of the former?

Fornication and Adultery, Heb. 13. 4.

What is Fornication?

When two single persons come together out of the state of Matrimony,
Fornication.
Deuteronomy. 22. 28. Ephesians. 5. 3.

What is Adultery?

When a man or a woman, Adultery.
whereof the one at least is contracted in marriage, commit filthiness together.

How manifold is this Adultery?

Either single, or double.

What call you single Adultery?

When the one person is single, and the other married, or espoused.

What is the double?

When two persons married, or contracted, do company together, which is a most
high degree of offense, as being committed against four persons.

What is the unlawful conjunction betwixt man and wife?

It is either betwixt one and many, or betwixt one and one.

What is the former?

Polygamy, Polygamy.
and the having of many wives at once, which was ever unlawful in conscience;
howsoever for a time it was borne with of God, in regard of the increasing of
the World and Church, and not punished by the positive Law, Genesis 4. 23. Levit.
18. 18. Malach. 2. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 6. 16. and 7. 2.

What is the latter?

When the holy Laws of Matrimony, and the order which God has appointed in
his Word are observed.

What be those Laws and Orders?

They do either concern the entrance into Marriage, or the holy use thereof
after it is consummated.

What is required in the entrance? What is required in the entrance into
Marriage.


1. That the persons to be joined in wedlock, meditate of the ends of
Matrimony, that it is ordained for procreation sake, and for their own mutual
comfort and preservation, not for fulfilling of lust only.

2. That they use Prayer for a blessing upon them.

3. That they look to the degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity prescribed.

4. That they look that either of them be free from any former Contract.

5. That they be of the same Religion.

6. That they have consent of Parents, and those which have charge over them;
for Parents have as great interest in their children, as in any of their goods.

7. That there be due consent and liking betwixt themselves, where Parents must
have a care to marry them when they have understanding and discretion.

8. That due respect be had to the age of the parties.

9. That there be espousalls before marriage, and that the parties espoused
join not themselves together before the marriage be confirmed by the Prayers
of the Congregation, according to the example of Joseph and Marie, The contrary
abuses.
Mat. 1.

What be the contrary abuses?

1. When Meditation and Prayer are neglected.

2. When neerenesse of blood and kindred is not respected.

3. When either of the parties is formerly married, or contracted to some
other, Mal. 2. 15.

4. When they are of a diverse Religion, Genesis 6. 2.

5. When there wants consent of Parents, Exodus 22. 16, 17. where stealing
away of men's daughters comes within the compass of Adultery, and is
condemned in this Commandment.

6. When there is not due consent between the parties themselves, Genesis 29. 23.
Where untimely marriages come to be condemned, which are the causes of many
discords, and so great dissension between Husband and Wives when they are come
to years of discretion and age.

7. When there is great disparity of age in parties contracted.

8. When espousalls are neglected, or the parties espoused come together before
the consummation of the marriage; both which are breaches of Gods Ordinances.

What is required in the holy use of marriage? What is required in the holy use
of Marriage.


1. An holy and Christian conversation together during the whole term of their
life.

2. The sober use of the marriage bed.

What is required in the former?

That there be mutual delight, Prove. 5. 19. fidelity, Romans 7. 2. and
confidence each in other, Prove. 31. 11.

What in the latter?

That they render due benevolence one to the other, 1 Cor. 7. 3, 4. and abuse
not the marriage bed, either unseasonably, or untemperately.

How unseasonably?

In not observing the time, either of natural separation, Lev. 18. 19. or of
solemn humiliation, wherein with consent they are to give themselves unto
Fasting and Prayer, which though it be not strictly commanded, is yet
permitted, 1 Cor. 7. 5, 6, 7.

How intemperately?

When the honorable and chaste estate of Matrimony is used to wantonness, and
not with moderation and seemlinesse, 1 These. 4. 4, 5. For as a man may commit a
fault in excess of Wine, although it be his own; so may he sin in abusing his
body with his own wife.

Hitherto of the unlawful conjunction: wherein does unlawful separation
consist? Unlawful Separation.


Either in the utter abjuration of marriage, or in the breach of conjugall
society.

How is the former sin committed?

By the unlawful vows of continency; where we must abhor the doctrine of
devils, depraving and denying holy marriage, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3.

How is the latter committed?

Either when the party is present, or when he is absent.

How when the party is present?

When due benevolence is not yielded, although there be aptness thereunto, nor
any hinderance by consent, in respect of extraordinary prayer, 1 Cor. 7. 3, 4.

How when the party is absent?

Either privately, or publicly.

How privately?

When the party withdraws it self in mislike or loathsomeness, or else by
long and unnecessary journeys of traveling, of merchandising, etc. or making a
desertion for hatred of Religion, 1 Cor. 7. 12, 13. 15.

How publicly?

When separation has been made by the Magistrate, without lawful cause.

Is there any lawful cause of divorce?

Yes: Adultery is a lawful cause of separation; but not contention, or
discord, or any thing beside, Matthew. 5. 32.

So much of the Commandment: What are the punishments of the breach of it?

1. When many other sins are hid, The punishments of the breach of this
Commandment.
this is most commonly discovered, Number. 5. 13. John 4. 16. Prove. 5. 14.

2. The sin is a judgment of it self, Prove. 22. 14. Eccl. 7. 27, 28. Romans 1.
24.

3. God judges them oftentimes in this world, always in the world to come,
Heb. 13. 4. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Number. 24. 8. Genesis 12. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 8. Genesis 34.
25. Judges 19. 29. Prove. 7. 23, 26, 27. Job 31. 9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Samuel 13. 14.
28.

4. More particularly, whipping for Fornication, and death for Adultery, and
other unlawful mixture, Lev. 20. 10.

5. It spends the goods, Prove. 5. 10. and 6. 26.

6. It hurts, wastes, and consumes the body, Prove. 5. 11.

7. It bereaveth a man of his understanding and judgment, Hos. 4. 11.

8. It not only reaches to the offenders themselves, but also to their
children, who are the children of Adultery; and by Moses Law, the Bastard (to
the tenth generation) might not enter into the Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 23. 2.

9. He sins against his wife and lawful children, whilst thereby he
oftentimes makes a Stews of his house, as David did by the adultery he
committed with the wife of Vrias, 2 Samuel 16. 21.

10. Barrenness in his wife, Lev. 20. 20.

11. Children begotten in horrible Incest were to be burnt or slain in their
mothers womb.

What are the helps to the obedience of this Commandment? Helps and means of
keeping this Commandment.


Unto the forementioned helps there must be added:

1. Care to keep a good conscience, Eccles. 7. 28.

2. Labor in our Vocation.

3. VVatchfulnesse over our own fpirit, Mal. 2. 16.

4. A Covenant with our eyes, Job 31. 1.

5. Love of God, and of his wisdom, Prove. 2. 10, etc.

6. Prayer, Psalm 119. 37.

7. Holy Meditation.

What are the hindrances to be avoided? Hindrances of obedience.


Beside the unlawful vows of continency, and other provocations unto this
kind of sin before noted, we must beware of,

1. Idleness, in ceasing from doing any profitable thing* Ezekiel. 16. 49. 2 Samuel
11. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 11, 13. Genesis 34. 1, etc.

2. The breach of peace with God, Prove. 22. 14.

3. Running on in sin, Eccl. 7. 28. especially Superstition and Idolatry, Romans
1. 25, 26. in which cases God gives men over to vile lusts.

4. Lewd company, Prove. 5. 20. and 7. 25.

5. Idle and unwarrantable exercises.

So much of the seventh Commandment, where Chastity is commanded: there
follows the general duties which we do owe to man in other things
appertaining unto him: what be they?

They either regard the preservation of his goods, as the eighth, or his good
name, as the ninth Commandment.

What are the words of the eighth Commandment?

Thou shall not steal, The eighth Commandment.
Exodus 20. 15.

What does it contain?

A charge of our own, and our neighbors goods, that we show love and
faithfulness therein, and not only not impeach or hinder, but by all means
preserve and further the same.

What special matter do you learn from hence?

The gross error of the Anabaptists, that hold community of goods, which by
the whole drift and scope of this Commandment is manifestly overthrown.

What is forbidden in this Commandment?

Whatsoever is prejudicial to our own or our neighbors wealth; that we no
way hinder, diminish, or abuse the same.

What is required?

Whatsoever may further or prosper our own, or our neighbors wealth; that we
give to every one that which is his, and do our best, as far as our callings
and means will suffer, to preserve his goods, and (as occasion serves) help
to increase them by all lawful courses, Ephesians. 4. 28. and honest dealing, Tit.
2. 10.

What is the end of this Commandment?

It is diverse. The end of the eighth Commandment.
First, in respect of God, that the goods which he has bestowed on us should
be conserved and employed to those uses for which he has entrusted them unto
us, and principally to the setting forth of his glory who gave them.

Secondly, in respect of the Church; for whatsoever is given unto any member
thereof, whether it be either spiritual or external good, it is given for the
common benefit of the whole body. And therefore he that takes away the goods
of any member, or refuses to employ for the common profit what he has, he
neglects this communion, and consequently sins against this Commandment.

Thirdly, in respect of the Commonwealth; for the preservation whereof,
justice is required, in giving unto every one that which is his own; which
being neglected, great Kingdoms are great Theeveries.

Lastly, in respect of every singular person, that every man may freely and
quietly enjoy those his goods which God has given him.

What was the occasion of this Commandment? The occnsion of this Commandment.


It was that covetousness which naturally adhereth unto us, whereof it comes
to pass, that we are not contented with our estate and means, but lust and
long after other men's, and use all our endeavors to compass them, whether it
be by right or wrong. And from hence arise injuries, oppressions, thefts, and
robberies. By which means what is gotten does naturally more delight and
please us, then that we get in our lawful callings, Prove. 9. 17. and 20. 17.

What are the words of this eighth Commandment?

Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20. 15.

What is here forbidden?

Theft, in all the kinds thereof.

What is theft?

It is the fraudulent imbezeling, Of Theft.
or taking away of those goods which belong to another man, without the
knowledge, or against the will of the owner; or the unjust detaining of it from
him, when we know that in right it belongs unto him.

What things are chiefly to be here considered?

Two. First, the Objects, about which it is chiefly exercised: and secondly,
the Virtues and Vices commanded and forbidden.

What are the Objects?

Our own and our neighbors goods; or as they commonly speak, meum and tuum,
mine and thine. For whereas he forbids theft, and commands beneficence, he
implies and requires, that there should be distinct proprieties and
possessions: for otherwise there could be no theft, nor exercise of bounty and
beneficence: for a man cannot steal but that which is another, nor give but
that which is his own.

What are the Virtues commanded, and the Vices forbidden in this Commandment?

The Apostle has comprised all in a brief sum, Ephesians 4. 28. Let him that
stole steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the
thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs. Of which
the Apostle propounds himself for an example, Acts 20. 33, 34, 35.

What then are the parts of this Commandment? The parts of this eighth
Commandment*


Two. First, the negative, forbidding all Theft. Secondly, the affirmative,
injoyning the just getting, and the just and liberal use of our goods.

What understand you by Stealing, or Theft?

All vices of the same nature and kind, whereby we any ways hinder or hurt
our selves, or our neighbors in our goods. And as Theft it self is here
forbidden, so also the cause and root of it, which is covetousness, together
with the means and signs of it, and the procuring of it in others; As also
the contrary virtues hereuuto are required.

How must we proceed in handling of them?

From the generals to the more special.

What degrees are there of the general duties?

They are three. General duties commanded.


First, to abstain from all injuries and injustice, whereby we hurt or hinder
our selves, or our neighbor, in our own, or his goods.

Secondly, that we use our best endeavor to preserve by all lawful means,
both our own and his.

Thirdly, that we cheerfully communicate our goods to the relieving of our
neighbors necessities.

What are the vices opposite hereunto?

They are three.

First, Opposite vices.
injuriously to hurt or hinder our selves or neighbors in our goods.

Secondly, to be wanting in any means whereby they may be justly preserved.

Thirdly, to be wanting to our neighbors in relieving them when their
necessities require our help; for we are not absolute owners of the things
which we possess; but Gods Stewards, who are enjoined to employ his Talents to
such uses as he requires; and particularly to the benefit of our
fellow servants, Luke 16. 2. Matthew. 25. 14, 15, 19. Luke 19. 13.

What is the second general duty respecting our own, and our neighbors goods?

That we use our best endeavor to preserve them. First, our own: For though
we may not set our hearts upon them, Psalm 62. 10. yet seeing they are Gods
gifts, and are to be employed for his glory and our own, and neighbors good,
if we should wilfully or negligently suffer them to perish, we should be worse
then the unprofitable servant, who kept the Talent committed unto him, though
he did not increase it, Matthew. 25. 25.

Secondly, we must do our best to conserve our neighbors goods, seeing they
have not by chance come unto them, but by the wise disposing of Gods
Providence, whose wise dispensation we resist, if by our best endeavor we do
not preserve them for their use. And to this end that Law concerning our
neighbors Cattle tends, Deuteronomy. 22. 1, 2, 3. Exodus 23. 4, 5.

What are the special duties here required?

They are of two sorts: Special duties here required.
the first respect the just getting and possessing; the other, the right using
and employing of our goods.

What are the duties which are referred to the former?

They are either internal, or external.

What are the internal?

They are chiefly four:

First, little or no love and desire of money.

Secondly, selfe-contentednesse.

Thirdly, a lawful measure of our appetite, or moderate concupiscence, and
desires.

Fourthly, lawful providence without carking care, or a laudable study, and
endeavor in getting of goods.

What do you mean by little or no love of money?

When we done not set our hearts upon riches and worldly wealth, Psalm 62.
10. But first seek Gods Kingdom and righteousness, Matthew. 6. 33.

What is opposite hereunto?

Love of money: that is, when we set our hearts upon riches, and worldly
things, which should be devoted unto, and fixed upon God.

By what Arguments may we be dissuaded from this vice? Arguments dissuading
from the love of money, and earthly things.


By diverse; especially these that follow.

First, because it is a foolish vice, seeing riches to those that immoderately
love them, are not only vain, but also hurtful, and pernicious, Hab. 2. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Secondly, because it is unseemly: for we are Pilgrims in this world, and
Citizens of Heaven; and therefore we should not set our hearts and affections
on earthly, but on heaveuly things, Phil. 3. 20. Col. 3. 1, 2.

Thirdly, because it is impious: for 1. He that loves the world loves not
God, 1 John 2. 15. James 4. 4. neither can we serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 6. 24.

2. Because a lover of money is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 5. For that is our God on
which we set our hearts.

Fourthly, because it is pernicious. For, he that sows unto the flesh, shall
of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6. 8. and their end is destruction who mind
earthly things. Phil. 3. 19. 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Fifthly, because the love of money is the root of all evil, and exposes men
to all tentations, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

What is the second special virtue here commanded?

Selfe-contentednesse: Selfe-contentednesse.
when a man is contented with that estate and condition which God in his wise
providence has allotted unto him. And does not covet either that which is
another man's, or that which is unnecessary and superfluous, Phil. 4. 11, 12.
And this springs partly from the neglect of money, and contempt of worldly
things, and partly from our affiance in God, resting it self upon his
promises, providence, goodness, and all sufficiency.

What motives may induce us to embrace this virtue?

1. By the consideration of the vanity of worldly things, Motives persuading to
selfe-contentednesse.
and the profit which arises from piety, and the love of divine excellencies,
1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8. Godliness is great gain with contentation: For this
abundantly supplyeth all our wants, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Psalm. 34. 10, 11, and 37. 16.
Mat. 6. 33. Prove. 15. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then
great treasures and trouble therewith.

2. Of Gods providence, who is our provident and loving Father: And therefore
seeing we are his sons, we ought to be content with our portion which our
gracious Father has allotted unto us; and to say with David, Psalm. 16. 6. The
lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places. For he best knows what we stand
in need of, Mat. 6. 32. Go, let us submit our selves to his will and
providence.

Thirdly, let us meditate on Gods promises, Heb. 13. 5, 6. Be content with such
things as you have, for he has said, I will never leave nor forsake thee. And
therefore let us cast our care upon God, for he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
Psalm 55. 22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, etc.

What is the vice opposite to this virtue?

Not to be contented with our present state and condition, but immoderately to
desire more and greater things, and to afflict our selves with distracting, and
carking cares in getting and compassing them.

Who are most addicted to this vice?

Those who will not live according to the proportion of their means which God
has given them: for these wanting more then is needful, their ordinary
commings in and lawful means do not suffice them, but they desire and seek
things superfluous by unlawful means; as food and raiment above their state
and ability.

But is it then unlawful, in a mean and poor condition to use means to
improve and better our estate?

Our affiance in God, and self contentedness do not hinder us from using all
lawful means to better our condition, nor make us slothful in our callings;
so that our desires be moderate, and the means we use be lawful, we in the
mean time resting upon Gods just and wise providence with contentation.

What is the third internal duty, respecting the lawful getting and
possessing of earthly things?

The lawful measuring of our appetite, Lawful measuring of our appetite.
and the moderating of our concupiscence: For all appetite and desire is not
unlawful, but that only which is inordinate and immoderate; for that desire
which tends to the neeessary sustentation of our selves and others is
commendable.

What things are here considerable?

Two things. First, what is necessary. Secondly, when the appetite is lawful.
Concerning the former, things are said to be necessary, in respect of the
necessity, either of our selves or others.

What things are to be reputed necessary in respect of our selves?

There may be a threefold necessity, as either in respect of Nature, Person,
or Estate.

What in respect of Nature?

Those things which are required to the sustaining of nature, as we are men;
that is, food, and raiment, 1 Timothy 6. 8.

What is necessary in respect of Person?

When we have sufficient for our selves, and those that belong unto us, 1 Timothy
5. 8.

What is necessary in respect of State?

When we have that which is sufficient to maintain us according to our rank,
place, and calling, whether it be Magistrates, Ministers, or ordinary men.

What is necessary in respect of others?

It is either private, or public.

What is that necessity which respects the private?

When we have wherewith to relieve the necessities of private men, after which
ability all ought to labor, Ephesians. 4. 18. Prove. 4. 15, 16. For it is a more
blessed thing to give, then to receive, Acts 20. 35.

What in respect of the public?

It either concerns the Church or Commonwealth; unto both which we must be
serviceable, as being borne not only for our selves, but also for them:
Therefore we may justly desire and labor after such abilities, as that we may
not be wanting to either of them, when their necessities require our help.

When is the Appetite lawful?

When it is ordinate and moderate.

When is it ordinate?

When it is subordinate to our study, and desire of Gods glory and our own
salvation, Matthew. 6. 33. and contrariwise it is inordinate and preposterous
when earthly things are more affected and desired then heavenly.

Who do sin in this kind?

Those who seek worldly things by sinful and unlawful means, to the hazard
of their souls, and their eternal salvation; such are more foolish then Esau,
that sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage; Mark 8. 36.

What is a moderate Appetite or Desire?

When we desire only things necessary; and these also so as that we can be
content, though we cannot get them, Phil. 4. 11, 12. An example whereof we have
in Paul, Phil. 4. 11. 12. and in Agur, Pro. 30. 8. And Christ has taught us to
pray, Give us this day our daily bread; that is, food convenient and necessary.

What are the extremes opposed hereunto.

They are two: Affected poverty.
The first is voluntary affectation of poverty, as the begging Friars among the
Papists, commending that for a virtue and a degree of perfection, which the
Spirit of God has taught us to pray against, Proverbs 30. 8. And has enjoined
us not to beg, but to labor with our hands, that we may be helpful unto
others, Ephesians. 4. 18.

What is the other extreme?

The immoderate affectation of riches and honors, and that in a greater
measure then is needful for us. The former, we call Covetousness; the other,
Ambition.

What is Covetousness?

An immoderate desire of Riches; Covetousness.
in which these vices concur.

1. An excessive love of Riches, and the fixing of our hearts upon them.

2. A resolution to become rich, either by lawful, or unlawful means, 1 Timothy
6. 9.

3. Too much haste in gathering riches, joined with impatience of any delay,
Prove. 28. 20. 22. and 20. 21.

4. An unsatiable appetite which can never be satisfied, but when they have
too much, they still desire more, and have never enough, Eccles. 4. 8. like the
Horse-leech, Prove. 30. 15. the Dropsy, and Hell it self, Prove. 27. 20.

5. Miser-like tenacity, whereby they refuse to communicate their goods either
for the use of others, or themselves.

6. Cruelty, Prove. 1. 18, 19. exercised both in their unmercifulness and
oppression of the poor.

What do you think of this vice?

That it is a most heinous sin: for it is Idolatry, and the root of all
evil, Col. 3. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 10. A pernicious Thorn that stifleth all grace,
and choaketh the seed of the Word, Mat. 13. 22. and pierces men through with
many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 10. and drowneth them in destruction and perdition,
verse. 9.

What is Ambition?

An immoderate love and desire of honors, Ambition
which is a vice compounded of Covetousness and Pride; in which concur all
those vices in Covetousness before spoken of: as an immoderate love of
honors, a resolution to aspire unto honors, either by lawful or unlawful
means, too much haste in aspiring unto honors, not waiting upon God for
preferment in the use of lawful means, unsatiablenes in aspiring higher and
higher, and enlarging of the ambitious man's desire, like unto hell, Hab. 2. 5.
Unto which may be added Arrogance, whereby he coveteth to be preferred before
all others; and Envy, whereby he disdaineth that any should he preferred before
him.

What is the fourth and last vice here forbidden? Carking care.


Immoderate and carking care, in the pursuing of these earthly things, riches
and honors; and contrariwise, moderate appetite and desires of having, and
moderate care of procuring them is approved and required; that we may not be
burdensome, but rather helpful unto others, 2 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 28.

What are the extremes opposed to the former virtue? Carelessness.


They are two: the first, is carelessness and neglect of our goods and state.
For as he is commended who gathers in seasonable times, so he is condemned
who neglects those opportunities, Prove. 10. 5. and 6. 6. and is censured by
the Apostle to be worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

What is the other extreme?

Anxious and solicitous care, Solicitous and distracting cares.
which distracteth the mind that it cannot be wholly intent to Gods service.
And this does partly arise from Covetousness, and partly from diffidence in
Gods Promises and Providence.

What are the reasons that may dissuade from this vice?

They are chiefly two. First, because it is Impious. Secondly, because it is
Foolish.

Why is it impious?

Because it charge God either with ignorance, that he knows not our wants,
contrary to that, Matthew. 6. 32. or of carelessness, that he neglects us; or
of impotency, that he is notable to supply our wants; whereas he is omniscient,
and knows our necessities; omnipotent, and able to relieve us; Ephesians. 3. 20.
and our most gracious Father, and therefore willing and ready to help us in
time of need.

Secondly, because it divides the heart between God and Mammon, and we cannot
at once serve these Masters, Matthew. 6. 24. 1 John 2. 15. James 4. 4.

Thirdly, because it is heathenish, Mat. 6. 32.

Why is it foolish?

Because it is both superfluous and vain: superfluous, because God has
undertaken to provide for us; and therefore in the use of lawful means we
must cast all our care upon him, 1 Peter 3. 7. Psalm 55. 22.

How is it vain?

Because it is Gods blessing only that makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
and by our own care we can no more add to that stint of state which he has
allotted unto us, then we can thereby add one Cubit to our stature, Matthew. 6.
27.

You have spoken generally of the internal duties: what duties are externally,
and more specially required?

They respect either the just acquisition and getting of our goods, or the just
retention and possessing of them; unto which is opposed the unjust getting, and
keeping of them; which are here forbidden under the name of Theft.

What is required to just getting?

That we get them by just and lawful means: What required to just getting.
For riches are Thorns, which are not to be hastily catched, but to be handled
warily, and with much caution, that they do not pierce the soul, and wound
the conscience.

What may move us hereunto?

First, by considering, that a little justly gotten, is better then abundance
gotten unjustly, Prove. 16. 8. Psalm. 37. 16.

Secondly, that what is justly gotten is the gift of God, and a pledge of his
love; but that which is gotten unjustly, is given in his wrath, and is a snare
of the devil to our destruction.

Thirdly, that as goods justly gotten are Gods gifts, which he blesses unto
us, Prove. 10. 22. so that which is ill gotten, is liable to his curse, Prove.
13. 11. Hab. 2. 9. Jer. 27. 11.

How many ways are goods lawfully gotten?

Two ways. First, without Contract. Secondly, by Contract. Out of Contract,
either such as are gotten by our selves, or received from others.

How gotten by our selves?

Either ordinarily, or extraordinarily. Ordinary getting is by the sweat of our
brows in our lawful Callings. So that here two things are required: First, a
lawful Calling: and secondly, that we labor in it, Ephesians. 4. 28.

What is a lawful Calling?

It is the setting apart of singular men unto some lawful labor and
employment, Lawful Calling and labor in it.
according to the variety of their gifts, and inclinations, whether they be
public or private.

What is in the second place required of every man?

That they diligently labor in their lawful calling, 1 These. 3. 10. and that
variously, according to every man's condition, and the variety of their several
callings. For if Adam was not to be idle in the state of Innocence, Genesis 2. 15.
much less we after the fall, Gen 3. 19.

What do you call extraordinary getting?

That which is acquired by the law of nature, Extraordinary getting.
or the law of Nations, as that which is gotten by the law of Arms, or that
which is casually found, being lost, of another, unto which men have right,
when as by diligent enquiry the owner cannot be known.

How are goods justly gotten as they are retained from others?

When as by a civil right we retain them from others, who are the true and
lawful owners; and that either by free gift, or by succession and inheritance,
whether it be given unto us by the Testators will, or by Law and right do fall
unto us.

What are the vices opposite to the former virtues?

All means and kinds of unjust getting, opposite to just acquisition, whether
ordinary or extraordinary.

What is opposite to ordinary just getting?

Inordinate walking, 2 These. 3. 6. 7. 11. which is opposed either to a lawful
calling, or to labor required in it.

What is opposed to a lawful Calling?

Either no Calling at all, What is opposite to a lawful Calling.
or such a Calling as is unlawful. They who have no Calling, are unprofitable
burdens to the Commonwealth, and like pernicious humors in the body.

Who are these?

First, sturdy beggars and rogues, who can work and will not, but live upon
other men's labors: which kind of people are not to be suffered in a
Commonwealth. For though we shall have the poor always, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. Mat.
26. 11. yet there ought to be no beggars, and inordinate walkers, who eat,
labor not, 2 These. 3. 10, 12.

Secondly, idle and superfluous Gentlemen, who having no Calling, spend all
their time in pleasure, hunting, hawking, revelling, gaming, etc.

Thirdly, such as thrust themselves into such Callings for which they are
altogether unfit, and so steal the rewards and profits of it, to which they
have no right.

What are unlawful Callings?

Those that have no warrant out of Gods Word, or the Laws of the Land: as
those that live by unlawful Arts; as Whores, Bawdes, Deuteronomy. 23. 17, 18.
Witches, Wizards, Deuteronomy. 18. 11, 12. Stage Plays, Beare-wards, Gamesters, and
the like.

What is opposed to lawful labor in our Callings?

An idle life, which as it is condemned in the seventh Commandment, as being a
cause and incentive of lust: so here as a companion and cause of theft, Ephesians. 4.
28. Prove. 18. 9. For sloth causes beggary, and this stealing, Prove. 6. 11. and
28. 19. and 30. 9.

What are the kinds of unjust getting out of Contract? Unjust getting out of
contract.


They are two:

1. Theft.

2. Rapine or Robbery, Lev. 19. 13. Both which men may commit either as
principals, or accessaries.

What is Theft? Theft.


The fraudulent taking of another man's goods, against the knowledge or the will
of the owner; which is the sin that is chiefly forbidden in this Commandment,
and comprehends under it all the rest, which is a great sin strictly
forbidden by God, Lev. 19. 11. and severely punished, Zach. 5. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 6.
10. and by our Laws also made Capital.

What are the kinds of Theft?

They are either Domestical, Domestical theft.
and in the Family, or out of the Family. Thefts in the Family, are either of
the wife, or children, or of servants.

What is the Theft of the Wife?

When she purloineth her Husbands goods, either without his knowledge, or
against his will. For howsoever she have a right unto them in respect of use,
yet the propriety belongs only to the Husband.

What is the Theft of the Children?

When they take away their Parents goods, either without their privity, or
against their will: For howsoever Children think this to be no Theft, yet
Solomon says otherwise, Proverbs 28. 24. Whosoever robs his Father or his
Mother, and says it is no transgression, the same is the companion of a
destroyer.

What is the Theft of Servants?

When they are unfaithful, or wastfull; unfaithful, when as they purloine
their Masters goods, John 12. 6. Tit. 2. 10. or are idle and negligent in their
service, or run away from them, as did Onesimus, Philem. 12. or give away their
goods without their knowledge and consent, though it be to good uses. Wastfull,
when as they wastfully and riotously consume their Masters substance.

How is Theft that is committed out of the Family distinguished?

It is either of goods, Theft committed out of the family.
or of persons; of goods, either common and sacred, and those either private or
public: Private, are such goods as belong to private men; whether it be
Cattle, money, or any thing that is money worth.

What is the Theft of public things?

When things are stolen which belong to the public State, or Body of the
Commonwealth, which is more heinous and capital then that which is committed
against a private man. And in this kind, enclosures of Commons are to be
reputed as theft, Prove. 23. 10, 11.

What is the Theft of sacred things?

When things consecrated to an holy and sacred use, Sacrilege.
are purloined and embezeled; the which we usually call Sacrilege. As when the
utensils and instruments of divine Worship are stolen; when the Lands or
Tithes devoted unto God for the maintenance of his Ministers are imbased,
withheld, or taken away, Mal. 3. 8. In which kind, the chief offenders are
corrupt Patrons; who having only the right of presentation of fit persons, do
incroach upon part of the Tithes, or sell Church Livings for money; and also
Proprietaries, who seize upon Church Livings devoted to the maintenance of the
Ministry, and convert them to their own proper and private use: And finally,
the Court Harpies, who seize upon the Revenues of the Church, by preferring of
unworthy, idle, and ambitious men.

What do you think of this sin?

That it is most heinous, seeing such as commit it, rob God himself, Mal. 3.
8. and thereby bring his heavy curse upon them, verse. 9. As we see in the
example of Achan, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Ananias, Sapphira, and the rest.

What is the Theft of Persons?

It is an heinous sin punished by the Law of God with death, Theft of persons.
Exodus 21. 16. Deu. 24. 7. As being so much worse then the theft of goods, as
the persons of men are better then they, Mat. 6 25. And this is committed by
such as steal men or children, to sell them for slaves; and by lustful or
covetous wooers, who steal men's daughters to make them their wives.

You have spoken of Theft properly so called: What is the other kind which is
more improper?

Rapine, Rapine.
which is a violent taking away of another man's goods; which is done either for
his profit who takes, or to his loss from whom it is taken. And the former is
committed under the pretext of Authority and legal power, or else without it.
The former are public thieves, of which Solomon speaks, Prove. 21. 7. which
are worse then common thieves, and shall be more severely punished, Wisd. 6. 6.
because their sin is aggravated by the abusing of their Authority; and because
commonly violence and cruelty is joined with it, Zeph. 3. 3. Ezekiel. 22. 27.
Mica. 3. 2, 3. Esa. 3. 14, 15.

What is this Theft called?

Oppression, Oppression.
and Extortion; when a man spoyleth his neighbor under color of Law, as Ahab
and Jezabel did Naboth, 1 Kings 21.

What is that Rapine which is committed without any pretext of Authority?

It is either in War, or in Peace. In War, either by Land, when Soldiers
being not content with their pay, do spoil and plunder, not only their
enemies, but also their friends, Deuteronomy. 2. 5, 6. Luke 3. 14. Or by sea, when as
Pirates they rob and spoil all they meet with, and can master.

What is that Rapine which is exercised on the Land?

It is either robbery by the highway, Luke 10. 30. John 18. and last verse; or
Burglary, when as they break open houses that they may rob the inhabitants.

Are there no other to be esteemed Thieves but those only who act theft
themselves?

Yes; They also who are accessaries, Psalm. 50. 18. and do consent to the theft
of others: And these thefts are common to all, or proper to Superiors. The
former is committed before, with, or after the theft.

How is a man an accessory before the theft?

When he counsaileth or provokes another unto it, Accessaries to theft.
as Jezabell did Achab, 1 Kings 21. Prove. 1. 11, 13, 14.

How with, or in the theft?

Either when he aideth the Thief, or does not hinder him when as it is in his
power.

How after the theft?

First, when he receives, and concealeth what is stolen, or hides, or keeps
the Thief from being apprehended.

Secondly, when he partaketh with him in the stolen goods, Prove. 29. 24. And
this is done; 1. When he takes the goods from the Thief, that he may keep them
to himself. 2. When he knowingly buyeth stolen goods, which ought to be
restored to the owners. 3. When by silence he concealeth the Thief.

How are the Superiors accessory?

When they do any ways encourage, or do not punish them: especially when
they do acquit them for a Bribe.

So much of that acquisition, and getting of goods which is out of Contract:
Now show that which is in, or by Contract: And first what a lawful Contract
is, and what is required in it.

A Contract is an agreement between parties by mutual consent about the
alienation of goods from one to another, Acquisition by lawful Contract.
upon some just and honest conditions. And this either respects the things
themselves, or their use for a time.

What is required in a lawful contract?

That it be done in simplicity and integrity, without guile and deceit; unto
which three things are required: first, truth in our words: secondly, fidelity
in our promises: thirdly, justice in our deeds, Psalm. 15. 24. Zac. 8. 16.

What is opposed hereunto?

First, all collusion and deceit, whereby one seeks to circumvent another, 1
These. 4. 6. which is a vice odious unto God, Ezekiel. 22. 12. and severely
punished, Psalm. 5. 7. and 55. and last v. Mic. 7. 2.

Secondly, lies in contracting the bargain, Prove. 21. 6. and most of all when
they are confirmed by oaths.

Thirdly, perfidiousnesse in promises, when covenants are not kept.

Lastly, injustice in Contracts, when equality is not observed.

What are the sorts of things gotten by Contract?

They are either of things alienated, Acquisition by liberal alienation.
or committed to trust: and the former is either liberal, or illiberall.

What is liberal alienation?

It is either for ever, or only for a certain time. For ever, as when things
are given absolutely, or upon certain conditions.

What is liberal alienation for a time?

When as things are lent for a time, either to be restored in the same, or in
the like kind; as money, corn, and such like.

What is opposed hereunto?

When the Borrower being able does not pay all, or not at the appointed time,
or does not do his best endeavor to pay it, Psalm 37. 21.

What is that Acquisition, Acquisition by illiberall alienation.
which you call illiberall alienation?

That which is made by way of recompense, or exchange, which is either of the
thing it self, or the use of it, or of labor and industry: in which the
general rule to be observed is, that there be an equal and just proportion in
the recompense or exchange between the things exchanged; as between the price
and thing prised, the industry, labor and reward.

What is opposite hereunto?

When as this just proportion is not observed?

What are the kinds of the alienation of the thing it self?

They are two: Either that which is for ever, or that which is only for a
certain time.

What do you call alienation for ever? Merchandise.


Merchandise, which consists in buying and selling: and it is a commutation
either for money for ware, which is buying, or of ware for money, which is
selling.

What do you think of it?

I hold that Merchandise is a lawful calling, but liable to much danger of
sin in the managing of it, Ecclus. 26. and last. 27. 1, 2. Hos. 12. 7. Mat,
21. 12, 13.

What is selling?

A Contract about the alienation of goods for ever at a certain price agreed
upon between the seller and the buyer, Of Selling.
without any fraud or guile.

What is required to just selling?

First, in respect of the person, that he be the just owner, or by him
appointed to sell in his right.

Secondly, in respect of the goods, that it be saleable, and neither
sophisticated by mixture, nor base and corrupt in respect of the substance.

Thirdly, in respect of use, that it be profitable for necessity of life, or
for ornament and delight.

Fourthly, in respect of the manner of selling, that it be without any deceit.

Fifthly, that it be sold at a just and equal price, according to the worth,
respect being had both to the use of the thing it self, and also to the
necessary pains and danger which the Seller has been at in getting of it.

What is required to the manner of lawful selling?

That it be done with simplicity and integrity, and that we do not in
bargaining defraud and overreach one another, 1 These. 4. 6. Levit. 25. 14.

What are the vices and corruptions in selling opposite hereunto? Vices and
corruptions in selling.


They are many; and concern either the Seller himself, the Ware, or things
sold, the price, or the manner of selling.

What are the vices which respect the person of the Seller?

First, when as he sells that which is not his own.

Secondly, when as he sells that which is not vendible: as first, when it is
defective, and faulty, or not useful. Secondly, when as it is such a thing as
ought not to be sold, as Gehazi, 2 Kings 5. 20. the miracle of healing, wrought
by divine power. So when Magistrates for Bribes sell justice, Amos 2. 6. Esa.
5. 23. and 1. 23. Thirdly, when men by lying and false witnesse-bearing sell
the truth; in which rank, Lawyers are chiefly to be numbered, who wittingly for
Fees plead ill causes.

How does the Seller offend in respect of the price?

When as he observes not a just and equal proportion between the price, and
the worth of the thing sold: And this is the vice either of private men, or of
whole societies. Private men who thus offend, are those which we call
Regraters, Monopolists, hoarders up of Corn, and other commodities, to raise
the Market by making a dearth and scarcity, Prove. 11. 28.

How do whole Societies in this kind offend?

First, when as they of the same Trade and Craft agree together to sell their
wares at an unequal rate above the true worth.

Secondly, not to finish the work which another has begun, though he deals
deceitfully and unjustly with his work-Master.

What are the sins committed by the Seller in respect of the manner?

They may be referred to two heads; Either his Words, or Deeds.

How offends he in Words?

First, when as he immoderately praises his wares above their true worth, and
concealeth the faults and defects in them, which he well knows.

Secondly, when as he asks much above the worth, and protests that he
cannot afford it better cheap.

How does he offend in his Deeds?

Either in respect of the kind, quality, or quantity, of his wares. In respect
of the kind, when as he sells one thing for another, or one color for
another, presuming on the ignorance of the buyer.

How in respect of the Quality?

When as he deceitfully sells old for new; that which is corrupt and
sophisticated, for that which is pure and simple; and bad for good. To which
end he uses many arts, and false lights, and showing course and bad wares, to
commend those for the best which he shows after, though they be but a little
better.

How in respect of the Quantity?

When as he detracteth from the just and equal proportion by using false
weights and measures not agreeable to the Standard, using less and lighter
when they sell, and larger and heavier when they buy, which God forbids, as
abominable, Lev. 29. 35, 36. Deuteronomy. 25. 14, 15. Prove. 11. 1. and 20. 10. 23.
Hos. 12. 7. Amos 8. 5, 6, Mic. 6. 10, 11.

You have spoken of Selling: Now what is that alienation which is by buying?

Buying is a Contract, Of buying, and what is required unto it.
whereby money, or a just price is alienated and parted with for wares of
proportionable worth.

What is required in buying?

Things answerable to those before spoken of in selling: and respect; first,
the person buying: secondly, the thing bought: thirdly, the price given: and
fourthly, the manner of buying.

What is required in respect of the person buying?

That he buy only of him whom he thinks to be the right owner of the
thing sold: for he that buyeth known stolen goods, communicates in the Theft.

What in respect of the thing?

That he buy that only which he knows may be lawfully bought and sold.

How do men sin in this respect?

When as they offer to buy, with Simon Magus, spiritual gifts and graces, or
things consecrated to divine worship, that they may alienate them from their
right use; Pardons, and Indulgencies, sacred Ordination, Benefices, and the
like.

Secondly, they which buy Justice, and much more injustice by Bribery.

Thirdly, they that buy Lies and false Testimonies to prevent Justice.

What is required of the buyer in respect of the price?

That according to his knowledge and judgment he give a just, equal, and
proportionable price, according to the true value of the things sold, and
bought; especially when he buyeth of the poor, who are by present necessity
enforced to sell, whether it be wares or labor; upon which, if any take
advantage to beat down the just price, they grievously oppress the poor,
Amos 8. 6. and 2. 6. Mic. 2. 2. 3.

What is required of Buyers in respect of the manner?

That they use all simplicity, and upright dealing, and shun all injustice and
deceit both in their Words and Deeds.

How in Words?

First, that they do not offer much under the true value of the wares they
buy, according to their knowledge and judgment.

Secondly, that they do not undeservedly dispraise it, and without cause, to
beat down the price; yea even when they inwardly like and approve it, Prove. 20.
14.

How in Deeds?

When as they do not pay at all, or less then the price that was agreed upon:
and this deceit respects either the quality, when as they put off in payment
base and adulterate money; or in quantity, when as they pass for payment clipped
money, Genesis 23. 16. or such as is defective in weight or number: And to these
private thefts in buying, we may add one that is more public; when as the
buyer buyeth up and ingrosseth a whole commodity, that having all in his own
hand, he may raise the market, and sell at what rate he lists.

Hitherto of that illiberall alienation which is for ever: what is that which
is only for a time?

It is called pawning; Of pawning, and what is required unto it.
which is a contract whereby the dominion and right of a man's goods is
alienated from the owner to another man, only for a time, upon some condition
agreed upon between the parties; which condition being not observed, the right
of the thing belongs to the receiver, at least so long till it be performed.
And this pawning is either of movables, and is called properly pawning; or of
immoveables, and is called morgaging.

What is his duty who lays a thing to pawn?

First, to provide, that the thing pawned be at least of equal worth to that
for which it is pawned.

Secondly, that he redeem it at the appointed time.

What is his duty that receives a pawn?

First, that if the party be poor, and the thing pawned necessary to the
preservation of life, that either he do not receive it, or that he do
restore it to the owner when his necessity requires it, Deuteronomy. 24. 6. and 24.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, Ex. 22. 26.

Secondly, that if the borrower be not able to restore it at the appointed
time, he do not use extremity, nor take advantage upon his necessity, to make
him forfeit the thing pawned; but at the most, provide only for his own
indemnity, Ezekiel. 18. 7. 12. and 33. 15.

So much of the illiberall Alienation of the thing it self: Now what is the
illiberall Alienation only of the use?

This contract of Alienation concerning only the use, Of Location and letting.
is either location and letting, which is the alienation of the thing for hire:
or hiring and conduction, which is the alienation of the hire for the use of
the thing.

What is Location or letting?

It is a contract, whereby only the use of a thing, and not the interest and
dominion is alienated from the owner to another, for hire and wages agreed
upon, and that only for a certain time: And therefore, by this contract, the
same individual is to be returned.

What is his duty that lets?

1. That he require an equal and proportionable price for the thing he lets.

2. That he lets only such things as are useful to him that hireth them.

3. That he do not exact any recompense for any hurt which happens to the
thing hired, which comes not by the fault or negligence of him that hireth
it, Exodus 22. 11. 15.

What is Conduction or hiring?

It is a contract, Of conduction and hiring.
whereby a man gets the use of a thing for a certain time, for a just price
or reward.

What is his duty that thus hireth any thing?

First, that he use the thing hired only for that end and purpose to which he
hired it.

Secondly, that he use it no worse then if it were his own.

Thirdly, that he restore it to the owner at the time agreed upon.

Lastly, that he restore whole and sound the thing hired; or if through his
fault or negligence it have received any hurt, that he give to the owner a
valuable recompense, Exodus 22. 12.

What is that we call Usury?

It is a lending in expectation of certain gain. Of Usury.


What do you think of it?

If you speak of that property which the Scriptures forbid and condemn, it is
a wicked and unlawful Contract, into which as a common sink, the filth of
many other sins, and unlawful Contracts do run; a fruitful womb, in
which many vices and corruptions are bred; and by which, if we live and dye in
it without repentance, we are excluded out of the Kingdom of heaven, Psalm
15. 5. and Ezekiel. 10. 8. and 22. 13.

But there is much question what this Usury is which the Scripture condemns.

Therefore it shall be our wisdom in matters concerning our salvation to take
the surest and safest course; and that is wholly to forbear it, and not to put
our souls, which are of more value then the whole world, upon nice disputes,
and subtle distinctions, Mark 8. 36.

You have spoken of that alienation which is in illiberall Contracts, in
respect of the things themselves, or the use of them: Now what is that
alienation which is for recompense of care, labor, and industry?

These Contracts are either public or private; the private, are either in the
Commonwealth, between the Magistrate and people; or in the Church, between the
Ministers and people.

What is the Contract between the Magistrate and people?

That the Magistrates should receive from them their stipends, Of Contracts
between Magistrates and people.
tribute, and maintenance, and the people from them, and by them, protection,
direction, and peaceable government.

What then is the Magistrates duty to the people?

That he faithfully bestow all his labor and industry, his care and diligence,
that he may in the Lord govern the people committed to his charge; and direct,
correct, and protect them for the common good, Romans 13. 4. Psalm. 78. 71, 72.
And if they have their reward, and neglect their duty, they are guilty of
theft, and sin against this Commandment, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3.

What is the Peoples duties to them?

That they faithfully pay unto them their tribute and due, as an honorable
reward of their pains and care, Mat. 22. 21. Romans 13. 7.

What is the public Contract between Ministers and people?

That the Ministers receiving their portion and maintenance from the people, Of
Contracts between Ministers and people.
or rather from God himself, that they feed the people committed to their
charge, with the bread of life, faithfully preaching the Word, and administering
the Sacraments, and shining before them by an holy example, and the light of a
godly life, seeking rather them then theirs, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 12. 14.

What is his Theft?

1. When he receives his reward, and neglects his duty. As when he presses
into his Calling uncalled, by the window, and not by the door, John 10. 1.
being neither qualified with gifts, nor willing to employ those he has for the
good of the people

2. When he feeds himself and not the people, eating the milk, and clothing
himself with the wool, but neglecting the flock, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3. Zach. 11.
15. 17.

3. When for gain he either preaches false doctrine, or concealeth the
truth, Mich. 3. 11.

What is the duty of the people?

That receiving spiritual things from their Ministers, they communicate and
impart unto them their carnal things, 1 Cor. 9. 10.

What is the Peoples Theft?

When receiving these spiritual things, they defraude them of their dues, and
withhold from them their means and maintenance which the Laws of God and man
do allot unto them: The which is not only theft, but even sacrilege, Of
Workmasters and hirelings, and their duties to one another.
and the robbing of God himself, Mat. 3. 8.

What is that Alienation which is in private Contracts?

When as men employ others to do their work upon promise of reward, or any
ways to use their gifts and abilities; their care, industry and labor for a
just recompense.

What is required of such as thus employ others?

1. That they give an equal and proportionable recompense to those whom they
thus hire, 1 Timothy 5. 18.

2. That they pay it without delay, especially to the poor, who are not able,
nor willing to forbear it, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Lev. 19. 13.

What then is their Theft?

When either they give not an equal and just recompense, or delay to pay it
to the poor, who are unable to forbear it, Jam. 5. 4.

What is the duty of the Mercenary or hireling?

1. That he require no more then such wages as is equal and proportionable to
his skill, care and labor.

2. That he do his work that hireth him, faithfully and diligently.

You have spoken of such Contracts as respect Alienation and change: Now what
are those which are of things committed to trust?

They are either of things committed to others only for safe custody, Of things
deposited, and committed to trust.
or such as are committed to Feoffees of trust for uses appointed, or such as
by last will are entrusted to Executors.

What is the nature of things deposited?

When neither the dominion and right, nor the use of the thing is alienated,
but only the safe custody is committed to a man.

What is his duty?

That he safely keep that which is committed to his trust, and willingly
restore it to the owner when he calls for it.

What is his Theft?

First, when he converteth the thing committed to his keeping to his own use.

Secondly, when he will not restore it to the owner when he desires to have it.

But what if the things deposited be stolen, or become worse?

If it be by his default that had the keeping of them, he is to make it good:
but if by oath he can clear himself of all unfaithfulness and negligence,
the owner and not he must bear the loss, Exodus 22. 7, 8.

What is the duty of Feoduciaries and Executors? The duty of Executors.


That they faithfully discharge their trust, and do their will (and not their
own) who have reposed confidence in them.

How do they offend?

When they fail in their trust, and aim more at their own profit, then at
the performing of their will who have entrusted them, or the faithful
discharge of their duty.

These are duties which respect things committed to trust: what say you of
persons thus entrusted?

Those are Pupills, Of persons committed to trust.
and children in their nonage, who being unable to govern, direct, protect,
and order themselves, are by the Laws of God and man, committed to the care
and tuition of others.

What is the duty of their Tutors and Guardians?

That they carry themselves toward them faithfully, according to the trust
reposed in them; and like Parents, aim chiefly at the good of their Pupils and
Wards, and not their own gain and profit, Esth. 2. 7. remembering that they
shall one day be called to give an account of these persons committed to their
charge and trust, and of all the goods belonging unto them.

So much of just getting goods: now in the order propounded we are come to the
just possession, and retention of them: what is required unto this just
possession?

Two things.

First, the keeping of our own goods. Of just possession of goods, and what is
required unto it.


Secondly, the restitution of that which justly belongs to others.

What does this Commandment require of us in the former respect?

That we be not wanting to the just preservation, not only of our neighbors,
but also of our own goods.

How prove you this.

Because our goods are Gods Talents, eommitted unto us; of which we must give
an account to our great Lord and Master. And therefore if through our own
fault and negligence we suffer them to be lost, or to be taken unjustly from
us, we rob our selves, and the poor also, who have right unto that which we
can well spare from our own uses.

What does this Commandment require concerning restitution of other men's goods?

That we readily restore those goods which either we have unjustly gotten from
the right owners, Of Restitution, and what is to be considered in it.
or which we cannot justly retain.

How do you prove that goods unjustly gotten ought to be restored?

Both by Gods Precepts, the examples of the godly, and necessary reasons. For
the first, God strictly requires, that if any thing be unjustly gotten, as
either by violence, or by fraud and deceit, or any other ways, restitution be
made to the true owner, Lev. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5. Number. 5. 6, 7, 8.

By what examples do you evince it?

Before the Law, by the example of Jacob and his sons, Genesis 43. 12 21. Under
the Law, by the profession of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 4. and the practice of Micah,
Judges 17. 2. who, though an Idolater, made conscience of it; and of the Jews,
Nehem. 5. 11, 12. And under the Gospel we have the example of Zaccheus, Luke
19. 8. Yea Judas himself, being convinced of his sin, makes restitution: so
that they herein are worse then Judas who refuse to do it.

What reason have you for it?

Because it is a duty necessarily to be performed by all that hope for
salvation: For without restitution we can neither have any true faith to
persuade us that our sin of Theft is remitted, nor any sincere Repentance.
For God pardons no sin which we still pertinaciously retain and live in, Prove.
28. 13. But he that restores not ill-gotten goods, lives still in his theft,
and repents not of it, seeing restitution is an inseparable fruit of
repentance, Ezekiel. 33. 15.

But what is to be considered in this restitution?

Four things.

First, who is to make it; namely, every man who has gotten any thing
unjustly, either by force or fraud, by contract or out of contract, by calumny,
and false accusation, by lying, oppression, or any other evil course, Luke 19.
8. Numb. 5. 6 Lev. 6. 23.

Secondly, to whom restitution is to be made; namely, to him who is wronged,
defrauded or oppressed; Lev. 6. 5. or to his kindred, if he be dead, or if
none such can be found, to pious uses.

Thirdly, how much ought to be restored; to wit, all the whole that is unjustly
gotten, if he be able, or at least so much to the uttermost as he is able; yea
the Law of God required, that to the principal a fifth part should be added,
Lev. 6. 5. Numb. 5. 7. And even equity it self requires, that beside the
principal it self, so much more should be added as the party is damnified by
this unjust detention of his goods.

Fourthly, when this restitution ought to be made; namely, not at the end of
our lives, or after our death; but as soon as we repent, and desire at Gods
hands that our sin should be forgiven. We must confess, bewail, and forsake
our sin, that God may be reconciled unto us, and then we must make satisfaction
to our wronged Neighbor, Mat. 5. 23, 24.

What are the things, which though they be justly gotten, yet are unjustly
detained?

Such things as others having lost, we have found: For such things come unto us
by the disposing of Gods providence, and we may justly keep them till we can
find out the true owners; so that we make diligent enquiry after them, with a
resolution to restore what we have thus found, when we know to whom they
belong, Deuteronomy. 22. 3. Exodus 23. 4.

Hitherto of the duties which belong to just getting and possession of goods:
Now what is required to the right use of them? Of the right use and fruition of
goods.


Two things: Fruition, in respect of our selves; and communication, in respect
of others, Prove. 5. 15, 16.

What is required to the former?

That we thankfully and comfortably enjoy Gods blessings which he has bestowed
upon us, Eccles. 5. 17, 18.

How must this be done? Of parsimony and frugality.


By exercising two virtues. The first is Parsimony or thriftinesse, whereby we
honestly keep and preserve our goods, that they be not vainly and unprofitably
misspent, John 6. 12. Prove. 27. 23. to 28.

The second is Frugality, whereby we dispose of our goods justly and honestly
gotten, to fit and necessary uses, in a sober and moderate manner.

What virtues then must here concur in the right use of our goods?

These four:

1. Justice in getting them.

2. Thriftinesse in keeping them.

3. Frugality in enjoying them.

4. Liberality in communicating them.

For without justice, parsimony degenerateth into covetousness; Frugality
without liberality, into sordid miserlinesse; Liberality without parsimony and
frugality, into prodigality.

What vices are opposed to these virtues?

Two:

1. Tenacity, or sordid gripplenesse.

Secondly, profusion, and wastefulnesse.

What is tenacity? Of tenacity and miserlinesse.


A kind of covetousness which restrains men, both from communicating their
goods to others, and from enjoying them themselves, Eccles. 6. 2. and 5. 10, 11.

Wherein do such offend?

By committing a double theft.

First, against their neighbors, seeing God has not made them absolute owners
of their riches, but Stewards, who must dispose of them also for the good of
others, which if they do not, they rob them of their right, James 5. 1, 2, 3.

Secondly, against themselves, in defrauding their own souls of the use of
those blessings which God has allowed them, Eccles. 4. 8.

What do you think of such Misers?

First, that none are more wicked, seeing they are neither good for themselves,
nor others, Eccles. 14. 5.

Secondly, none poorer, seeing though they possess much, yet they enjoy
nothing, and want as well what they have, as what they have not.

Thirdly, none more foolish, seeing they want for fear of wanting, and live
poor that they may dye rich.

Fourthly, none more wretched, seeing they deprive themselves both of the
comforts of this life, and of the joys of the life to come.

What is the other extreme?

Profusion and wastfulnesse: Profusion and Prodigality.
And this is twofold, either in spending above their means in unnecessarie
expenses, whereby they either ruin their estates, or expose themselves to the
devils tentations, in using unlawful means to recover that which they have
wastfully misspent.

Or secondly, in wasting their goods in dishonest and riotous courses, tending
to luxury and riot, whereby they necessitate themselves to use all unlawful
means to get so much more wealth as may serve to maintain their riotous
expenses; and so Luxury becomes the mother of Covetousness; and
Covetousness the nurse of Luxuriousness.

What is the use of our goods respecting others?

It is by communication or liberal alienation of them for the use and benefit
of others.

What virtues are hereunto required?

Two: Liberality and Justice. Of Liberality.
Liberality, whereby we communicate our goods with a ready and cheerful mind.

Secondly, Justice, that we thus communicate that only which is our own. And
these must go hand in hand, and are therefore conjoined by Solomon, Proverbs
21. 21.

What are the kinds of liberal alienation?

They are two. For it is for a certain time only, or for ever.

What is that which is only for a certain time?

It is either a liberal alienation of the use only of a thing for a certain
time, Of lending.
or of the dominion also, and that freely, without any expectation of
recompense. For both these ought to be liberal, respecting only the profit of
the receiver: and secondly, just, to which is required that that which is lent
be his own who lends it, and fit for his use who borrows it: And this duty
is commended, Psalm 112. 5. and commanded, Deuteronomy. 15. 7. 8, Matthew. 5. 42. Luke
6. 35.

What is that alienation which is for ever?

It is free giving, Of Freegiving.
when as goods are alienated from the true owner unto another liberally, and
without expectation of any recompense, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Acts 20. 35.

What is further required to it?

That it be not only free, but also just, giving that only which is a man's
own, and not another, which were no better then theft: As when a man by
lavish giving defraudeth his children of their inheritance, or gives his goods
or lands from his daughters to strangers, or remote kindred of his name,
because he has no sons to continue it.

Secondly, That we make good choice of those upon whom we confer benefits,
either for their worth or indigency; but especially, we must give and do good
to those who are of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.

What are the uses unto which we must freely contribute?

They are either public or private, and the public are either civil or
Ecclesiastical.

What are the Civil?

When as we freely give our goods for the service, preservation and benefit of
the Commonwealth, both in the time of peace and war. To which uses we must
give freely, to the uttermost of our ability: yea, even above it, when the
necessity of the State requires it, seeing the good of the whole body must be
preferred before the good of any particular member, 2 Samuel 17. 27, 28, 29.

What are the Ecclesiastical?

When as we give freely for the maintenance of the Ministry, and means of Gods
Worship, tending to the salvation of our souls. To which uses we must give so
much the more cheerfully, as the soul is to be preferred before the body, or
outward estate, Luke 10. and last. Prove. 3. 9. An example whereof we have in
the Israelites, Exodus 36. 5, 6. 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. And if they were so free and
liberal in giving toward the building of the Tabernacle and Temple, how much
more should we toward the building of Gods spiritual Houses and Temples for
the Holy Ghost?

What are the private uses?

For the benefit and relief of private men, whose necessity does require it of
us according to our abilities; and these are those Almsdeeds, and other works
of mercy, unto which the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 13. 16. And are partly fruits
of mercy, and partly of brotherly love, and Christian charity, of which we
shall have occasion to speak afterward.

Hitherto you have spoken of the duties respecting our own and Neighbors
person, both in regard of life in the sixth, and of chastity in the seventh, as
also our own and their gods in the eighth. Now what is the ninth Commandment?

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. The ninth
Commandment.


What is the maine scope and end at which God aymeth in this Commandment? The
scope or end.


The conservation of truth amongst men, and of our own and Neighbors fame and
good name.

Why does God so much regard truth?

Because it is most dear unto him; for he is the God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
Psalm. 31. 5. yea truth it self, John 14. 6. Therefore Christ came into the
world, that he might bear witness unto the truth, John 18. 37. and by
speaking the truth God is glorified, Josh. 7. 19.

Why does he respect so much our fame and good name?

Because it is his own good gift, and therefore he takes care to preserve
that unto us, which himself has given.

What was the occasion of this commandment?

First, The occasion of this Commandment.
our natural corruption, which makes us prone to lying, Psalm. 58. 3. Romans 3.
4. as appears hereby, in that we no sooner speak then lie, and not only for
advantage, but without any cause, out of mere vanity.

Secondly, out of a natural disposition men are ready to trespass against the
fame and good name of others; and this arises out of mere envy and pride,
which makes us ready to abase others, to advance our selves: And these
corruptions God opposes in this commandment.

What is the thing that is here chiefly forbidden?

That we should not in legal proceedings and Courts of justice give a false
testimony concerning our neighbors, The chief sin here forbidden.
as appears by the words expressly used, Thou shall not answer a false
testimony concerning thy neighbor, which imply a precedent question or
examination, unless we will say that answering is here used for speaking or
saying, as it is often times, Matthew. 11. 25. Luke 14. 3, 5. Matthew. 28. 5. and
then the meaning is, that we must not give a false testimony of our neighbor
either publicly or privately, whether it be with or against him; or if we had
rather take it of legal testimonies in Courts of justice, then by a synecdoche
we must under this one kind understand all other kinds of false testimonies,
but this is here named as the chief, and of all the rest most hurtful and
pernicious, to comprehend under it all the rest, as it is in the other
commandments.

What then is the negative part of this commandment?

It generally forbids all false, The Negative part.
vain, and offensive speeches concerning our neighbor, whether it be for or
against him, whether in judgment or out of judgment, although principally
here are forbidden all false testimonies which tend to the prejudice of the
fame or state of our neighbors; or more briefly it forbids all falsity and
untruth, especially that which is prejudicial to our neighbor in any respect,
or to our selves.

What does the affirmative part require?

Two things: The Affirmative part.
the conservation of the truth, and of our own and neighbors good name, with
all duties of the tongue homogeneall and of the same nature and kind, with all
helps and means tending hereunto.

Why are our words and speeches so much to be regarded, seeing they are but
wind, as is commonly supposed?

Great care is to be had of our speech, seeing it is an excellent faculty
peculiar to man, and being a special gift of God it must not be abused to Gods
dishonor and our own destruction. Neither are words slightly to be regarded,
seeing we must give account of every idle word, and by our words we shall be
justified or condemned, Matthew. 12. 37. And the wise man tells us, that death
and life are in the power of the tongue, Pro. 18. 21. and that a wholesome
tongue is a tree of life, whereas an evil tongue is an unruly evil, and full
of deadly poison, James 3. 8. which if we do not subdue and rule, whatsoever
profession we make of Religion it is all in vain James 1. 26.

What is the sum of the duties of the tongue here required?

That our speeches be both true and charitable: The sum of the duties here
required.
for these must inseparably go together; for Charity rejoiceth in truth, 1
Cor. 13. 6. and the truth must be spoken in love, Ephesians. 4. 15. For truth without
love savoureth of malice, and charity without truth is false, vain, and
foolish.

Unto what heads then are these duties of the Tongue, required in this
Commandment, to be referred?

Unto two: 1. The conservation of truth amongst men; And 2. the conservation of
our own and our neighbors fame and good name.

What have you to say concerning Truth?

Two things. Of Truth.
First, what this truth is.

Secondly, the means of conserving it.

What is to be considered in truth it self?

Three things, First, what it is.

Secondly, whether it be to be professed.

Thirdly, after what manner.

What is truth or veracity?

It is an habit of speaking that which is true from our hearts, Psalm. 15. 2.

What is required hereunto?

Two things. First, that our speech be agreeable to our minds.

Secondly, that our minds be agreeable to the thing: For though we speak that
which is true, yet if we think it false, we are liars, because our tongue
agrees not with our minds: and if that we speak be false, and yet we think it
true, we do not speak truly, for though truth be in our hearts, yet a lie is
in our mouths; and though we cannot be called liars, because we speak as we
think, yet may we be said to tell a lie, because that we say is false.

What great necessity is there of this truth?

Very great: for if speech be necessary, (as all confess) then also speaking
truth, without which there would be no use of speech; for take away truth, and
it were better that we were dumb, then that we should be endued with this
faculty of speaking

What other motives are there to embrace it?

Because it is both commended and commanded in the Scripture: It is commended
as a virtue which God greatly loves, Psalm. 51. 8. as a note of a Citizen of
heaven, Psalm. 15. 2. and of one who shall be established for ever, Pro. 12. 19.
It is commanded Ephesians. 4. 25. Zach. 8. 16, 19.

Is it only sufficient to know the truth and believe it?

No: Truth must be professed, and how.
we must also upon all fit occasions profess it with our mouths, Romans 10. 9,
10. Matthew. 10. 32, 33.

How must the truth he professed?

Freely and simply.

How is it done freely?

When as we profess it willingly and undauntedly, so far forth as the
matter, place, and time do require. So Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. Acts 4. 8, 10, 13.

How is it done simply?

When as it is done without guile and dissimulation, shifts or shuffles.

What are the vices opposite to truth?

They are two: Opposites to truth.
First, falsity and lying.

Secondly, vanity, or an habit of lying.

What is lying? 1. Lying.


It is twofold: First, when we speak that which is false.

Secondly, when as we speak that which is true, falsely, and with a mind to
deceive.

What is it to speak that which is false?

When as we do not speak as the thing is, whether we think it true or no.

What is it to speak falsely?

When as we do not speak as we think, whether the thing be true or false.

What are the reasons which may dissuade from lying?

1. Because God is true, Reasons to dissuade from lying
and the author of truth; and the Devil a liar, and the father of lies; and as
truth makes us like unto God, so lies make us like unto the Devil.

2. Because it is strictly forbidden in the Scriptures, Lev. 9. 11. Exodus 23.
7. Col. 3. 9. Ephesians. 4. 25.

3. Because the liar sins grievously, not only against his neighbor, but
also against God himself, Lev. 6. 2.

4. Because the Scriptures condemn lying as the spawne of the old serpent,
John 8. 44. and as a thing abominable and odious unto God, Pro. 12. 22. and 6.
17.

5. Because it perverteth the use of speech, takes away all credit and faith
between man and man, and quite overthrows all humane society, which cannot
stand without contracts and commerce, nor they without truth.

Lastly, because God severely punishes lies, Pro. 19. 5, 9. Psalm. 5. 6. Acts
5. 1, 2, 3, etc. and that both in this life with infamy and disgrace, for it
makes a man esteemed base and of no credit, so that the usual liar is not
believed when he speaks truth, Eccles. 34. 4. And in the life to come, for it
excludes out of heaven, Apoc. 22. 15. and casts men into that lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, chap. 21. 8.

How are lies usually distinguished? Three sorts of Lies.


Into three sorts, Merry Lies. Officious Lies. Pernicious Lies.


What are merry Lies?

Such as are spoken only to delight the hearers, and make sport.

Are such to be condemned as sinful, seeing they do no man hurt?

Yes verily, for the Scriptures condemn not only false, but also all vain
speeches, Matthew. 12. 29.

Secondly, because they are against truth, and cannot be spoken without
impeaching of it.

Thirdly, lies must not be spoken to delight Princes, who have most cause of
care and trouble, Hos. 7. 3.

Fourthly, lies must not be spoken for profit, and therefore much less for
delight.

What are officious Lies?

Such as are spoken either for our own, or neighbors profit, and do not hurt
any man.

Are such lies unlawful likewise?

Yes surely, and upon the same grounds; for though we may buy the truth at a
dear purchase, yet we must not sell it at any rate, Prove. 23. 23. And if it be
unlawful to lie in the cause of God, because it has no need to be supported
by our lies, Job 13. 7, 8. much less for our own or neighbors profit.

What do you call Vanity in lying?

When men by a corrupt custom are so habituated to lying, that they will lie
for every cause, yea even for no cause, and when they might attain their ends
as well and easily by speaking truth.

What vices are opposite to Freedom and Liberty in speaking the truth?

They are either in the excess, Vices opposite to freedom of speech.
or in the defect.

What in the excess?

Unseasonable and undiscreet profession of the truth, with the danger or loss
of our selves or others, when neither the glory of God, nor our own, or
neighbors good does require it. And in such cases our Savior himself would
not profess the truth, though he were pressed unto it by his malicious
enemies, John 18. 20, 21. Because he should thereby have but cast Pearls
before Swine, contrary to his own Doctrine, Matthew. 7. 6.

What is opposite in defect?

When either out of a cowardly fear, or some other sinister respect we deny
the truth in our words, or betray it by our silence. Of the former we have an
example in Peter, Matthew. 26 of the other in those weak Christians, 2 Timothy 4. 16.

But is it not sometime lawful to conceal the truth?

Yes surely, when neither the glory of God, nor our own, or neighbors good
do require the profession of it, but yet with this caution, that we do not
speak any untruth to conceal it. 1 Samuel 16. 2. 5.

What is opposed to simplicity in speaking the truth?

Simulation or double dealing; Opposites to simplicity of speaking truth.
which is twofold, either in our words, or deeds.

What is that in our words?

When we speak one thing, and think another, or speak with an heart and a
heart, in the Scripture phrase, Psalm 12. 2. This is called a deceitful
tongue and mouth, Zeph. 3. 13. and a tongue that frames deceit, Psalm 50. 19.
as it is described, Psalm 52. 22. Ier. 9. 8, 9. The which is to be avoided,
Psalm 34. 14. and Christ's example to be imitated, 1 Pet. 2. 22.

What is simulation in our deeds?

When as one thing is pretended, and another thing is intended. So Ioab killed
Abner, and Amasa under pretense of friendship. But howsoever this is esteemed
policy with men, yet it is odious to God, Psalm. 5. 7. and punished with
immature death, Psalm. 55 and last.

You have spoken of truth it self, and the opposites unto it; now show what
are the means of it?

They are of two sorts. Means of preserving truth.


First, that it may be amongst men.

Secondly, that it may have a profitable being.

What is required to the being of it.

Two things.

First, that it may be known.

Secondly, that being known, it may be preserved.

What is required to the knowing of it?

Two things.

First, a love of the truth.

Secondly, teachablenesse.

What is the love of the truth?

First, when as men are so affected toward the truth, that they study with all
their endeavor to get it, but will not sell it at any price, Proverbs 23, 23.

Secondly, when as they are willing to defend it upon all occasions, Ecclus. 4.
33.

What is opposite hereunto?

First, love of lies, which excludes out of heaven, Apoc. 22. 15.

Secondly, voluntary ignorance, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

What is opposite to the defense of truth?

When as it is deserted or opposed.

What is teachablenesse?

A fruit of the love of truth: when as men are ready and willing to admit the
truth, and to give place to better reasons, Acts 17. 11.

What is further required to the preserving of truth?

That we be constant, and not carried away with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians.
4. 14. And these two virtues must concur: for teachablenesse without
constancy degenerateth into levity and vain credulity, and constancy without
teachablenesse into pertinacie.

What are the means of the profitable being of truth amongst men?

Profitable speech; which is accompanied and furthered with courtesy, and
civility, and remedied with silence.

When is our speech profitable?

First, Profitable speech.
when it advances Gods glory, either in respect of the matter of it, or the
end. The matter, when as we praise God, and celebrate his glory, Psalm 50. and
last. Ephesians. 5. 4. James 5. 13. And Gods glory is the end of our speech, when
as it is chiefly referred thereunto.

How does our speech tend to our neighbors profit?

First and chiefly when it tends to his spiritual good and edification, as
instructing the ignorant, counselling them that need counsel, comforting the
afflicted, strengthening the weak, exhorting the sluggish, admonishing them
that err, and rebuking them who wilfully offend.

Secondly, when it tends to his temporal profit either for his honest
delight in a witty and facetious way, called Vrbanity, which may be called the
sauce that seasoneth truth, 2 Cor. 12. 15. or for his profit, when as it has
some necessary use for the good of his body or state.

What is the means of furthering this profitable truth in our speeches?

Courtesy and affability, Courtesy and affability.
which is a virtue whereby we are easily drawn to communicate with others, by
talking with them in a humane and courteous manner, with expressions of love and
good will: an example whereof we have in Christ, John 4. 7, 10. who for this
cause was said to be a friend to publicans and sinners.

What is the remedy against the contrary vice?

Taciturnity, Seasonable silence.
or seasonable silence, which is a virtue that keeps counsel, and
restrains us from uttering secrets, or any unprofitable, unnecessary, and
unseasonable speeches, which in the Scriptures is made a note of a wise man,
Pro. 17. and last, 10. 19. Jam. 1. 19. and is commended to all, especially to
women, 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. and young men in the presence of their elders and
betters, Ecclus 32. 9. And these two virtues, taciturnity and affability, must
go together; for affability without seasonable silence degenerateth into vain
babbling; and silence without affability into Cynicall sullenness, and sour
churlishness.

What are the opposites to these virtues, and namely to profitable speech?

They are two: Opposites to profitable speech.
First, speech unprofitable.

Secondly, that which is hurtful.

What is unprofitable and vain speech? 1. Unprofitable


That which is not referred either to Gods glory, or our own or neighbors
good, which is condemned in the Scripture, Psalm. 12. 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 20. Tit. 3. 9.
Pro. 30. 8. and accountable at the day of judgment, Matthew. 12. 36.

What is hurtful speech?

First, 2. Hurtful speech.
that which tends to Gods dishonor, as imprecations, blasphemies, rash and
false oaths.

Secondly, that which tends to our own and neighbors hurt, and is opposed
either to edification, or the temporal good of his person, name, or state.

What is speech opposite to edification?

Rotten and unsavory speech, 3. Rotten speech.
Ephesians. 4. 29. which is called rotten, because it springs from a rotten and
poisonous fountain, and is also apt to infect and poison the hearers, 1 Cor.
15. 33.

What are the kinds of this rotten speech?

They are many: as by our words to misse-lead men, to give evil counsel,
grieve the afflicted, to encourage men to run on in sin, to praise men in
their evil courses, and the like.

What vices are opposed to Urbanity?

There are diverse: some in the excess, as witty speeches wantonly wicked,
scurrility, talkativenesse, and vain babbling. In the defect, such speeches as
are foolish and unsavory.

What vices are opposite to Affability?

In the excess, counterfeit Complements, 2 Samuel 15. 5. Secondly, lightness
and idle talk. And in the defect* Morosity, and churlish speeches.

What vices are opposed to seasonable silence?

Prating, and immoderate and unseasonable multiplying of words, Pro. 10. 19.
Psalm. 140. 11.

Secondly, futility, when men can hold in no secrets; but unseasonably vent out
all that is in their minds, Prove. 15. 28. and 12. 23. and 29. 11. Ecclus 21.
29.

Thirdly, unseasonable suppressing of truth with silence.

You have spoken of conserving of truth, now speak of our fame and good name:
and first show why it is to be respected?

We ought to have singular care of preserving of our own and neighbors good
name, Fame and good name.
because it is no less dear to a good man then his life, Eccles. 7. 2. Pro.
15. 30. and 22. 1.

What is required to the conserving of our neighbors good name?

First, an internal disposition, care, and study of preserving it, which we
shall show by these fruits: First, when we are glad of it, and rejoice in it,
Romans 1. 8. Coloss. 1. 3, 4. and are grieved when as it is blacked and blemished.

What other fruits are there of it?

They respect either our hearing, judgment, or reports.

Our hearing; first, when as we shut our ears to whisperers and slanderers;
for their detractions and slanders cannot hurt our neighbors good name, if we
will not hear and believe them, Pro. 25. 23. And this is a note of a Citizen
of heaven, Psalm. 15. 3.

Secondly, when as we willingly and cheerfully hear the praises of our
neighbors, which is a sign of an honest heart, that is free from self-love
and envy.

What is required in the judgment?

A candid and ingenuous disposition to preserve our neighbors fame, and in all
things doubtful to judge the best of his words and deeds.

What are the fruits hereof?

Not to nourish hard conceits of him, but when they arise to suppress them, if
the grounds of them be not very probable.

Secondly, not to believe rashly any evil of our neighbor.

Thirdly, to take and conster all things well done and spoken by him in the
best sense.

Fourthly, to interpret and take things doubtful in the better part.

What are the fruits respecting reports?

Silence and secrecy: For it is a Christian duty to keep secret our neighbors
faults, which proceed from infirmity and humane frailty, unless it be to amend
him by admonition or seasonable reproof, Lev. 19. 17. Matthew. 18. 15, 16. Genesis
37. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 11. or to give warning to the hearer, that he may prevent some
evil that is intended against him, Jer. 40. 14. Act. 23. 16. or to preserve
him that he be not infected with the contagion of his sin with whom he
converseth: or finally, when himself is necessitated to discover another
faults and crimes, lest by silence he become accessory unto them, as in case of
Felony, Murder, or Treason, Eccles. 19. 8.

What are the vices opposite to these virtues?

To the care of preserving our neighbors name is opposed,

First, carelessness, as if it did not concern us, which argues defect of
love.

Secondly, a study and desire to detract from his fame, and to lessen his
credit and estimation, which is a fruit of hatred and envy, Matthew. 21. 15.

What are the vices opposite to those virtues which respect the means?

They are referred either to hearing, the judgment, or report.

What are those which respect hearing?

First, to have itching ears after such rumors as tend to our Neighbors infamy
and disgrace, forbidden, Exodus 23. 1. Prove. 17. 4. which was Saul's sin, 1 Samuel
24. 10.

Secondly, to have our ears open to hear calumnies and reproaches, and shut
to our Neighbors praises, which is a fruit of envy and self-love.

What are the vices which respect the judgment?

They are vices opposite to candid ingenuity; as first, suspiciousnesse, when
we suspect evil of our Neighbor without just cause, and upon every slight
occasion, 1 Timothy 6. 4. which is a false testimony of the heart.

Secondly, to believe rashly rumors reported from others, tending to the
disgrace of our Neighbors, which have no sure ground; which was Putiphars
fault, Genesis 39. 19. and David's, 2 Samuel 16. 3, 4.

Thirdly, hard and uncharitable censures; either in respect of their sayings
and doings, sinisterly interpreting things well spoken or done, or taking
things doubtful in the worst sense: or in respect of their persons, censuring
and condemning them rashly, when as we have no just cause, 1 Samuel 1. 13. Acts
2. 13. Luke 7. 39. and 13. 1. Acts 28. 4.

What vice respects report?

First, when as men raise false reports against their Neighbors.

Secondly, when as they discover uncharitably their secret faults, especially
arising from infirmity and humane frailty, Prove. 10. 18.

What is opposite to the external profession of truth, concerning our
neighbor, which ought to be charitable?

First, a malicious testimony, though true, which arises from malice and envy,
and tends to a sinister and evil end, 1 Samuel 22. 9. Psalm. 52. 3, 4.

Secondly, a false testimony, which is either simply false, as that 1 King. 21.
13. Acts 6. 13. or true in the letter of the words, but false in the sense, as
that against thirst, Mat. 26. 60, 61. John 2. 19.

Into what sorts are testimonies spoken of in this Commandment to be
distinguished?

They are either public, Public Testimonies.
or private; and the public, either in the Courts of Justice, or out of them.

Of which does this Commandment principally speak?

Of public and Legal Testimonies, which are to be regarded above others,
because it is the judgment of God rather then man, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19.
6. and therefore he that perverteth this judgment, makes God himself as much
as in him is, guilty of his sin of injustice.

What are the kinds of Legal Testimonies?

They are either of the Judge, or of the Notary, or the parties suing,
contending and pleading, or of the Witness.

What is the Testimony of the Judge?

It is his sentence which he gives in the cause tried before him.

What is herein required of him?

First, that before he give sentence, he thoroughly examine and find out the
truth and equity of the cause, Deuteronomy. 13. 14. and 17. 4. and 19. 18. according
to Gods own example, Genesis 3. 9, 10. and 18. 21.

Secondly, that in passing sentence he judge according to truth, justice, and
equity: for Judges must be men of truth, Exodus 18. 21. Secondly, just and
righteous, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. and 16. 20. Lev. 19. 15. And thirdly, not just in a
rigid and extreme way, according to the letter of the Law; but so as when
there is just occasion he must moderate the rigor of the Law with equity,
which is the true sense and life of the Law.

But is not the Judge to give sentence according to things legally alleged
and proved?

Yes ordinarily. But if he undoubtedly upon his own certain knowledge know,
that things are otherwise then they seem to be by Testimonies, pleadings and
reasons alleged, he must judge according to known truth, and defend the
cause, being just, which is oppressed by false evidences and reasons, or
otherwise he shall sin against his own knowledge and conscience, Prove. 31. 8,
9.

What are the vices opposite hereunto?

They are two:

1. Rash.

2. Perverse judgment.

What is rash Judgment?

It is done diverse ways: Rash Judgment


First, when as the Judge pronounces sentence before the cause be sufficiently
examined and known, Prove. 18. 13.

Secondly, when as they condemn any man before they have heard his cause, Acts
25. 15, 16.

Thirdly, when as they pronounce sentence, having heard one part only. So
David, 2 Samuel 16. 4. Let such remember that of Solomon, Prove. 18. 17.

Fourthly, when as they in matters concerning life and death give sentence upon
the single testimony of one witness, Deuteronomy. 17. 6.

Whas is perverse Judgment? Perverse Judgment.


When as truth is oppressed, and justice and right is perverted, whereby the
wicked is acquitted, and the just condemned, Prove. 17. 15. which for the most
part happens, because the Judge is corrupted with bribes, or accepts persons,
both which are forbidden and condemned, Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19. Exodus 23. 8. Prove.
24. 23, 24. and 28 21. Lev. 19. 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17.

What must Judges do to avoid this?

They must ever remember that in the Seat of Justice they represent God
himself, and in that regard are called Gods, Exodus 22. 28. Psalm 82. 1, 2. and
therefore they must judge as God would if he were present, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6.
which if they do not, they must expect that woe threatened, Isa. 5. 23.
Neither must they protract suites, but put as speedy an end unto them as the
cause will permit, Exodus 18. 17. 23.

What is the duty of the Notary?

That they commit things truly to writing, conserve them truly, and truly
recite them.

What are the Persons suing and contending in Law? The duties of the
Plaintiff, and the vices opposite hereunto.


They are either the principal, or less principal: The principal are the
Plaintiff and Defendant, to both which this common duty belongs.

1. That they do not contend in Law, unless in their consciences they are
persuaded that their cause is good and just; yea and necessary also.

2. That in pursuing of it they do not say or do any thing that is false and
unjust.

What are the vices opposite hereunto?

First, to commence suits out of a love and desire of contention.

Secondly, to produce false instruments, writings, proofs, seals, and suborne
false witnesses.

What are the special corruptions of the Plaintiff?

First, to calumniate upon a false or uncertain ground, Deuteronomy. 19. 16. So
Haman, Esth. 3. 8. So Acts 25. 7.

Secondly, when prevaricating and trifling in the cause, they conceal and let
pass weighty matters and heinous crimes, and insist upon those which are
light, feigned, and impertinent; so as they may seem to dally and trifle with
their adversary, rather then to contend in a legal manner.

Thirdly, when as they fall off, and hang back from a just accusation once
undertaken.

What are the special sins of the Defendant?

To defend himself in a false way; which is done in a various manner.

First, The vices of the Defendant.
by false speaking, in denying the fault whereof he is accused, and stands
guilty, as it is usual among us; whereas we should give glory unto God by
confessing our sin, Ios. 7. 19. Job 31. 33. and not by denying the truth, to
add sin unto sins

Secondly, by concealing and hiding the truth, which he ought to confess.

Thirdly, by answering indirectly; and so waving a just accusation. So Adam,
Genesis 3. 12.

How else does the Defendant offend?

First, by making an unjust appeal to protract the suit.

Secondly, by resisting a just sentence, which is to resist Gods Ordinance in a
lawful power instituted by him, and so to make himself liable to damnation.
Romans 13. 2.

Who are the persons that are less principal?

The Lawyers, who plead the cause of the parties and principalls.

What are their duties? The duties of Lawyers, and the opposite vices.


First, to undertake the defense of such causes only as in their judgment
appear to be good and just.

Secondly, to defend them in a true and just manner.

What are the corruptions opposite hereunto?

First, wittingly, to undertake the defense of ill and unjust causes, wherein
they sin; First, against God, whilst they labor to overturne truth and
judgment, Eccles. 5. 7.

Secondly, against their neighbor: as First, against the Judge, in seeking to
corrupt his judgment, that he may pass an unjust sentence: Secondly, against
his Client, by encouraging him in a sinful course, if he prevail; or
defrauding him of his money, if he do not: Thirdly, against his adversary,
whom he wounds, either in his body, goods, or fame, Prove. 25. 18.

Thirdly, against his own soul: first, in a sinful defense of an unjust
cause, Exodus 23. 1. 2. Chr. 19. 2. Romans 1. 31. 2. Secondly, by setting his
tongue to sale to speak lies for fees, Prove. 21. 6. and with their tongue their
souls also.

What other vice do Lawyers commit by handling of their causes in an evil
manner?

They handle them ill,

First, by lying either for their client, or against their adversary; in both
which they are guilty of a false testimony.

Secondly, by prevarication in betraying the cause of their Client, whilst they
seem to defend it: and this is the worst kind of cousenage and theft.

What is the testimony of the witness which this Commandment specially
respects, and what is required unto it?

Two things. The duty of witnesses.


First, that he be ready and willing to give his testimony when need requires.

Secondly, that he do give a true testimony.

When does need require it?

Either when lawful authority calls for it; or when thereby he can do his
neighbor good, Prove. 24. 11. Psalm. 82. 4. Prove. 14. 25.

What are the vices opposite hereunto?

First, to detract and withold a true testimony. Secondly, to give a false
testimony.

What do you think of this sin?

That it is odious, and abominable to God, Pro. 6. 18. and therefore God made
choice of this sin as most heinous, to comprehend under it also sins of the
like kind, as in the other Commandments forbidding murder, adultery, theft.

Secondly, because he adds perjurie to his false testimony.

Thirdly, because he sins against the Judge, whom he labors to pervert,
against the Plaintiff and the Defendant, Prove. 25. 18. and most of all against
his own soul, as before, Prove. 19. 5. 9. and 21. 28. Deuteronomy. 19. 16. 19. Apoc.
21. 15. and 21. 8.

You have spoken of public testimonies in Courts of Justice: Now what are
those which are given out of Courts?

They are either open and manifest, or else hid and secret.

What are those that are open and manifest?

They are either in the public ministry of the Word, or in public Writings,
or in Elections.

How in the public Ministry?

He gives therein a false testimony, False testimony in the public Ministry
of the word.
who preaches false Doctrine, which is repugnant to Gods glory, or hinders
man's salvation, which God has appointed to be punished with death, Zach. 13.
3. And the same is to be said of those who in their public writings broach
errors, or oppose the truth.

How in elections?

When those are not preferred that are worthy, but those that are unworthy; for
in elections men testify their excellency that are chosen before others.

What are the false testimonies that are hidden and in secret?

They are either in infamous Libels, which by the Civil Law disable a man from
giving any testimony; or the spreading of false rumors, and scandalous
reports, tending to the disgrace of our neighbors, Exodus 23. 1.

You have spoken of public testimonies, now what are private tectimonies, or
the private profession of the truth with charity?

It is either of the virtues, or vices of our neighbors.

What is the duty which respects the virtues of our neighbors?

It is willingly to acknowledge, and ingenuously to commend, the virtues and
good parts of our neighbors, both absent and present, to the glory of God that
gave them, and the increase of virtue in him that has received it, 1 Cor. 11.
2.

What is that duty which respects the vices of our neighbor?

It is freely to admonish and reprove him being present, Matthew. 18. 15. Lev.
19. 17. Pro. 27. 5, 6. Psalm. 141. 5. and in his absence to cover his faults, as
far as will stand with justice and charity, 1 Pet. 4. 8.

What are the opposite vices?

They are two: Flattery, and evil speaking.

What is flattery?

It is fair and fawning speech, Flattery.
whereby a man is falsely and unworthily praised.

How does the Flatterer offend?

First, in respect of the object, when they commend another either for a thing
doubtful and uncertain, whether it be good or evil; or for a known evil,
Pro. 28. 4. and 24. 24, 25.

Secondly, in respect of the manner, and that either in dissimulation, Pro. 27.
24. or above measure, Acts 12. 22.

Thirdly, in respect of the end, and that either for their own profit, as
Parasites do; or for his hurt and ruin whom they flatter, Pro. 29. 5. Jer. 9.
8. Matthew. 22. 16.

What is the second opposite vice?

It is evil speaking: Evil speaking.
and this is either against one present, by railing and reproachful words,
tending to his discredit and disgrace, Matthew. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 6. 10. and by
scoffing and mocking, which is a kind of persecution, Genesis 21. 9 Gal. 4. 29. Or
else against one absent, which is whispering, or obtrectation, or detraction.

What evils are in the vice of whispering?

Whisperers defame their neighbors, Whispering.
by discovering their faults and failings; dissolve all friendship between man
and man* Pro. 16. 28. and sow dissensions between them, Pro. 26. 20.

Secondly, they spoil their neighbors of their good name, which is better
then riches, Pro. 22. 1. and more sweet then a precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 2.
and also of their friends, by sowing discord amongst them, Pro. 6. 19.

What is Obtrectation? Obtrectation.


The blacking and branding of our neighbors good name by secret and malicious
words; and that either by detracting from his virtues, or by malicious
discovering of his vices.

What do you think of this vice?

That it is a grievous sin: for it deeply wounds our neighbor in his life,
goods, and fame. In which regard it is compared to Bows and Arrows that shoot
in secret, Ier. 9. 3. 8. Psalm. 64. 3, 4. to coals of Juniper, Psalm 120. 4.
to a Sword, Psalm 64. 3. Proverbs 12. 18. to a Rasor, Psalm 52. 2. to the
tongue of a Serpent, Psalm 140. 3. Eccles. 10, 11.

How should we keep our selves from it, being naturally addicted to it?

By considering that the Scriptures forbid it, Lev. 19. 16. James 4. 11. and
condemn it as an heinous sin, Psalm 50. 20. Ezekiel. 22. 9. Romans 1. 30.

Secondly, because it is a sign of an hypocrite, who will declame against the
sins of others, that themselves may be thought religious, James 1. 26.

Thirdly, because above other sins it makes men like unto the devil, who
has his name from slandering, being a slanderer from the beginning, 2 Timothy 3.
3. Tit. 2. 3.

Lastly, because Gods heavy judgments and punishments are denounced against
it, Psalm 50. 20, 21. Ezekiel. 22. 9. Psalm 52. 5. and 15. 3.

But is it not lawful to speak truly of our neighbors faults?

There are few detracters and back-biters do so, but either devise calumnies
of things that are not, or add something that is untrue of their own. But
though a man speak truth, yet if it be maliciously to do hurt, or out of a
vain custom to keep their tongue in ure, he is a slanderer, and offends, if
not against truth, yet against charity.

What is the chief cause of detraction?

To be curious in prying into other men's lives and manners, and negligent in
looking into our own, and judging our selves.

You have spoken of concerning our neighbors fame: now what is required to the
conserving of our own?

Two things. Conserving of our own good name.
First, that every one have a care of preserving his own good name.

Secondly, that every one give a true testimony of himself.

What is to be considered in the former?

Three things. First, what this good fame is. Secondly, how highly to be
esteemed, that hereby we may be moved to this care of preserving it. Thirdly,
by what means it may be attained unto and kept.

What is good Fame?

It is a good opinion and esteem which men conceive of others for their virtues
and deeds well done. And this is highly to be valued, Proverbs 22. 1. Eccl. 7.
2. as being not only profitable to our selves, but also unto others, who are
refreshed with the smell of this fragrant ointment; and studiously to be sought
after, Phil. 4. 8.

Wherein does the care of conserving our good name consist?

First, in prosecuting, and using the means of getting it.

Secondly, in avoiding the means of both vainglory, and also infamy.

What are the means of getting and conserving our fame and good name?

First, The means of getting a good name.
and above all things to seek Gods glory, his kingdom and righteousness, and
to glorify him by our serious study to walk before him in holiness of life,
and the exercise of all good works, Mat. 6. 33. and 5. 16. Psalm 112. 6. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Prove. 10. 7.

Secondly, we must avoid the means of vainglory, whereby men seek more the
praise of men then of God, John 12. 43. and 5. 44.

Thirdly, to prefer the testimony of a good conscience, before the applause
of men, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Fourthly, to look more to the inward, then the outward man, and take more care
to be good then to seem good, and to approve our hearts unto God then our
outward actions unto men, Romans 2. 29.

Fifthly, to avoid hypocrisy and dissimulation, which though for a time it may
gain the praise of men, yet at length God will pull off this false vizard, and
expose the hypocrite to shame and contempt.

Sixthly, to shun that glory which men seek to gain by vanity and vice, 2 Samuel
18. 18. which were to glory in our shame.

Seventhly, to abhor flatterers, and parasites, and to love those who
faithfully admonish us when we err, and reprove us when we offend, 1 Kings 22.
18.

Eighthly, to be severe in judging our selves, and charitable in censuring
others, Matthew. 7. 1, 2. For if we think well of others, they likewise will
think well of us.

Lastly, not to undertake great matters above our strength to gain an opinion
of our great parts and abilities, but to be lowly in our own eyes, Psalm 131.
1. Luke 14. 28, 29.

But may we not at all in our good actions seek the praise of men?

We may not principally, and in the first place aim at this end in performing
our duties, but rather Gods glory, and the adorning of the Gospel which we
profess; yet if God cast upon us this blessing of a good name and praise of
well-doing, as a vantage unto the bargain, it is not to be neglected; seeing
contempt of others opinion of us, especially those that are good, argues both
arrogance, and desperate dissoluteness; we must seek Gods glory by good
report, and evil report, 2 Cor. 6. 8. But if he be pleased to bless us with
unaffected fame, let us thankfully accept it, and use it as encouragement in
well-doing, Phil. 4. 8. Romans 13. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 14.

What are the means of infamy from our selves?

All manner of sin. For as sin is the cause of shame, so shame the
punishment of sin. Therefore all sin is to be avoided of him that would
preserve his fame. As first, open sins, Eccles. 10. 1. Yea not only the
sin it self, but all appearance of it, 1 These. 5. 22. Romans 14. 17.

Secondly, secret sins, which if they be not repented of, God will discover
them to our shame, 2 Samuel 12. 12. if not in this life, yet at Christ's coming
before men and Angels, Luke 10. 17. and 12. 2. Matthew. 25. 31. Luke 8. 17. 1
John 2. 28.

What are the means of infamy from others?

Either the opprobrious obloquies of Railers, or the rumors and whisperings of
Back-biters and Sycophants, against which we are bound to preserve our fame by
speaking, writing, and (if need be) the authority of the Magistrate;
especially if we be public persons, whose infamy may prejudice the Church and
Commonwealth.

You have spoken of conserving our fame, what say you to the second thing
propounded, that is, a true testimony of our selves?

Every one is bound by this Commandment to give a true testimony of himself,
A true testimony of our selves.
as occasion is offered: For as we must speak nothing but truth of our
neighbors, so also of our selves.

How is this done?

Either by modest acknowledging that which is good in us, or ingenuous
confessing that which is evil; or by denying a false good attributed unto us,
modestly and humbly, or a false evil, wisely and warily.

What is opposite hereunto?

When as we give a false testimony of our selves, by denying any truth; or
affirm any thing false concerning our selves, whether it be good or evil.

May we then acknowledge that which is good in our selves without vanity?

Yes, if we do it with modesty, and chiefly to Gods glory, from whom we have
received all that is good in us, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

What is opposite to the profession of truth concerning our selves?

First, The opposites to the profession of truth concerning our selves.
an ironicall speech, whereby true good in our selves is denied.

Secondly, boasting or bragging, whereby it is falsely arrogated.

How is the former vice committed?

Either out of simplicity, when in an humble conceit of themselves men speak as
they think, though it be not true, and therefore do not properly lie, because
their words agree with their mind; who are not wholly to be justified, because
they speak that which is not true, yet their falsity is no more to be condemned
then their humility to be commended. And such was the excuse of Moses, Exodus 3.
11. and 4. 10. 13. and of Jeremy, Jer. 1. 6

Or secondly, they speak worse of themselves then they are in their own
opinion, and that either out of modesty, to avoid bragging; which though it
cannot be wholly excused from being sinful, because it is ingratitude to God
to deny his gifts, and so derogatory to his glory and bounty, and not free from
lying, yet it is extenuated by modesty and humility; or else it proceeds from
a dissembled and counterfeit modesty and pride of heart, when men deny the good
that is attributed unto them in a slight manner, to draw on double praise; and
so men offend both in opposing truth by lying, and humility also by seeking
praise in a cunning way.

What is the other opposite?

Boasting and arrogance. Arrogance and boasting.
For as we must truly profess the good that is in us, or done by us, to Gods
glory, when need requires, in a modest manner; so must we carefully shun all
vain bragging, in arrogating unto our selves that good which belongs not to
us, or extolling it above due measure, seeing it cannot stand with modesty,
Pro. 27. 2. and is opposite to Gods glory, from which we so much detract as we
arrogate to our selves, 1 Cor. 4. 7. John 5. 31.

In what respect does the arrogant boaster offend?

Three ways; First, in respect of the object: Secondly, the manner: Thirdly,
the end.

How in respect of the object?

When that he boasts of that which is not truly good, but evil, which
argues desperate wickedness, as in Doeg, Psalm. 52. 1. Phil. 3. 19. Gen 4. 23,
2^. And such are those who glory in their drinking and whoring.

How in respect of the manner?

When this boasting is contrary to truth or charity: To truth, either in
respect of the thing it self, or of opinion.

How in respect of the thing it self?

When he arrogateth to himself the good he has not, or in a greater measure
then it is: So Matthew. 26. 33, 35.

How in respect of opinion?

Either his own, when he arrogateth that to himself which in his own opinion
belongs not to him: or the opinion of others, when his boasting exceeds
that merit and worth, which men truly conceive is not his due, or above that
measure that he deserves.

How does he sin against charity?

Both in respect of God, and his Neighbor. In respect of God, either openly
and professedly, as when he arrogates to himself that which is due only to
him, Ezekiel. 28. 2. Exodus 5. 2. Esa. 36. 20. Dan. 3. 15. Or else more covertly
and cunningly, when he spoils God of his glory, by attributing the praise of
the good things he has given him unto himself, Esa. 10. 15.

Secondly, in respect of his neighbor, when as his own praises tend to the
disgrace of others, Luke 18. 10.

How do men sin in respect of the end?

When as they boast and brag, either for their glory, which usually is
accompanied with shame, Romans 1. 22. Pro. 26. 12. Or for their gain, as when
they glory in their skill to draw on profit; which is the practice of Empericks
and Mountebancks, Acts 8. 9.

What is the confession of truth concerning the evil that is in us, or done by
us?

It is either before God, Confession of sin.
or men: Before God we must confess our sins, if we expect to have them
pardoned, Pro 28. 13. 1 John 1. 9. Psalm. 32. 5.

How are they to be confessed before men?

So far forth as the glory of God requires it, Josh. 7. 19. John 1. 10. or
the good and salvation of our neighbors, or our own profit and necessity,
James 5. 15. otherwise it is not necessary that we should lay them open to our
own shame. But howsoever we may conceal that which is evil in us, yet when
it is questioned we must not deny that which is true, nor confess that which
is false in us: For by denying the truth, we lie, and add sin unto sin, Genesis
18. 15. and by confessing that evil falsely which is not in us, we also lie,
and expose our selves to disgrace and danger, 2 Samuel 1. 10. compared with 1 Samuel 31. 4, 5.

What is the Tenth Commandent?

Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, The 10. commandment.
thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, etc.

What is the sin chiefly here forbidden?

Concupiscence, that is, those secret and internal sins, which go before
consent of will, and are the seeds of all other vices, of which sort are
wicked and corrupt inclinations, thoughts, desires, which are repugnant to
charity.

What is the end of this Commandment?

It respects either God, The end of this Commandment.
our Neighbors, or our Selves.

What is the end which respects God?

That He might show the perfection of that Charity which in His Law He
requires of us, and the excellency of it above all other humane laws. For
humane and Divine Laws differ, as the Lawgivers themselves. And as God is a
Spirit, who is omniscient and searches the heart, so He requires spiritual
obedience, Romans 7. 14. and binds by His Law, which is spiritual, like
Himself, not only the hand, tongue and outward man, as men do by humane
laws, but even the most inward, hidden and secret thoughts and desires of the
mind and heart.

What is the end respecting our Neighbors?

That we might not think or desire any thing tending to their hurt, but that
with all the powers of our souls, we exercise Charity, in doing them good, not
seeking our own good only, but theirs also, 1 Cor. 13. 5.

What is the end of this Commandment respecting our selves?

That it might discover unto us our corruption, and how far we are from that
perfection which Gods Law requires, Romans 7. 7. 13. 24. Prove. 20. 9. Psalm. 19.
13. and secondly, that it might be unto us a perfect rule of spiritual
obedience, and might teach us chiefly to observe our hearts, Prove. 4. 23. to
suppress the first and inward motions of sin, and to aspire to that original
purity, that we had by Creation.

What was the occasion of this Commandment?

Threefold: The occasion of this Commandment.
first, the pravity of our hearts and thoughts, Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21.

Secondly, the blindness and stupidity of our minds and hearts, which could
neither see nor feel their own pravity and corruption, Romans 7. 7, 8.

Thirdly, the error of our judgments, which suppose that our thoughts be
free, and that concupiscence and first thoughts are not sins till they have our
conscent, because they are not in our power to restrain them.

What is the difference between the spiritual obedience required in this and
the other Commandments?

In that it not only requires the internal obedience of the heart, with the
outward man, as the rest do, but also restrains the first motions and
inclinations, which go before consent; If we had not rather say, that it is
added to the other, as a full and more clear explication of that spiritual
obedience, which is required in all the rest.

Now show the meaning of this commandment; and first, what is that
concupiscence which is here spoken of?

There are two sorts of concupiscence, Two sorts of concupiscence.
or of the affections of the heart; the first called the Irascible, conceived
against things evil which we shu^, as anger, hatred, fear, grief, etc. The
other called Concupiscible, conceived toward things good and desirable, as
love, joy, delight, etc. And these are things either truly evil or good, or
else so only in appearance.

Is all concupiscence here forbidden?

No, for there is some good and lawful, some evil and unlawful; the one
commanded, the other forbidden.

What is lawful concupiscence?

It is either natural, Lawful concupiscence.
or spiritual. Natural, that which desires things good and necessary to our
being, or well-being; as food, clothing, and other lawful comforts of this
life.

Secondly, spiritual, which lusts and fights against the flesh, Gal. 5.
17. and affects and coveteth after spiritual things, Psalm. 119. 40.

What is opposite hereunto?

Unlawful and evil concupiscence, Unlawful concupiscence, and the kinds
thereof.
Col. 3. 5. which is also called concupiscence of men, 1 Pet. 4. 2.
concupiscence of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16, 17. worldly concupiscence, Tit. 2. 12.
lusts of the Devil, John 8. 44.

What are the kinds of this evil concupiscence?

Either habitual, or actual: Habitual, is an evil inclination and
pronenesse to that which is evil, or an evil desiring of it, which is a part
of original injustice, Romans 8. 6, 7.

What is that evil concupiscence which is actual?

It is distinguished into two kinds.

First, in respect of the form.

Secondly, in respect of the object.

What is that which respects the form?

It is either inchoate and imperfect, which is an act of sensuality only, and
the first and sudden motions of concupiscence, which go before the act of
reason and the will, tickling the mind and heart with a kind of delight: Or
it is formed and perfected, having also the act of the will joining with it,
and consenting to it, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.

What are the degrees of that inchoate concupiscence?

They are three: First, an evil motion cast into our minds, by either the
Devil, the World, or our own Flesh, corrupting the sense, memory, or
fantasy, whereby we have an hanging and hankring appetite after that which
is our Neighbors, as thinking it fit and convenient for us.

Secondly, a longing after it, and wishing for it, following that motion.

Thirdly, a tickling delight, arising from a conceit of the pleasure or profit
which we should have in the enjoying of it, James 1. 13, 14, 15.

How then does sin grow from its first conception to its full growth?

Saint James in respect of the degrees of it compares it to the conception,
The growth of sin.
growth, and birth of an Infant, in, and from the womb, James 1. 14, 15.

The first is, the abstraction of the mind and heart from good to evil, by
the evil motion and appetite, which may be called the carnal copulation
between the heart, and sin, and Satan.

The second, inescation, and enticing of the heart with delight and consent
unto it, as it were the retention of the seed.

The third, consent to the acting of it, which may be called the conception of
it.

The fourth, deliberation after this consent, by what means and how it may be
acted, which is the articulation and shaping of the parts and members.

The fifth is the acting of sin it self, that is the birth of it, which being
borne causes death: Which degrees and growth of sin may be observed in the
example of Eve, Ahab, and David himself.

How may evil concupiscence be distinguished in respect of the object?

Into three kinds.

First, of pleasure, which is the lust of the flesh.

Secondly, of profit, which is the lust of the eyes.

Thirdly, of honor and glory, which is the pride of life, 1 John 2. 25.

What are the parts of this Commandment?

Two: The parts of this Commandment, and 1. the negative.
First, the Affirmative: Secondly, the Negative: The first is here to be
understood, the other is plainly expressed.

What is forbidden in the Negative?

Evil concupiscence, which is twofold, either original or actual.

What is original concupiscence?

Original sin, Original concupiscence.
which is the corruption and disorder of all the powers and faculties of soul
and body, disposing them to all that is evil: It is also called habitual
concupiscence, which is nothing else but an evil inclination and pronenesse to
the transgression of Gods Law, which by corrupt Nature is bred with us.

How is it called in the Scriptures?

The old man, Ephesians. 4. 22 Coloss. 3. 9. Sin inhabiting and dwelling in us, the
Law of sin, the Law of the members warring against the Law of the mind, the
flesh, the encompassing sin, etc. Romans 7. 23. Gal. 5. 17, 24. Heb. 12. 1.

Is this to be reputed sin?

Yes, and a great sin, as may appear by these reasons.

First, That original concupiscence is sin.
because it defiles and corrupts the whole man, soul and body, with all
their faculties, powers, and parts; as the mind, will, memory, heart,
affections, appetite; with all the members of the body, which it makes to be
the instruments of evil.

Secondly, it polluteth all our words and works, and makes them all repugnant
to the Law of God.

Thirdly, it is the root and fountain of all our actual sins, from which they
grow and spring.

Fourthly, because it continually warreth against the spirit, and choaketh and
quenches the good motions of it, Gal. 5. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 11.

Fifthly, because it makes a man the slave of sin and Satan, Romans 7. 14, 23.

Sixthly, because it joyneth with the Devil and the World, and betrayeth us to
their tentations, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.

Seventhly, because it is an uncurable evil, seeing it so hangs upon us that
we cannot shake it off, Heb. 12. 2.

Eighthly, because it is but the more irritated by the Law of God, which should
suppress it, Romans 7. 8.

Lastly, because it makes us children of wrath, and liable to everlasting
condemnation, although dying in childhood, we should never commit any actual
transgression: For death and damnation reigned even over them which had not
sinned after the similitude of Adam. that is, by actual transgression, Romans 5.
14.

But does this Commandment extend to the prohibition of Original sin in the
whole body, and all the parts of it?

No; for it forbids sins committed against our Neighbors only, like all
other Commandments of the second Table, as appears by the words themselves,
and the Apostles epitomizing of this whole Table, in those words: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, Romans 13. 9. And therefore, all original
injustice, wicked inclinations, thoughts and affections are here only
forbidden, as they respect our neighbors, and are opposite to charity; but as
they respect God, and are repugnant to the love of him, they are forbidden in
the first Table.

What are actual Concupiscences?

They are evil motions which are repugnant to charity. Actual Concupiscence.


What are the kinds of them?

They are either such as are vain and unprofitable, or such as are hurtful
and pernicious.

How are they unprofitable?

So far forth as they fasten men's minds to earthly things, and thereby
withdraw them from heavenly.

In what respects are they hurtful?

First, because they are instruments of sin, as they are fit objects to every
sin in its kind: For if any objects are offered to the mind or senses, which
self-love causes them to think to be profitable, pleasant and desirable,
concupiscence presently apprehends and catches at them to satisfy worldly
lusts.

Secondly, They choke the seed of the Word in the hearts of carnal men, Mar.
4. 19.

Thirdly, They make men insatiable, knowing no end or measure in pursuing
worldly things.

Fourthly, They cast men headlong, in whom they reign, into sin, Ephesians. 2. 3.
and give them up to vile lusts, and a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 24. Psalm. 81. 12.

Fifthly, They fight against the soul, and if they overcome, bring it to
destruction, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

How many ways are these motions evil?

Two ways, either in respect of the fantasy and cogitations of the mind, or
in respect of the affections and imaginations of the heart.

When are the thoughts evil?

Then, Evil thoughts.
and so far forth as they solicit and incline us unto evil.

Why do men think that thoughts are free, and not to be charged upon men, or
called to account?

Foolish men think and say so, but the Scriptures say otherwise, and affirm
them to be sins, Prove. 24. 9. as being repugnant to charity, 1 Cor. 13. 5. and
therefore forbid them, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. injoyne us to confess them, and to crave
pardon for them, Isa. 55. 7. Acts 8. 22. and though we slight them yet God
takes notice of them, Psalm. 94. 11. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Ezekiel. 11. 5. Psalm. 139. 2.
yea, he hates evil thoughts, as abominable, Prove. 15. 26. Zach. 8. 17. and
severely punishes them, as we see in the example of the old world, Genesis 6. 5.
and 8. 21.

How are these evil thoughts injected?

Either by Satan, or else arise from original concupiscence, and both of them
either waking or sleeping.

How are they injected by Satan?

Either immediately by himself, Evil thoughts injected by Satan.
1 Chronicles. 21. 1. John 13. 2. Luke 9. 46, 47. or mediately by his instruments,
as of old by the serpent. And that he may the more easily insinuate into his
mind whom he tempts, he often suborneth those that are nearest and dearest
unto us to be his instruments, as we see in the example of Jobs wife, and
Peter, Job 2. 9. Math. 16. 23.

But are these tentations to be reputed our sins?

Not if we repel and extinguish them, as fire in water: for Christ himself
was tempted, yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. But if we admit them, and do not
presently reject them, they infect our minds and hearts with their poison, and
become our sins.

How else do evil thoughts arise in us?

From our natural corruption, Evil thoughts arising from natural corruption.
and habitual concupiscence, Luke 24. 38. Genesis 6. 5. Math. 15. 19. 2 Cor. 3.
5. And these thoughts arise in us, either waking or sleeping.

How are these motions evil, in respect of the affections of the heart?

These though they have not the consent of the will to act them, yet are they
sinful in respect of the sins which arise from them, of which also they are
the first degrees, as we see in the first boiling of anger in the heart, and of
lust and unclean motions, which proceed from the defect of that charity and
purity which God requires in us, and afterward produce the acts of murder
and fornication, when the will consents unto them, Mat. 5. 22, 28.

Are there no degrees of these evil affections, and perturbations of the heart?

Yes, for they are to be considered either in their first beginnings, as they
are the first motions of concupiscence, by which the mind is first withdrawn
from its rectitude, and then the heart suddenly affected: Or else, when by the
pleasure and delight in those first motions, they are tickled and enticed to
retain them still, that they may enjoy a greater and more full measure of
delight.

What follows this pleasure thus retained and continued in the mind and heart?

Consent to the acting of the sin, which in Gods sight is all one with the sin
it self, seeing he reputeth the will for the deed, whether it be in good or
evil, 2 Cor. 8. 12. Mat. 5. 28.

Why then, it seems that it were as good for a man to act sin; as to consent
to the acting of it?

Not so: For though they be both sins, the one as well as the other, yet not
equal, and in the same degree; but as the one is more heinous then the other,
and more defiles the conscience, so makes it a man liable to a deeper degree
of hellish condemnation.

You have spoken of the degrees of evil affections: now show what are the
kinds?

They are either concupiscible, about things affected and desired; or
irrascible, about things which they abhor and shun; as sudden and rash anger,
and the first motions of envy, etc.

How are the concupiscible distinguished?

By the Objects: for it is either the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh,
or the pride of life, 1 John 2. 15. all which are forbidden in the first
Commandment, as they are repugnant to the love of God: and in this
Commandment, as they are opposite to the love of our neighbors; and so far
forth as they are more secret and covert, and the first motions of
concupiscence, and the first principles and degrees of the sins against our
neighbors forbidden in the other Commandments.

You have showed what concupiscence is in the general; now show what it that
special kind of it which is here expressly forbidden.

The concupiscence of the eyes, The special kind of conpiscence here
forbidden.
which is varied and diversified by the removing of diverse objects.

But why is this rather forbidden, then any other kind?

Because it is the worst of all, and most pernicious, and therefore fittest to
comprehend under it all the rest, as it is done in the other Commandments.

But why is it the most pernicious?

First, because it is the root of all the vices forbidden in the other
Commandments, either in begetting or nourishing them.

Secondly, because it extinguisheth charity toward God, by turning the heart
from him after earthly things, Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. and toward our
neighbors by disposing men's hearts to cruelty, lust, and covetousness; and
making them averse to charity, mercy, and Christian beneficence.

Thirdly, because it is unsatiable, Eccles. 4. 8.

Fourthly, because it is unquiet and restless, vexing the covetous mind and
heart as it were hellish furies, 1 Timothy 6. 10. 1 Kings 21. 4.

Fifthly, because it is joined with self-love and envy.

Lastly, because it betrayeth men unto Satan's tentations to their destruction,
1 Timothy 6. 9.

But is all concupiscence here forbidden as unlawful?

No, but that only which is repugnant to charity toward God and our
neighbors; that which is inordinate, and that which by unlawful means
seeks to be satisfied, and tends to an evil end, James 4. 3. Finally, that
which is either immoderate, having no bounds, or else unjust, coveting that
which is another man's, against their will and profit.

What are the objects which are here removed?

They are infinite and innumerable; but for examples sake, he insisteth upon
some which men more usually and ardently covet after.

What means he by the house of our neighbor?

Both his place of habitation, What is meant by our neighbors house.
and his family, Genesis 17. and last. For a house is necessary to him that
has a family; which convinces them of a great sin, that for every slight
cause thrust their Tenants out of their houses, Esa. 5. 8.

What are the parts of the Family here numbered?

The wife, Neighbors wife.
servant, maid, etc. The wife of another must not be coveted: for such is the
union in marriage between man and wife, that it is unlawful to covet another
man's wife; not only to commit adultery with her, but to enjoy her for his own,
though by lawful means, and after the others death.

What are the other parts of the family?

Servants, Our neighbors servant.
men and maidens, whom we are here forbidden to covet, or to use any means to
entice them from their masters to come to us.

For though this were a greater sin among the Jews, because they had a
propriety in them, their servants being part of their goods: yet it is a sin
also amongst us, as being against charity and the common rule of Justice, which
enjoyneth us to let every one have his own, and to do to another as we would
have him do unto us.

What other things does this Commandment forbid to covet?

Our neighbors Ox, His Ox and Ass.
or Ass, which are here named, to comprehend all other goods, immovable, or
moveable, because they are of most necessary use for man's life. And lest we
should think it lawful to covet any other thing not here named, he includes
all in the last words; Nor any thing that is thy Neighbors: whether it be for
necessity, profit, or delight.

What do you further gather from hence?

First, that those things are our Neighbors which God has given him.

Secondly, that by this gift of God every man has a propriety and distinct
right in that he possesses by virtue of this tenure.

Thirdly: that he ought to be contented with that portion which God has given
him, and not to covet another man's: and consequently, that the Doctrine and
practice of the Familists, is erroneous and wicked.

You have spoken hitherto of the Negative part: now show what is the
Affirmative.

Here is commanded a pure, The affirmative part.
charitable, and just heart toward our neighbors, 1 Timothy 1. 5. unto which,
though none can attain in a legal perfection, yet ought all to desire and
aspire unto it.

Wherein does this purity consist?

In two things:

First, in original justice, and internal perfect charity, in which we were
created.

Secondly, in spiritual concupiscence.

What is original Justice?

Not only an exact purity from all spots of unrighteousness, but also a
disposition to perform cheerfully all offices of Charity and Justice.

What is spiritual Concupiscence?

It contains two things:

First, good motions of the Spirit.

Secondly, a fight of the Spirit against the lust of the Flesh.

What are those good motions of the Spirit?

Charitable and just motions, thoughts, desires, and affections, that all which
we think or desire may be for our neighbors good. And this we must do
frequently and constantly.

What is the fight against fleshly lusts?

When as being regenerate, and assisted by Gods Spirit, we make war against
the flesh, and the lusts thereof; and in all we may, labor to mortify,
crucify, and subdue them, because they make war against our souls, and
spiritual part, Gal. 5. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Romans 7. 23.

What are the means moving, and enabling us to perform the duties required in
this Commandment?

They are either general and common; The means enabling us to obey this
commandment.
or else more special and proper.

What are the general means?

Such as tend to the conserving of the heart in purity, that it may shun all
sinful concupiscence: As first, to walk with God; and so to demean our
selves at all times, and in all things, as being always in his presence, who
searches the heart and reins.

Secondly, to observe and set a watch over our hearts, Prove. 4. 23. And first,
that it do not admit any evil concupiscence. Secondly, that if it be
admitted, it be not retained. And this care must be taken both when we be
awake, that we keep our minds intent unto lawful and good things, Matthew. 12.
44. And when we go to sleep, that by hearty prayer we commend them to Gods
keeping.

But what if the heart have admitted evil concupiscences?

We must strive and fight against them, and never be at rest, until we have
cast them out, and extinguished them.

What further is required to the conserving of the heart in purity?

In the third place we must observe our senses, that they do not bring into
our minds such objects as being apprehended, will stir up in us evil
concupiscence, Genesis 3. 6. and 6. 2. Josh. 7. 21. 2 Samuel 11. 2. Matthew. 5. 28.
Job 31. Psalm. 119. 37.

What are the special means to suppress or take away the concupiscence of
the eyes?

First, we must mortify self-love, and not seek our own, but every man
another wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24.

Secondly, we must pull out the eyes of envy.

Thirdly, we must labor after contentation, Phil. 4. 11. And to this end
consider: First, how many want those good things which thou enjoyest, who are
far more worthy of them. Secondly thine own unworthiness of the least of
Gods benefits. Thirdly, meditate on Gods providence, and fatherly care, who
provideth all things necessary for thy good and salvation.

What do you learn from this Commandment thus expounded?

That it is most impossible for any man to keep it. The impossibility of
keeping this Commandment.
For who can say, that his heart is clean from the first motions of sin, and
concupiscence that go before consent? Prove. 20. 9.

To what purpose serves the knowledge of this impossibility?

To humble us in the sight and sense of our sins, which have made us subject
to the wrath of God, and the curse of the Law; that so despairing in our own
merits we may be driven out of our selves, and with more ardent desire, fly
unto the mercies of God in the satisfaction and obedience of Jesus Christ.

What other use are we to make of it?

That being by Christ freed from the curse of the Law, we study and endeavor
to conform our selves, our souls and lives according to the prescript rule of
this holy and most perfect law, Matthew. 5. 48. and that mortifying the flesh,
with all the carnal concupiscences, and lusts of it, we be daily more and more
renewed unto the Image of God in all holiness and righteousness, and walk
worthy of our high calling, as it becomes Saints, Ephesians. 4. 1.

Hitherto we have treated of the rule and square of our Sanctification, viz.
The ten Commandments:
Now wherein is the effect or exercise of Sanctification seen?

IN unfeigned repentance, Repentance and new obedience.
and new obedience springing from thence. For the fruits of Sanctification,
are; First, inward virtues, whereby all the powers of the mind are rightly
ordered. Secondly, the exercise of the same, by putting those heavenly and
sanctified abilities to holy use and service.

If then the exercise of Sanctification be first seen in repentance, what is
repentance?

An inward and true sorrow for sin, Repentance what it is.
especially that we have offended so gracious a God, and so loving a father;
together with a settled purpose of heart, and a careful endeavor to leave all
our sins, and to live a Christian life, according to all Gods Commandments,
Psalm 119. 57. 212. Or a turning of our selves to God, whereby we crucify
and kill the corruptions of our nature, and reform our selves in the inward
man, according to Gods will.

What is it to crucify the corruption of our nature?

It is freely, and with all our heart to be sorry that we have angered God with
it, and with our other sins, and every day more and more to hate it and them,
and to fly from them.

How is this wrought in us?

It is wrought in us, partly by the threatening of the Law, and the fear of
Gods judgments, but especially increased by feeling the fruit of Christ his
death, whereby we have power to hate sin, and to leave it: For when the sinner
is once humbled with the terrors of the Law; he flies to the comforts of the
Gospel: and he there sees in Christ Crucified, not only the mercy of God,
discharging him of all his sins; but also how deep the wounds of sin are,
wherewith he has pierced his Savior, Zach. 12. 10. and how severe the wrath
of God is against sin, even to the slaughtering of his own Son; and hence 1
Peter 4. 1. comes he to hate his sins, Psalm 97. 10. as God hates them, and
to look back thereon with godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10. resolving for ever after
to forsake them all.

How is the reformation of our selves newness of life wrought in us?

Only by the promise of the Gospel, whereby we feel the fruit of the rising
again of Christ.

What does ensue hereof?

Hereby we are raised up into a new life, having the Law written in our hearts,
and so reform our selves.

Wherein then does repentance properly consist?

In a thorough changing of our purpose and desires from the evil which Gods
Word rebukes in us, to the good which it requires of us, Romans 12. 1, 2. Esa.
1. 16, 17.

What is required in respect of the evil we turn from?

First, knowledge of the evil, then a condemning of the same, together with a
judging of our selves for it, and then with godly sorrow for that which is
past, a hatred of it for ever, and all this because it is sin, and displeases
our God.

What is required in regard of the good we turn unto?

First, a knowledge and approbation of good to be done, with a purpose of heart
to do it: then, an earnest love of the same, showed by care, desire, and
endeavor.

Can men repent of themselves, or when they list?

No, for it is the gift of God, given unto them that are born again.

Is it sufficient once to have repented?

No, we must continue it always in disposition, and renew it also in act, as
occasion is given by our transgressions, and Gods displeasure: for there is
none of Gods Saints but always carrying this corruption about them, they
sometimes fall, and are far from that perfection and goodness which the Lord
requires, and therefore stand in need of repentance so long as they live.

When then is this repentance to be practiced of us?

The practice of repentance ought to be continually, When repentance is to be
exercised.
an abhorring of evil, and cleaving unto that which is good, Romans 12. 9. for
as much time as remains in the flesh after our conversion, 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3.
yet at times there ought to be a more special practice and renewing thereof;
as after grievous falls, Psalm. 51. in fear of eminent judgments, Amos 4. 12.
Genesis 33. 2, 3, etc. or when we would fit our selves to receive special
mercies, Genesis 35. 2, 3, etc.

In what manner must the especial practice of repentance in such cases be
performed?

There must be 1. A serious search and enquiry after all sins, Lam. 3, 40. as
Traitors against God; but especially special sins, Ier. 8. 6. Psalm. 18. 23. as
the Arch-rebels. 2. Humble confession of Sins, 1. Of necessity unto God, with
shame of face, and true sorrow of heart, Prove. 28. 13. Ier. 31. 18, 19. 2. Unto
men conditionally, Luk 17. 9. viz. if either 1. The Church, for satisfaction of
the public offense, do enjoyne open acknowledgment, 2 Cor. 2. 6. Or, 2. Some
personal wrong dedemand private reconciliation, Luke 17. 4. Or, 3. The
weakness of the laboring Conscience do require the secret assistance of a
faithful and able Minister or brother, James 5. 16.

3. Fervent and faithful prayer, Psalm. 51. 1, 2, etc. to God in Christ, both
for pardon of what is past, verse 7. and for supply of renewing grace for the
time to come, verse 10. 4. Promise of amendment and satisfaction to such as we
have endammaged.


Seeing many do falsely pretend that they repent, how may we know that our
repentance is true?

A true trial of ununfained repentance may be taken, 1. From the generality of
it, viz. if it extend to the abhorring and shunning of all sins, Psalm. 119.
128, 139, 24. and to the love and practice of all duties without reservation,
Psalm. 119. 6. 2. From the through performance of each part, viz. 1. Hatred of
sin, in spiritual warfare against it, and that even unto blood, if need be,
Heb. 12. 4. 2. Of the love of righteousness, in bringing forth fruit worthy
amendment of life, Matthew. 3. 8. to wit, good works.



What is the spiritual warfare?

The daily exercise of our spiritual strength and armor against our
adversary, Of the spiritual warfare.
with assured confidence of victory; for the state of the faithful in this
life is such, that they are sure in Christ, and yet fight against sin, there
being joined with repentance a continual fighting and struggling against the
assaults of a man's own flesh, against the motions of the Devil, and
enticements of the world.

How shall we overcome these enemies?

By a lively faith in Christ Jesus.

What is then our principal strength?

The powerful assistance of God in Christ, Ephesians. 5. 10. who has loved us,
whereby we become more then conquerous, Romans 8. 37.

What is our spiritual Armor?

The complete furniture of saving and sanctifying graces, Of the spiritual
Armor.
called therefore the Armor of righteousness, 2 Cor. 6. 7. and the Panoplie,
or the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 5. 11, 14, etc. viz.

1. The girdle of verity and sincerity.

2. The breastplate of righteousness, that is, holiness of life, and good
conscience.

3. The shoes of the preparation (or resolution to go through with the
profession) of the Gospel of peace.

4. The shield of Faith.

5. The helmet of the hope of salvation.

6. The sword of the Spirit, which is the sound knowledge, and wise application
of the Word of God.

7. Finally, continual and instant prayer in the spirit.

Who are the Adversaries in the spiritual conflict?

They are either our friends proving us, or our enemies seducing and
endangering us.

Who is that friend of ours for our probation, who enters into conflict with
us?

God himself, who though he tempt no man unto evil, no more then he can
himself be tempted, Iam. 1. 13. yet as a Master of defense enureth us to
conflict, by contending with us even in his own person, viz. Genesis 22. 1. or
sensible apparitions, Genesis 32. 24. but more ordinarily by striking our hearts
with his terrors, Job 6. 4. withdrawing the comfort of his gracious presence,
Psalm. 77. 7. Chron. 32. 31. that by our falls we Heb. 12. 5, 6. Rev. 3. 19.

How must we contend with God?

No otherwise then Jacob, Hos. 12. 3, 4. and other holy men have done; that is,
by obedience, humility, patience, and fervent prayer unto God, who only
inableth us to previle with himself, giving us the blessing and name of
Israel, Genesis 32. 28.

What are those enemies of ours that seek to seduce and endanger us?

Whatsoever marches under the banner of Satan, the god and prince of the
darkness of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 6. 12. who sometimes immediately
assaileth us with impious and odious suggestions, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Zach. 3. 1. But
more usually imployeth his forces or attendants, namely, the world, 1 John 2.
15. and the flesh, Gal. 5. 24. So that the faithful in this life have battle,
both without, by the temptations of Satan, and the world; and within, by the
battle of the flesh against the spirit.

How do these enemies fight against our souls?

By employing all force and fraud, to draw us by sin from the obedience and
favor of God unto damnation, 1 John 2. 15.

What must we do being thus assaulted?

We must stand fast, being strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might,
and taking unto us the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 13, 14. that we may be able
to resist in the evil day and to lead* captivity captive.

How shall we overcome?

By a lively faith in Jesus Christ.

To come then to these enemies in particular: What call you Satan?

The adversary or enemy of God and his people. Of our first enemy, Satan.


How may we be able to stand against his assaults?

First, we must labor to inform our selves, that we may not be ignorant of
his enterprises or stratagems, 2 Cor. 2. 11.

Secondly, we must boldly resist, Iam. 4. 7. 1. Pet. 5. 9. that is, give no
place or ground unto him, Ephesians. 4. 27. or admit no conference with him, but
rather neglect and despise his suggestions.

Thirdly, we must take the shield of faith in Christ, and his assistance,
setting him on our right hand, who is mighty to save, Psalm. 16. 8. Isa. 63, 1.
whereby we may quech all the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephesians. 6. 16.

Forthly, we must brandish against him the sword of the Spirit, that is, the
word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. after the example of our Savior, Mat. 4* 4. etc.
keeping our selves to that only which God reveals to us, and requires of us.

What is the first assault of Satan against us?

By subtilty he allureth us to sin, and therefore he is called a Tempter, and a
Serpent.

How shall we overcome him in these temptations?

First, by faith in Jesus Christ, who overcame all Satan's temptations in his
own person, that so we might overcome him.

Secondly, by resisting the inward motions, and outward occasions of sin.

How shall we do that?

By believing that we are baptized into the death and Resurrection of Christ.

What is the second assault of Satan against us?

He lays fearfully to our charge our sins committed, and therefore he is
called the Devil, and accuser.

How shall we overcome him in these accusations?

First, by faith in Jesus Christ, who has justified us from all the sins for
which Satan can accuse us.

Secondly, by all those comfortable promises of forgiveness of sins, which in
Christ name are made unto us.

What is the third assault of Satan against us?

He seeks by manifold inward terrors, and outward troubles, to swallow us up,
and therefore is called a roaring Lion.

How shall we overcome him in these terrors and troubles?

1. By faith in Jesus Christ, who was heard in all his troubles, to give us
assurance, that we shall not be overcome in them.

Secondly, by faith in Gods providence, whereby we know that Satan can do no
more harm unto us, then the Lord does permit him for our good.

So much of Satan our first enemy: 2. Enemy, the World.
What call you the World?

The corrupt state and condition of men, and of the rest of the creatures,
which Satan abuses as his storehouse, or armory of temptations, 1 John 2. 15.

How does the World fight against us?

By alluring and withdrawing us to the corruption thereof.

What means does it use?

First, it allureth us to evil, with hope of false pleasures, gain and
profit, preferment and glory of this world, drawing us from our obedience to
God, 1 John 2. 16.

Secondly, otherwhiles with fear of pains, troubles, losses, reproaches, it
discourageth us from our duty, and allureth us to distrust Gods promises, Joh.
16. 33.

How may we withstand these temptations of the world?

By our faith, 1 John 5. 4. which sets a better world, even Gods heavenly
kingdom before our eyes, and so enableth us both to contemn, Heb. 11* 24, etc.
and crucify, Gal. 6. 14. the love of this present world, and to endure
manfully the threats and wrongs the reof, Heb. 11. 36, 37. both confessing
Christ in peril, and suffering martyrdom for his sake, if we be thereto
called, Rev. 12. 11.

How are then the pleasures, profits, and glory of this world to be overcome?

First, by a true faith in Jesus Christ, who despised all these things to work
our salvation, and to make us overcome them.

Secondly, by faith in Gods word, that fears us from doing any thing that is
against his will.

And how shall we overcome the pains, losses, and reproaches of this world?

First, by a lively faith in Jesus Christ, who suffered all these things to
work our salvation, and to enable us to suffer them.

Secondly, by a steadfast faith in Gods promises and providence, that we shall
want no good thing, and that all things seeming hurtful, shall be turned to
the furtherance of our salvation.

So much of the World, the second enemy: What call you the Flesh?

The corruption of our nature wherein we were borne and conceived. Third enemy,
our flesh.


Does that remain after Regeneration?

Yea, it dwells in us, and cleaves fast unto us, so long as we carry the
outward flesh about us.

How does the flesh fight against the Spirit?

As a treacherous part within us, being by Satan stirred up, and invegled with
the baits of the world, or discouraged with the evil entreaty thereof, it
fights on his side against our soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. That is, our spiritual
life and welfare, by continual lusting against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 24.

How is that?

First, by hindering, or corrupting us in the good motions, words, and deeds of
the Spirit.

Secondly, by continual moving us to evil motions, words, and deeds.

What call you the Spirit?

The holy Spirit which God in Christ has given us, whereby we are begotten
again.

Do we not receive the Spirit in full measure and perfection at the first?

No; but first we receive the first fruits, and afterward daily increase of
the same unto the end, if the fault be not in our selves.

How does the Spirit fight in us?

By lusting against the flesh.

How does it lust against the flesh?

First, partly by rebuking, and partly by restraining in us the evil motions
and deeds of the flesh.

Secondly, by continual enlightening and affecting us with thoughts, words, and
deeds agreeable to Gods will.

How may we withstand the temptations of our flesh?

By setting before our eyes the pattern of the death of Christ, and arming our
selves with the same mind, that it behooves us also to suffer in the flesh,
ceasing from sin, 1 Pet. 4. 1. hereto craving and employing the power of the
same death of Christ, to subdue and crucify our carnal lusts and affections,
Romans 6. 2. etc. Whereto also belongs the help and assistance of the Spirit,
for the repressing of our inordinate desires of nature, 1 Cor. 9. 25.

So much of the spiritual fight: what follows after a man has gotten the
victory in any tempatation or affliction?

Experience of Gods love in Christ, and so increase of peace of conscience, and
joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 5. 3. 2 Cor. 1. 5.

What follows if in any temptation he be overcome, and through infirmity fall?

After a while there will arise godly sorrow; which is, when a man is grieved
for no other cause in the world, but for this only, that by his sin he has
displeased God, who has been unto him a most merciful and loving father, 2
Cor. 7. 8, 9. Matthew. 26. 75.

What sign is there of this sorrow?

The true sign of it is this: when a man can be grieved for the very
disobedience of God in his evil word or deed, though he should never be
punished, and though there were neither heaven nor hell, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19.

What follows after this sorrow?

Repentance renewed afresh, 1 Cor. 7. 11.

By what signs will this repentance appear?

By seven, 2. Cor. 7. 11.

1. A care to leave the sin whereinto he is fallen.

2. An utter condemning of himself for it, with a craving of pardon.

3. A great anger against himself for his carelessness.

4. A fear lest he should fall into the same sin again.

5. A desire ever after to please God.

6. A zeal of the same.

7. Revenge upon himself for his former offenses?

Thus far of repentance and the spiritual warfare accompanying the same:
What are those good works wherein our new obedience is exercised?

That which proceeding from a person acceptable, is something of God commanded,
New obedience.
performed in right manner, and directed unto a good end: namely, whatsoever
thing is done of us, not by the force or conduct of nature, 2 Cor. 3. 5. but by
the power of the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, Romans 8. 10. and according to
the rule of the known will of God. Romans 12. 2. unto the glory of God, 1 Cor.
10. 31. the assurance of our election, 2 Pet. 1. 10, etc. and the edification
of others, 1 Cor. 10. 23.

How many things then are needful for the making of our actions good, and what
properties are to be required in good works?

Five: Of good works in general, and of the Properties of them.


1. They that do them must first be such as are ingraffed into Christ, and
continue in him, that so their persons may be acceptable unto God.

2. They must be agreeable to the Law of God; and he that does them, must know
that he has a warrant for his action from the Commandment of God.

3. He that does them, must not only have a warrant for his action, and know
that it is lawful, but he must also do it in that manner which God has
appointed.

4. He that does them, must be persuaded in his heart that God allows them.

5. They must be done to that holy end for which God has commanded them;
namely, to glorify God, and to assure our own salvation.

Cannot all men do good works?

No, but only the regenerate, who are for that purpose created anew, and endued
in some measure with the spirit of Christ, and power of his resurrection, and
carry the Image of God in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 21.

What say you then of the good works of the unregenerate?

They do no good works, because they neither are as yet members of Christ, nor
do offer them to God in the name of Christ, and therefore are the evil Tree,
which brings forth only evil fruit, Mat. 7. 17, etc. Jer. 13. 23.

Is there no difference between those unregenerate, which keep themselves to
their own wives, and those that take other men's: Or between him that steals,
and him that lives of his own labor, though not converted?

Yes verily: For the former actions are civilly good and profitable for
maintenance of the society of men, and before God not so abominable as they
which are committed against civil honesty; yet coming from some other cause
(either of vainglory, or of servile fear, or opinion of merit) then from
faith, and consequently, the love of God, they are no better then sins, what
show of goodness soever they have.

Is there no concurrence of nature in the doing of a good work?

Taking nature (in the common sense of Scripture) for that hereditary
corruption that cleaves to all the sons of Adam, Ephesians. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 14. no
good work has any ground or help from nature, but is altogether contrary
thereto, Rom 8. 7. But if we understand by nature, as Romans 2. 14. the created
abilities of soul and body, as the light of reason, liberty of the will,
motion of the bodily members, etc. we acknowledge nature not to be the
principal mover or guide, Mat. 16. 17. but the things moved and guided by
grace in well doing, 1 These. 5. 23.

Do not our good works make us worthy of eternal life, or in some part
justify us, or any whit merit and deserve the favor of God?

No: because, That there is no merit in good works.


1. We are ten thousand times more indebted to God, then all our good works, or
our selves are worth.

2. We can do no good thing but that which comes from God.

3. The righteousness which is able to stand in the judgment of God, must be
perfect in all respects, but in many things we sin all. And again, our best
works are imperfect, corrupt and defiled with sin, and therefore can deserve
nothing at the hands of God, who being perfect righteousness it self, will
find in the best works we do, more matter of damnation then of salvation:
wherefore, we must rather condemn our selves for our good works, then look to
be justified before God thereby, Ps. 143. 2. Isa. 64. 6. Job. 9* 3.

Is there no works of man perfectly good?

No work of a sinful man is wholly free from sin, neither is there any good
work perfect, no not of the most perfect in this life, by reason of the
remainders of corruption, Isa 64. 6. Gal. 5. 17. but only the work of Christ,
in whom alone there was no mixture of sin, 1 Pet. 2. 22.

But when our Sanctification here begun shall be perfected in the world to
come, shall we not then be justified by an inherent righteousness?

No, but by the imputed righteousness of our Savior Christ, which being once
given us, is never taken away from us.

How is pollution conveyed into the good works which God works in us?

There is (besides the work of his own hand, through the operation of his
holy Spirit) a pollution in us, and an infection of ours, which comes from
the sin that dwells in us: as clear water put into an unclean vessel, or
running through a filthy channel, receives some evil quality thereof.

Wherein do our good works fail of Gods Justice?

Partly in the isntrumental causes from which they proceed, and partly in the
final cause or end whereunto they aim.

What are the isntrumental causes hindering the perfection of our work?
Wherein our good works fail.


1. Our understanding, in that the work is not done with knowledge, absolute
and thoroughly perfect.

2. Our memory, in that our remembrance is infeebled, and does not so fully
retain that which the understanding conceives.

3. Our will and affections, in that they are short of their duty.

4. Our body, in that it is not so apt and nimble for the execution of good
things as is required.

Express this by a similitude.

We are in the isntrumental causes like to a common Labourer, which being
hired by the day, works with one hand whereas both are required, or works a
piece of the day, being hired for the whole.

What is the final end wherein good works fail?

In that we have not so direct an eye to Gods glory, or the good of our
neighbor as is required; but look asquint, as it were, at those duties which
are enjoined us: Like to those Artificers, who prefer their own credit in
their skill before their Masters profit.

If then it be so that sin cleaves to our best works, and makes them sin, are
not our good works sin? and are not all evil works equal?

No, doubtless, be it far from us to think it: For their imperfection is
sinful, but the good work is not a sin, and even in bad actions (as has been
said) some are better, that is less evil and hurtful then others.

But seeing our works are thus corrupt, how can they please God? and why does
he promise a reward unto them?

First, Why God rewards our works.
the reward that God does promise, is not for the desert of our works, but of
his own grace and mercy.

Secondly, the corruption and pollution that cleaves unto our good works is
taken away by the intercession of our Savior Christ, for whose sake God
covering the imperfection, accepts and accounts of, and so rewards them,
as if they were perfect, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Exodus 28. 36, 37, 38.

What Doctrine is hence to be gathered?

A Doctrine of great comfort to the children of God to stir them up to abound
in good works, since they are so acceptable to God and Christ Jesus: for when
men know any thing to be delightsome to their Prince, they will withal
endeavor and strive for it: how much more then ought we to be pricked forward
to the service of God, who quenches not the smoking Flax, nor breaks the
bruised Reed, Matthew. 12. 20. yea which forgets not a cup of cold water given
in faith, and for his sake? Matthew. 10. 42.

Declare now the ends for which good works are to be done.

1. That by them Gods glory may be advanced. The ends of good works.


2. That by them we may show our thankfulness to God for all his benefits.

3. That by them we may be assured of our faith and election.

4. That by our good works we may edify others.

How may we edify others?

1. By encouraging and strengthening those that are good.

2. By winning those that are not come to God.

3. By stopping the mouths of the wicked, and of those that are incorrigible.

Is it not lawful to seek our own praise and merit by our good works?

No; for all our good works are imperfect, and salvation is only merited by the
death and obedience of Christ, (as has been said.)

But will not this Doctrine make men careless of well-doing:

No; for they that are ingraffed into Christ, must needs bring forth good
works; and good works are necessary, (as has been declared) though not for
merit, yet for Gods glory, the edification of others, and our own assured
comfort.

Are good works so needful, that without them we cannot be assured of
salvation?

Yes; for though good works do not work our salvation in any part; yet
because they that are justified are also sanctified, they that do no good
works, do declare that they neither are justified, nor sanctified, and
therefore cannot be saved.

Then they must much more be condemned, which commit sin, and lie in it.

Yea; for such are not only pronounced to be accursed by the Law, but also the
Gospel has pronounced, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven.

What consideration may draw us to be zealous in good works?

That if we do well, we shall have well, as the old saying is.

But that is a hard thing to be persuaded of?

So it is indeed; because our hearts are naturally distrustful in the promises
of God: As also our flesh, the world, and the devil do suggest unto us, that
it is a vain thing to do good. Mal. 3. 14.

What remedy is there against this assault?

That it shall be well with them that do well, by the testimony of God
himself, commanding the Prophet Esaiah to say so to the righteous, Esa. 3. 10.
which ought to teach all men, that laying aside all their own opinions, and
whatsoever seems good in their own eyes, they should rely wholly upon the
direction of God.

What may be gathered of this?

That it is better to endanger our selves with obedience to God, then with
disobedience to rid our selves out of appearance of trouble.

But why did the Lord thus charge the Prophet?

Because the wicked (as says Malachi) wearied God with their blasphemies,
saying, that he delighted in their wickedness, Mal. 2. 17.

How secondly is that point confirmed?

By a continual practice and experience from time to time, as the friends of
Job do well reason thereupon.

What is the third proof?

That since the Lord must do either good for good, or evil for good; and that
it is absurd, yea blasphemous, to say that God does evil for good; it must
needs follow, that he will do good for good: for if a reasonable honest man
would not requite kindness with unkindnesse; it can much less fall into the
nature of God so to do; especially seeing he did then show kindness unto us,
when we were enemies unto him.

How fourthly is it confirmed?

In that God is said to write up the good deeds of his servants into his book
of Records, as the Kings of the earth are wont to do, Mal. 3. 16, 17, 18.

But this seems not so, since the wicked do so triumph over the godly, as if
there were no difference?

A difference shall specially appear at the day of judgment, when by the
sentence of the great Judge the wicked like stubble shall be consumed with
fire, and the Sun of righteousness shall shine upon the just.

Is there no difference at all in this life?

Yes, inwardly: For the godly in doing well have always a good conscience,
howsoever earthly things go with them; so that the green Sallet of herbs, or
dry bread, is better to them then all the rich man's wealth; because the grace
of God goes with them whither soever they go, whereas the wicked have a hell
in their conscience, how well soever they fare outwardly.

So much of good works in general: What special good works are commanded us
in the Word of God?

The things which we give unto God, Of special good works required.
prescribed in the first Table; and the giving of alms to our needy Neighbor,
touching which among all the duties of the second Table, our Savior gives
special direction in the sixth of Matthew, where he entreats of prayer and
fasting.

What are those things that we give unto God?

Prayers and Vows, Psalm. 50. 13, 14. and 66. 13, 14. which being special
parts of Gods worship may not be communicated to any other, Esa. 42. 8. and 48.
11.

What is prayer?

It is a familiar speech with God in the name of Christ, Of prayer, what it is.
1 John 5. 14. opening the desires of our hearts unto him, and so a lifting up
of the mind, and a pouring out of the heart before God, for the more ample and
free fruition of the good things we have need of, Psalm. 50. 15. Jer. 33. 3.
Lam. 2. 19. Phil. 4. 6.

How further is the necessity of Prayer considered?

Prayer is a key to open the Storehouses of all Gods treasures unto us; The
necessity of prayer.
and as by knocking we enter into the place we go to, so by Prayer we obtain
those things we need. Also as men provide gifts to make way for favor, Pro.
17. 8. so Prayer is a gift to appease Gods anger toward us, and as a hook to
reach those things that are above our reach, and to put by those things that
stand in our way and let us. Add hereunto, that it is so necessary, as without
it the use and enjoying of the things we have is unlawful, 1 Timothy 4. 5. For as
if we take any thing that is our Neighbors without asking him leave we are
accounted Thieves, so to take any thing of Gods (whose all things are) without
asking them at his hand, is Felony. Finally, Prayer is a principal means
serving for the strengthening and increasing of Faith, and for the further
advancing and more plentiful effecting of the outward means of salvation,
Jude 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. And therefore the Apostles did not
only say unto Christ, Increase our faith, Luke 17. 5. but also, Lord teach us
to pray as John taught his Disciples, Luke 11. 1.

What gather you hence?

That we can never honor God aright, in calling upon his name, unless we
bring faithful and feeling hearts before him, James 1. 6, 7. 1 Samuel 1. 16.

Describe Prayer yet more largely?

It is a religious calling upon God alone in the name of Christ, A more full
description of prayer.
by the titles wherewith in the Scripture he is set forth unto us, as well
thereby to do service and homage unto the Lord, as to obtain those further
things and Graces that are necessary for us. Or thus. It is the holy request of
an humble and sanctified heart, together with thanksgiving Phil. 4. 6.) offered
by the power of the spirit of Prayer ( Romans 8. 26.) as a special service unto
God ( Psalm. 50. 15.) in the name of Christ ( John 14. 14.) in behalf of our
selves and others, ( Ephesians. 6. 18.) with assurance to be heard in what we pray
for according to the will of God, 1 John 5. 14. James 1. 6.

Why do we call it a request with thanksgiving?

Because in all our Prayers there must both petition of the good things we
need, and thankful acknowledgment of those things we have obtained, (1 Thessalonians.
5. 17, 18.) As for those forms which contain neither supplication nor giving
of thanks, as the Articles of the Belief, the Decalogue, etc. they may, and
ought, for other good purposes, be committed to memory and rehearsed, Deuteronomy. 6.
7. but to use them as Prayers savoureth of deep ignorance, if not of
superstition, Matthew. 6. 7.

Why do you call it the request of the heart?

Not to exclude the use of bodily gesture, much less of the voice and tongue,
in the action of Invocation, (therefore called the Calves of the Lips, Hosea
14. 2.) but to show, first, that the heart is on our part the principal mover
and speaker in prayer, from whence both voice and gesture have their force and
grace, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Psalm. 45. 1. and 108. 1.

Secondly, that Prayer on sudden occasions may be secretly and powerfully
offered, and is of God heard and accepted, when neither any voice is uttered,
nor any bodily gesture employed, Exodus 14. 15. Nehem. 2. 4.

Why do you add, Of an humble and sanctified heart?

Because as in general none can pray, or do any thing acceptable, Psalm. 109.
7. but such as are truly regenerate and sanctified unto this and every good
work, Psalm. 51. 15. so in special (and for the present action of prayer) it is
required as the sum of all sacrifices, that the heart be humble and contrite,
Psalm. 51. 17. acknowledging it own unworthiness by reason of sin, Dan. 9.
8, 9. feeling the want of Gods grace and mercy, Psalm. 143. 6. and submitting it
self unto him, willing to be beholding for the least degree of favor, Luke
15. 18, 19.

What then is required of us, that our prayers may be holy?

1. That we pray with faith and assurance that God for Christ sake will hear
us. What is required that prayer may be holy.


2. That we pray with fear and reverence of God.

3. That we pray with humility, and a lively sense of our own unworthiness to
obtain any thing at Gods hands.

4. That we pray with a true feeling of our own wants, and an earnest desire
to obtain those things for which we pray.

5. That our affections be agreeable to the matter for which we pray.

6. That we purpose to use all good means for the obtaining of those things
for which we pray.

In brief, these be the special properties of true prayer. It must be

1. In faith, without wavering, James 1. 6.

2. In truth, without faining, Psalm. 145. 18.

3. In humility, without swelling, Luke 18. 13.

4. In zeal, without cooling, James 5. 16.

5. In constancy, without fainting, Luke 18. 1.

What learn you hence?

That even they which are most frequent and fervent in this duty had need to
pray God to forgive their prayers, in conscience of their own frailties and
infirmities, Esa. 38. 14, 15. Psalm. 77. 9, 10. and 32. 3, 5.

What is the spirit of Prayer?

An especial grace and operation of the holy Ghost, Jude 20. called therefore
the spirit of grace and supplication, Zachary 12. 10. enabling us to power out
our souls unto the Lord, Psalm 62. 8. with sighs that cannot be expressed,
Romans 8. 26. For the holy Ghost must be our helper in prayer, to teach us
both what to pray, and how to pray, Romans 8. 26.

To whom must we pray?

To God alone, That we must pray to God alone.
and to none other. For 1. He alone is the searcher of the hearts, hears the
voice, and knows the meaning of the spirit of prayer, Psalm. 65. 2. Romans 8 27.

2. He is able to grant whatsoever we demand, Ephesians. 3. 20.

3. He challenges our faith and confidence, without which we cannot pray, Romans
10. 14. Wherefore seeing he alone hears all prayers, heales all sins, knows
all suitors, Jer. 31. 18. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. and 6. 30. 1 Chro. 28. 9. Psalm. 44.
21. He alone has love enough to pity all, and power enough to relieve all our
wants and necessities, to him alone we are to pray, and to none other.

What learn you hence?

That seeing the Scripture forbids us to communicate Gods honor to any
other, Isa. 42. 8. and 48. 12. such as pray either to Saints or Angels, Col. 2.
18. have forgotten the name of their God, Psalm. 44. 20. which condemns those
of the Church of Rome, who would have us to pray to Angels and Saints departed.

Whether must we direct our prayers, to the Father, or the Son, or to the
Holy Ghost?

We must pray to the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; that is to
say, to our God in Trinity.

In whose name, or for whose sake must we pray to God?

In the only name, That we must pray only in the mediation of Christ.
and for the only sake of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, Dan. 9. 17. John 16.
23, 24. the alone Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. As of
propitiation, so or intercession, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Romans 8. 34. who through the
veil of his flesh, and merit of his blood, has prepared for us a new and
living way, whereby we may be bold to enter into the holy place, Heb. 10. 19.
in whom alone we are made the children of God, and have liberty to call him
Father, Gal. 4. 5. Finally, in, with, and for whom God gives all things that
be good to his Elect, Romans 8. 32.

Who are condemned by this Doctrine?

They of the Church of Rome, who teach us to pray in the name of Saints, and
make them to be our Mediators between God and us.

For whom are we to pray?

For our selves and others, For whom we must pray.
us and ours; in a word, for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. even our enemies, Mat. 5.
44. because they bear the common Image of God, Jam. 3. 9. and blood of
mankind, whereof we are all made, Act. 17. 26. unless it be apparent that any
one has committed the unpardonable sin, 1 John 5. 16. But principally, for
such as are our brethren in Christ, and of the household of faith, Ephesians. 6. 18.
Gal. 6. 10.

Secondly, for all sorts and degrees of men, especially public persons, as
Rulers, and such as are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Ministers that watch over
our souls, Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3, etc.

What assurance have we that we shall be heard in what we pray for?

1. Because we pray to that God that hears prayers, Psalm. 65. 2.

2. And is the rewarder of all that come unto him, Heb. 11. 6. and in his name
to whom who so asks, God denies nothing, John 11. 42. and therefore howsoever
we are not always answered at the present, Psalm. 77. 1. or in the same kind
that we desire, 2 Cor. 12. 9. yet sooner or later we are sure to receive even
above that we are able to ask or think, if we continue with constancy,
patience, and importunity to sue unto him according to his will, Luke 11. 5.
and 18. 1. 1 John 5. 14.

What things must we come to God in prayer for?

Not for trifles and toys, but for things needful and necessary, and such as
God has made us promise of; some whereof do immediately concern the glory of
God, others the necessity of man; either in things belonging to this present
life, or those especially which belong to the life to come.

But how can we remember all the promises that God has made therein to ground
our Petitions, especially being unlettered?

There are general promises, that whatsoever we shall ask according to his
will, it shall be given us, 1 John 5. 14. Again, whatsoever we read or hear
that the servants of God have uncontrollably demanded in the Scriptures, or
without special calling; that is a good warrant for us to demand at the hands
of God.

Where then is that will of God revealed, according whereto we must direct our
prayers?

Throughout the whole book of the Scriptures of God, which inform us as
concerning other duties, so especially concerning this of prayer. Recording
also for this purpose many excellent prayers, as of Moses, David, Daniel,
Nehemiah, Paul, etc. But most absolutely in that passage or portion delivered
by our Savior himself; and therefore commonly called, the Lords Prayer.

What learn you from thence?

That for help of our weakness and rudeness in prayer, we are to look to the
prayers of the holy men of God, set down in Scripture, according to the state
wherein they were at the time of those prayers, may best sort with the special
cases wherein we are when we pray. But especially, and above any other, yea
above all of them together, we are to look unto that most absolute prayer
which our Savior Christ has taught us in the Gospel.

What is the special end and use of Prayer?

To recover our peace, and to nourish our communion with our God, Dan. 9. 9.
Phil. 4. 6, 7. John 17. or 1 John. 1. 7.

What gather you hence?

That such as have least care, and make least conscience to call upon him, have
also least acquaintance and acceptance with him, Psalm 14. 3.

What is the excellency of this duty?

It sets head and heart, and all our best affections aworke, giving God the
praise of his Majesty and mercy, goodness and greatness both together, 1 Samuel
10. 12, 13. Jam. 5. 13. 14. Psalm. 50. 23. and therefore it is compared to
Incense or sweet perfume, Psalm 141 2. for that it is acceptable to the Lord,
as perfumes are to men; and to the drops of honey, as it were dropping from the
lips of the Church, as from an honey-combe, Cant. 4. 11. Thy lips o my Spouse
drop as the honey-combe, honey and milk are under thy tongue.

How can God so infinitely wise, take delight in our Prayers that are so rude?

Because in Christ he takes us for his children; and therefore as Parents,
rather take pleasure to hear their children stammer, then some other to speak
eloquently; so does the Lord take pleasure in the weak prayers of the Saints.

Hitherto of Invocation and Prayer in general: what are the parts thereof?

Two principally, The parts of Prayer.
( Psalm 50. 15. 23. 1 These. 5. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Phil. 4. 6. Petition, or
Request, (properly called Prayer) whereby we crave things needful; and
Thanksgiving, or Praise, whereby we magnify the goodness of God, and give
thanks for benefits received; to both which is annexed, confession of sins,
and of the righteous judgment of God against them: at the view whereof we
being humbled, may come more preparedly to prayer in both kinds.

What is Petition?

Petition, Of Petition.
(or prayer properly so called) is a religious calling upon the name of God, by
suit or request; in which we desire and beg all things necessary, Luke 11. 1,
2. 3. Phil. 4. 6, 7. Psalm 50. 15. And it is either for things of this present
life, with this exception, so far forth as the same shall be thought good
unto the wisdom of God; or (and that especially) for the things of the life to
come, without exception, Matthew. 8. 2. 2 Samuel 15. 25. 26.

What learn you of this; that it is a religious calling upon God?

First, that we may not rush unadvisedly into Gods presence, but approach his
Throne with fear and reverence, Heb. 12. 28. Eccl. 5. 1.

Secondly, that the best hearing is in heaven, and readiest help from Gods
hand, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.

What do you mean by calling upon God?

Not the calling of the tongue, but the cry of the heart; as Hannah called upon
God, when her voice was not heard, 1 Samuel 1. 13. and Moses cried unto the Lord,
when yet he spoke not a word, Exodus 14. 15.

What gather you hence?

That the heart without the tongue, may pray with fruit and feeling 1 Samuel 1.
10. But the tongue without the heart is nothing but vain babbling, Matthew. 6. 7.

What do you mean by the name of God?

God himself considered in his attributes and properties, whereby (as men by
their names) he is known unto us. Exodus 34. 6, 7. Psalm 145. 12, etc.

What learn you hence?

First, that neither any may claim, nor we may yield this duty, but where we
may find the power and properties of the Deity, Psa. 44. 20. 21.

Secondly, that it is a good ground of prayer to stay our hearts on such of
Gods properties, as are best suiting with our necessities, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6, 7,
8, 9. Neh. 1. 5.

Thirdly, that they that will not settle their hearts on God alone by faith can
never lift up their hearts to him alone in prayer, Romans 10. 14. Psalm. 44. 20.
Lam. 3. 41.

Fourthly, that in every state and condition, they that pray best, speed best,
and live best, Dan. 9. 23. Psalm. 50. 15. and 66. 18, 19.

It seems to be of no use to make our Petitions to God, seeing he both
knows what we want, either for his glory or our good, and has determined
what to bestow upon us?

Yes verily: we must ask, and that continually; that is, at set times, without
intermission, by the Commandment of Christ himself, bidding us ask and we
shall receive, seek and we shall find, knock and it shall be opened to us,
Mat. 7. 7. wherein we should rest: For as God has fore-appointed all
necessaries to be given us; so has he also appointed the means whereby they
should be brought to pass, whereof Prayer is a chief.

What other reason have you for this?

We should therefore pray for the things we have need of, that having received
them, we may be assured we had them of God, and not by accident or fortune, as
natural men say.

What, does not God oftentimes bestow his benefits without Prayer?

Yes: both upon the wicked, either to provoke them to repent, or to make them
inexcusable; and upon his own children: even as a loving father, in regard of
his ignorant, and sometimes negligent child, does give things unasked, even so
does God toward his.

Why will the Lord have us beg his blessings of him?

To exercise our faith in seeking, Mat. 7. 7. and our patience in waiting, Jam.
5. 10, 11. as also to stir up a feeling of our wants, Mat. 15. 22. and to
quicken our affections unto good things, Phil. 4. 6.

What gather you hence?

That where the heart is faithless, the Prayer must needs be fruitless; for
according to our faith it shall be unto us, Luke 18. 11, 14. Iam. 1. 6, 7.

But why does not he answer when we ask, but delays to help us when yet he
sees and hears us?

Because we are sometimes too haughty, and he will humble us; sometimes too
hasty, and he will curb us, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. sometimes we fail in the
matter asking, we know not what; sometimes in the manner asking, we know not
how; and sometimes in the end, asking we know not wherefore, Iam. 4, 2, 3.

Does he not sometimes delay us, when yet he purposes to answer us?

Yes he does:

First, because he loves to hear the voice of his own spirit in us, Romans 8.
26, 27.

Secondly, because the suite may be good, and yet the season not so meet for
us, Rev. 6. 10, 11. Acts 1. 7.

Thirdly, he takes pleasure in our constancy, being a fruit of faith and
fervency, Luke 18. 1. Mat. 15. 27, 28.

Fourthly, because such blessings as are won by long and strong prayers, are
always esteemed very highly, received in humility, enjoyed in sobriety, and
employed faithfully for man's good and Gods glory, 1 Samuel 1. 20, 21. 1 Chronicles.
29. 14, 15.

What gather you hence?

That if we faint not in praying, we shall in due season be sure of a blessing,
Luke 18. 7, 8. And that when our God denies us, or delayeth us in that which
seems good unto us, even then he gives us that which he knows is better for
us, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.

What good means may we use to obtain the gift of prayer in some measure?

1. To get some true feeling of our misery, The means of obtaining the gift of
prayer.
for sense of misery breeds suit for mercy, Matthew. 15. 22.

2. Bring hungring and thirsty souls after grace and good things, Psalm. 42. 1,
2. when the soul pants most, the soul prays best.

3. Gather principles of knowledge, that the head may guide the heart, 1 Cor.
14. 15. for what we know is worth the having we will not lose for the asking.

4. Consider the examples of Gods servants in like sorrows, and make like
suits, Dan. 9. Nehem. 9. be thou as they were to him, and he will be to thee
what he was to them.

5. Be well persuaded of Christ's ordinance, Master teach us to pray; Luke 11.
1. and of Gods acceptance, reckon of him as of our father, Matthew. 6. 5, 9. for
according to our faith it shall be unto us.

6. Be resolute against sin, neither living in grosser iniquities, nor allowing
lesser infirmities, Romans 7. 15. so he will never shut out our prayers, not
withold his mercies from us, Psalm 66. 19, 20.

7. In reading or hearing turn precepts into prayers; Lord give what thou
command, and command what thou will: Duties enjoined, graces commended,
blessings promised, and cursings threatened, do all quicken us to prayer, and
furnish us with matter for the same, Matthew. 5. 6, 7. Romans 12. Ephesians. 6.

But when for all this our prayers are few and faint, cold and weak, what
special helps may we then have against our infirmities?

None better then to pray for the spirit of prayer, which helps and heals
our infirmities, and teaches us both for manner, measure, and matter, to lay
open all our necessities, Romans 8. 26. Luke 11. 13. And secondly, call others
which are best acquainted with the practice and power of prayer, to pray with
us, being present, James 5. 14. and for us, being absent from us, Romans 1. 9.

What be the signs of a sound prayer?

1. To use all other good means carefully, Acts 27. 23, 31.

2. To seek Gods glory principally, Exodus 32. 11, 12.

3. To desire the best things most earnestly, Col. 1. 9, 10, 11.

4. To ask nothing but what Gods Word warranteth us, 1 John 5. 14.

5. To wait patiently till he hear and help us, Psalm. 40. 1. Iam. 5. 10, 11.

What motives may we have to stir up our hearts to this duty?

Many and good: Motives to prayer.
Because prayer is the voice of Gods spirit in us, Romans 8. 26. a jewel of
grace bequeathed by Christ unto us, Luke 11. 2. It is the hand of faith, the
key of Gods treasury, the souls Solicitor, the hearts Armor-bearer, and the
minds interpreter, Matthew. 7. 7. Ephesians. 6. 18. It procures all blessings,
preventeth curses, 2 Chro. 7. 14. sanctifies all creatures, that they may do
us good, 1 Timothy 4. 5. seasoneth all crosses, that they can do us no hurt, 2
Cor. 12. 18. Lastly, it keeps the heart in humility, the life in sobriety,
strengthens all graces, overcommeth all temptations, subdueth all
corruptions, purges our affections, makes our duties acceptable to God, our
lives profitable unto men, and both life and death comfortable to our selves,
Acts 9. 11. Ephesians. 6. 18. Jude 20. Act. 4. 24. and 7. 5, 9.

What are the lets and hindrances of Prayer?

There be some which hinder the power of it, Hindrances of Prayer.
as our ordinary infirmities, Mark 9. 23, 24. other which hinder either the
practice or the fruit of it, as our customary and grosser iniquities, Psalm
66. 18.

What are the infirmities that weaken the power of Prayer?

Roving imaginations, inordinate affections, dullness of spirit, weakness of
faith, coldness in feeling, faintness in asking, weariness in waiting, too
much passion in our own matters, and too little compassion in other men's
miseries, Psalm 32. 3, 4. Mark 9. 24. Isa. 38. 13, 14. Jonah 4. 2, 3.

What be the customary iniquities which hinder the practice of Prayer?

1. The profaneness of the Atheists, in not calling upon God, Psalm. 14. 4.

2. The sottishness of the Papists, lifting up their hearts and hands to base
Idols, Psalm. 44 20.

3. The sensuality of the voluptuous drowning all his desires in delights, and
his prayers in pleasures, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.

4. The stupidity of worldlings, that think they have no need of praying, but
of carking and caring, toyling and moyling in the world, Luke 12. 17, 18. Phil.
3. 19.

5. The foolishness of the malicious, which because they will not forgive
their brother a 100 pence, cannot pray to God to forgive them the 1000 Talents,
Mat. 18. 32.

What be the gross sins that shut the ears of the Lord, and hinder the fruit
of our Prayers?

1. Graceless hypocrisy, drawing near with our lips, but having our hearts
far from him, Isa. 29. 13.

2. Shameless impiety, when turning our ears from his precepts, he turns
away his from our prayers, Prove. 28. 9.

3. Senseless impenitency, when the cry of our sins unrepented of, drownes the
voice of our prayers that are offered, Zach. 7. 13.

4. Merciless cruelty, when we either cause or suffer the afflicted to cry
without hearing; the Lord hearing us cry in our affliction without helping,
Genesis 42. 22.

What is the general subject of our requests?

Good, The subject of our requests.
or evil; Good to obtain it, and evil to remove or prevent it, Col. 1. 9. 2
These. 3. 1, 2. That wherein we pray for good things is called supplication, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

That wherein we pray against evil, is called Deprecation.

What do you mean by Good or Evil?

Whatsoever is helpful or hurtful, either for soul or body, goods and
graces, sins and sorrows, mercies and judgments, in spiritual or in carnal
things, Phil. 1. 9. Luke 18. 13. Dan. 9.

What gather you hence?

1. That as Prayer is the key of the heart, to open all our necessities unto
God, James 2. 9. so it is also the key of his treasury, to obtain his mercies
from him, Mat. 7. 7.

2. That the gift of Prayer is a pledge and earnest penny of all other good
gifts and graces whatsoever, Romans 8. 26, 27, 32. and that so long as we can
pray, the greatest evil cannot hurt us, Jonah 2. 1. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. nor the
greatest good without Prayer, can ever be profitable unto us; 1 Timothy 4. 5.

Are we only bound to pray for our selves by request for good and against evil
things? Prayer for others.


No; we are also bound to pray likewise for others; which kind of prayer is
called Intercession, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

What is Intercession?

It is the suit of the heart unto God for the good of others. As Abraham prayed
for Abimelech, Genesis 20. 17. Jacob for his sons, Genesis 49. Paul for the people,
1 These. 1. 2. and they for him.

Why does the Lord require this duty of us?

1. For communicating our gifts and his graces, James 5, 5. 14, 15.

2. For nourishing our love.

3. For increase of our comforts.

4. For mutual support and relief in all crosses.

What gather you hence?

That all such persons as are linked together in nearest bonds of society, are
also mutually bound to discharge this duty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. James 5. 10. As
first, in the household of Faith, the stronger is to pray for the weaker, that
he fail not, Phil. 1. 9. and the weaker for the stronger, that he fall not, 2
These. 3. 1, 2.

Secondly, the Sovereign for the Subject, that he may obey in piety and
loyalty, 2 Cor. 6. 13, 14. The Subject for the Sovereign, that he may rule in
righteousness and religious policy, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. and so in all societies,
whether of public assemblies, or private families. Job 1. 5. Deuteronomy. 33. 6. 1 Chronicles. 29. 19.

What follows of all this?

Strong consolation, that when we find small power or comfort in our prayers,
the Lord has ordained that we may seek and find both in the prayers of his
Church and children, James 5. 14, 15. Acts 12. 5. 7.

You have now spoken of the first part of Invocation, namely Petition: what
follows?

The second; which is Praise and Thanksgiving, 1 These. 5. 18.

What is this Praise and Thanksgiving? Of thanksgiving.


It is a reverent calling upon the name of God, wherein the heart being cheared
with some taste of his goodness, acknowledges all from his mercy, and
purposes all for his glory, Luke 10. 21. 1 Chronicles. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. And it
is either in praising all his goodness, wisdom, power, and mercy; and
generally for the government of his Church; or for those particular favors,
that by Petition we have received from his merciful hand.

Whence does this duty of praise arise?

As Petition arises from the feeling of our misery: so praise from the
feeling of Gods mercy: Petition beggeth what we want, and praise acknowledges
what and whence we have it, Rev. 15. 3. 1 Chronicles. 29. 12.

What gather you hence?

That when the Lord has granted unto us our Petitions, we are forthwith bound
to render unto him his due praises, Exodus 15. 1, Psalm 66. 19, 20.

Wherein does this duty of praise specially consist? In what thanksgiving
consists.


1. In emptying our selves of all worthiness, Genesis 32. 10.

2. In acknowledging him the author of every good gift, and fountain of living
waters, James 1. 17. Jer. 2. 13.

3. In speaking good of his name unto others, Psalm 40. 9, 10.

4. In rejoicing before him in all his mercies, Deuteronomy. 26. 11.

5. In resolving to bestow all for his honor and service, 1 Chro. 29. 2, 3.

Wherefore does the Lord require praise and thanksgiving at our hands? Why
thanksgiving is required.


First, because it is the fairest and sweetest fruit of true Piety, Psalm. 92. 1.

Secondly, it entirely preserves Gods glory.

Thirdly, it boweth the heart to true humility.

Fourthly, it is the condition of the Covenant, when he gives and we receive
any mercy, Psalm 50. 15.

Fifthly, it provokes others to faithfulness and cheerfulness in Gods
service, Psalm 95. 1.

Sixthly, it maintains the intercourse of mercies and duties betwixt God and
man.

What be the properties of true praise?

1. It must be faithful, The properties of praise.
without glossing, with a simple, not with a double heart, Psalm 145. 18.

2. It must be plentiful. Psalm 18. 1, 2. If God give his mercies by showers,
we may not yield our praises by drops.

3. It must be cheerful, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. he gives freely, and we must offer
willingly; for he loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7.

4. It must be powerful with the best measure, with the best member Psalm 81.
1, 2.

5. It must be skillful, in the best manner, suting his several properties,
with their due praises according to the nature of the present blessings, Ex.
^5. 2. 3. Psalm. 144. 1, 2.

6. It must be continual, as long as his mercy endures, and life lasts,
Psalm. 146. 1 These. 5. 18.

What means may we use to attain unto this duty?

1. Serious consideration of the great things he has done for us so vile
creatures, The means of thanksgiving.
1 Samuel 12. 24.

2. To desire to taste Gods love in the least of his mercies, Genesis 28. 20,
21.

3. To give him a taste of our love in the best of our services, Psalm 116. 12.

4. To rest content with our allowance, and estate wherein he has set us,
Phil. 4. 11.

5. To compare our estates with many of Gods Saints, who want many comforts
which we enjoy, and feel many sorrows which we feel not, Psalm 147. 20.

6. To be faithful in all Talents, and fruitful in all graces, will be great
means to make us praise God in all his mercies, Matthew. 25. 23. Phil. 1. 11.

What motives have we to provoke us to this praise?

1. It is a good, Motives to thanksgiving.
comely, and pleasant thing to praise God, Psalm. 147. 1.

2. It is his will thus to be honored, 1 These. 5. 18.

3. It is a duty of Saints and Angels, both here and hereafter, Luke 2. 13, 14.

4. It spreads abroad Religion, magnifieth and sanctifies him that is most
high, and most holy, Psalm 145. 1, 2, 3. Esa. 8. 13.

5. It keeps the heart from swelling, and the soul from surfeiting with Gods
blessings.

6. It fits the heart for further graces, and provokes the Lord to fresh
mercies.

What be the special signs and marks of one that desires to be thanksfull
and unfeignedly to praise God in all things.

1. Contentedness, Signs of thankfulness.
Psalm 4. 11.

2. Cheerfulnes in the use of Gods blessings, Deuteronomy. 26. 11. Psalm. 63. 5.

3. Faithfulness in our duties, both of our persons and places.

4. Readiness to draw others into the fellowship of Gods praise, Psalm. 66. 16.
and 135. 1.

5. Rejoicing in God, even in the midst of many crosses, Job 1.

6. Fruitfulness in good words and works, John 15. 8.

7. A conscionable carfulness to take all occasions, and use all means to
seal up our love, and set forth Gods glory.

So much of the principal parts of Invocation, Petition, and Thanksgiving: Are
we limited and bound in certain words, how and wherein to pray?

No verily; but we have a prescript rule, and perfect pattern of Prayer of all
kinds, left us in that prayer which our Savior Christ taught his Disciples,
and in them all succeeding ages, called the Lords Prayer.

What is the Lords Prayer?

It is an absolute Prayer in it self; Of the Lords Prayer.
and a Prayer giving a perfect direction to frame all others prayers by.

It is thought by some not to be a Prayer, but only a platform to direct all
our Prayers by?

It is both a prayer which we both may, and ought to pray; and also a platform
of Prayer, whereunto we are to conform, and by which we ought to square all
ours: and therefore as St. Matthew bids us pray after this sort, Matthew. 6.
9. so St. Luke bids us say; Our Father, etc. Luke 11. 2. the one propounding
it as the most perfect platform to be imitated; the other, as the most
excellent form to be used of all Christians.

What is the platform propounded in this Prayer, whereunto we ought to look?

It teaches us both the manner how to pray, and the matter for which to pray.
It teaches us in all our prayers to whom, and through whom, and for what to
pray. Also what difference to make of the things we ask, and with what
affection we are to come unto God in Prayer.

What are the words of the Lords Prayer?

They are thus set down in the 6. of Matthew. 9. After this manner therefore
pray ye,

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

What do you observe here in general?

That Prayer is to be made in a language which we understand: for our Savior
Christ taught his Disciples here in a Tongue which they understood, and not in
an unknown Tongue; which condemns the practice of the Church of Rome, which
teach the people to pray in an unknown Tongue, contrary to Christ's practice
here, and the will of God, who commands us to serve him with all our hearts,
and therefore with our understanding as well as our affection.

What are the parts of this prayer?

They are three.

1. A Preface of compellation for entrance into prayer, in the first words, Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

2. A body of Petitions, containing the matter of Prayer, in the words
following.

3. A conclusion for shutting up, for confirmation and close of prayer, in the
last words, For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

What gather you of this, that there is a preface?

That Christian men are not to come malapertly or rashly without preparation,
Of the p^e^ace.
Eccles. 5. 1. Psalm 26. 6. Exodus 3. 5. for the Angel of the Lord stands at
the entry, to strike with hardness and blindness etc. those that come not
with preparation: And if we make preparation before we come to an earthly
Prince, and bethink us of our words and gesture, how much more ought we to do
it when we come before the Prince and Lord of heaven and earth?

How are we to prepare our selves?

Not only to put off our evil affections, 1 Timothy 2. 8. but even our honest
and (otherwise in their due time) necessary cogitations, as the cares and
thoughts of our particular vocations, as of house, family, etc.

What does the preface put us in mind of?

1. Of him to whom we pray.

2. Of our own estate in prayer, that we come unto God as to our father, with
boldness, and yet with reverence of that Majesty that fills the heavens.

What are we taught concerning him to whom we must pray?

That God, and God only (not any Saint or Angel) is to be prayed unto, Romans
10. 14. Psalm. 73. 25 For although there be other Fathers besides God, and
others in heaven besides him, yet there is none which is our Father in heaven
but God alone. Besides that, this being a perfect platform, a pattern of all
prayer, it is evident that all prayers (as in other things, so in this) must be
framed unto it.

Why do you here name the Father?

Because discerning the Persons, we pray to the Father, secretly understanding
that we do it in the mediation of the Son, by the working of the holy Ghost;
and so come to the first person in the Trinity, by his Son, through the holy
Ghost; which form is to be kept for the most part, although it be also lawful
to pray unto Christ, or to his blessed Spirit particularly, Acts 7. 59. 2 Cor.
13. 13, 14. if so be that in our understanding we do conjoyn them, as those
which cannot be separated in any actions either belonging to the life to come,
or pertaining to this life.

Why must we pray to the Father in the mediation of Jesus Christ his Son?

Because God being displeased for sin, we can have no dealing with him, but
only by the means of his Son, in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. and in
whom alone we have liberty to call him Father, Gal. 4. 5.

Why is it required that we pray by the working of the Holy Ghost?

Because the Holy Ghost assures us that he is our Father: And whereas we know
not what to pray, nor how to pray, the Holy Ghost does teach us both.

What must we be persuaded of, and how must we be affected in Prayer?

Partly concerning Our selves. 1. We must be truly humbled, which is wrought in
us with a certain persuasion, 1. Of our sinful misery and unworthiness to be
helped. 2. Of the glorious Majesty of God in heaven that must help us.
2. We must have a certain confidence we shall be heard, and this is wrought in
us by faith, being persuaded that, 1. God loves us as his own children in our
Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Our Father being God Almighty, he is able to do
whatsoever he will in heaven and in Earth.

Others. 1. That all Gods people pray for us. 2. We must be persuaded that it
is our bounden duty to pray for others as well as for ourselves.



Why does our Savior direct us to give such Titles unto God in the beginning
and entrance of our Prayers?

That thereby we may testify, Our Father.
increase, and strengthen our faith in God, considering what he is to us, to
whom we are about to pray, Heb. 11. 6.

What are we taught to consider from this, that we are taught to call God
Father?

That God in Christ is become our Father, and gives us, both the privilege,
John 1. 12. and spirit of sons, Gal. 4. 6. so to call him.

What arises from hence?

First, confidence in his fatherly love and compassion toward us as his
children, Psalm 103. 13. with assurance of obtaining our suites and desires, 1
John 5. 14, 15. For as young children desire to come unto their Fathers bosom,
or to sit upon the knee, or in the Mothers lap: so we by prayers do creep into
the Lords bosom, and as it were, do stand between the Lords legs, Deuteronomy. 33.
3. coming with boldness unto him, as unto our merciful Father, whose bowels
are larger in pitiful affection then any parents, yea then the Mothers
toward the tendrest child, if we come with faith and affiance, that he will
grant what we require: For if parents will give good things to their children
when they ask them, much more will the Lord give his spirit to them that ask
it of him, without doubting, Mat. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13. and this doubting is the
cause why many go away so often from prayer without profit and comfort, James
1. 5. which overthrows the long and idle prayers of the Papists, who have not
assurance of Gods love toward them in the thing they demand.

Secondly, necessity of duty on our parts: that we both reverence, Mal. 1. 6.
and imitate him, Mat. 5. 45. as our Father, Ephesians. 5. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 17.

Thirdly, that to come in any other name then our Savior Christ's, is
abominable, which was figured in Moses, Exodus 24. 2. and 20. 19. and Aaron,
Levit. 16. 17. But is notably set forth of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 5. therefore
it is abominable to come by Saints, as in Popery they do.

What is to be considered by this, that we are directed to call him our Father?

The nature of faith, which is to apply it home to himself, John 20. 28 Gal.
2. 20. Matthew. 27. 46. Also, that our Savior Christ is the natural Son, and we
his Sons by grace and adoption.

May not a man say in his prayer, My Father?

Yes verily, and that with warrant of our Savior Christ's example, Matthew 27. 46.

Why then are we taught here to say, Our Father?

As the word Father directs us to meditate upon the relation between God and
our selves, so the word Our directs us to meditate upon the relation between
our selves, and so many as are or may be the children of the same father with
us.

What does this put us in mind of?

That we must at all times maintain or renew love and peace one with another,
but especially when we make our prayers we must come in love, as one brother
loves another, and therefore reconcile our selves, if there be any breach, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Esa. 1. 15. Matthew. 5. 25, etc. Secondly, that we are bound to pray,
and to be suitors to our God and Father one for another, as well as for our
selves, James 5 16. That every one praying for all, and all for every one, we
may jointly increase and enjoy the benefit of the common stock of prayers, laid
up in the hands of God.

Whereto do the words following direct us, when we say, Which art in heaven?

To the meditation of the glory, Which art in heaven.
powerful providence, wisdom, and holiness of God, in which regard he is
said to dwell in the high and holy place, Psalm 11. 4. Esa. 57. 15. not that he
is excluded from earth, or included in heaven, or any place, who fills all
places, Jer. 23. 24. yea, whom the heaven of heavens is not able to contain, 1
Kings 8. 27. But first, because his wisdom, power, and glory, appears most
evidently in the rule of the heavens, as of the most excellent bodily
creatures, by which inferior natures are ruled, Psalm. 19. 1, etc. and 8. 3.
and 103. 9.

Secondly, for that in heaven he does make himself and his goodness known to
the Angels, and blessed Spirits of men, immediately, and without the helps and
aids which we have.

Thirdly, because he communicates himself and his goodness more powerfully
to them then to us: and so God is said to be present in the Temple, and in the
Elect.

Fourthly, because there, and not on earth, we should now seek him, Psalm 123.
1. Col. 3. 1, 2. where also we hope another day to dwell with him, in the same
happy fellowship, which now the holy Angels and blessed souls do enjoy; which
teaches us not to have any fleshly conceit, but to have our cogitations above
any worldly matter.

Fifthly, to teach us that as we come boldly to him as to a Father, so also we
are to come with humility and reverence of his Majesty, who is so high above
us; we wretched men being as worms crauling upon the earth, and he sitting in
great Majesty in the highest heaven, Eccles. 4. 16. and 5. 1.

Sixthly, to teach us to pray not only reverently, but also fervently before
him, so directing and lifting up our hearts to Almighty God, that our prayers
may ascend into heaven, 2 Chro. 32. 20.

Seventhly, to increase our confidence in him, who is both ready and able to
do all things for us, that acknowledging him to ride on the heavens for our
help, ( able) as in heaven to do for us whatsoever ( as a father) he will,
Psalm. 115. 3. we may with full confidence in his power and love ask every good
thing of him, Psalm 2. 8. Luke 11. 13.

Thus much of the preface: Now are we to come to the prayer it self: What is
general unto it?

That our affections with zeal and earnestness ought to wait and attend on
prayer, which appears by the shortness of all the petitions.

What is declared hereby?

The great affection we should have to the things we come for: which gives a
check to our cold prayers, where the understanding is without the affection,
and (as it were) the sacrifice without the heavenly fire ^o lift it up, and
make it mount into heaven, both in public and private prayers.

So much of attention general to the Prayer: The parts of the Lords Prayer.
What are the parts ther^of?

A form of Petition, and of Thanksgiving.

What is taught hereby?

First, that whenever we come unto God in Petition, we are (...) give him
thanks, Phil. 4. 6. Luke 17. 17, 18. things not to be (...) means to make way
for further graces, and benefits to be obtain^^*.

Secondly, that it is a fault of us (when we are distressed) in (...) to come
unto God in Petition, but not to return Thanksgiving (...) benefits received.

How many Petitions are there in the Lords Prayer? 6. Petitions in the Lords
Prayer.


Six, (equally divided, as it were, into two Tables) whereof (...) concern
God, as does the first Table of the Law; three do concern^ our selves and our
neighbors, as does the second Table: For in the three first we make request
for those things that concern Gods Majesty, whose glory and service we are to
prefer before our own good, John 12. 27, 28. In the three latter, for those
things that concern the necessity of man, and our own welfare, which we must
refer to the former, Psalm 50. 15. So that by the very order of the
Petitions, we learn this instruction, that we must and ought first to think
upon Gods glory before any thing that appertains or belongs to us, and that we
should seek the service of God before our own good, John 12. 27, 28. yea, and
prefer the glorifying of the name of God before our own salvation, Romans 9.
3. As also by the order of the Commandments, which being divided into two
Tables, the first concerns the Worship of God, the second our selves.

What observe you from this?

Our hypocrisy: for were it not for our selves and our wants, we would not
come to God at all in prayer: As in Popery, all their prayers are for
themselves, and their salvation, etc. whereas this word ( thy) in all these
Petitions does shut forth the consideration of our selves, to the end that we
might have our minds altogether fastened upon the service of God.

What further observe you proper to those Petitions that concern the glory of
God?

That as they must be begged in the first place, so must they likewise be
performed with further zeal of spirit, and earnestness of affection: as may
be gathered, in that they are propounded without any band or coupling of one
with another.

How are the three first Petitions divided?

Thus: the first concerns Gods glory it self, the other two, the things
whereby God is glorified; as when his Kingdom comes, and his will is done.

What are the words of the first Petition?

Hallowed be thy Name, 1. Petition.
Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.

What is the sum of this Petition?

That in all things God may be glorified, That he, who in himself, his words
and works is most glorious and holy, may be acknowledged and honored for such
by us, Psalm. 46. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Why is this Petition set before all?

Because it is that which ought to be dearest unto us, and for that all things
are to be referred unto it, Prove. 16. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 31.

What is to be considered for the further opening of this Petition?

First, for the meaning of the words apart, then of them together.

What is meant by the word Name?

By the name of God, What is meant by Name.
we are to understand God himself, 1 King. 5. 5. Isa. 26. 8. as he makes
known to us the fame and glory of his nature, otherwise unconceivable, Genesis
32. 29. For the name of God in the Scripture signifies God himself; because
the nature of a thing is taken for that it is the name of, as Acts 1. 15. his
Essence, and all things by which he is known unto us.

What are those Names whereby God is made known unto us?

First, his Titles; as Jehovah, Elohim, the Lord of Hosts, and such like, Exodus
3. 14. and 6. 3.

Secondly, his Attributes and Properties; as his wisdom, power, love,
goodness, mercy, justice, truth, Exodus 33. 18, 19, etc. and 34. 5, 6, etc.
which being essential in him, are for our capacity expressed under the name of
such qualities in us, and are called the names of God, because as names serve
to discern things by, so God is known by these things.

Thirdly, also his memorials signified by his name, because he gets glory by
them.

What are these Memorials?

First, the works and actions of God; as the Creation and government of the
world, Psalm. 104. but especially, the work of redemption, Psalm 19. 14.

Secondly, the things that belong unto God; as his Worship, Word, Sacraments
and disclipine; but especially his Word, Psalm 138. 2. and 19. etc. which is
the book of grace, and the box of ointment, out of which the sweet savor of
his name is most effectually powered, Cant. 1. 2, 3.

What is meant by the word Hallowed?

Sanctified and reverenced: What is meant by hallowed.
for to hallow, is to set apart a thing from the common use to some proper end;
and therefore to hallow the name of God, is to separate it from all profane and
unholy abuse, to a holy and reverend use.

Can any man add any thing unto Gods holiness?

No, no, we cannot add any holiness unto God, or take any from him; but as
God is holy in his properties and actions, and also in his Ordinance both in
the Church and Commonwealth, so we desire they may be (and that not only by
our selves, but also by all men) acknowledged and reputed as they are worthy in
themselves to be reputed and accounted. And in this respect only are we said
to hallow his name, when we acknowledge it and honor it for such, Psalm. 96. 7,
8. thereby (as it were) setting the Crown of holiness and honor upon the
head of God: contrariwise, failing so to do, we are guilty of the profanation
of Gods holy name; not that he can receive any pollution from us, but only as
a man that lusts after a chaste woman is said by our Savior to be guilty of
adultery with her, though she remains in her self spotless and undefiled,
Matthew. 5. 28.

May none else be glorified but the name of God?

When it is said, Hallowed be thy name, thereby is noted that no glory or
honor should be given to any thing in the world, but to the name of God, Esa.
42. 8. and 48. 11. further then they are instruments whereby we may arise to
the glorifying of it; for God will not give his glory to any other thing, no
not to the manhood of our Savior Christ.

What is to be considered in the words together?

That it is a singular benefit of God to admit us to the sanctifying of his
name, and (as it were) to set the Crown (which is his glory) upon his head,
and to hold it there, especially seeing he is able himself alone to do it; and
when he would use others thereto, he has so many Legions of Angels to do it,
yea, can raise up stones to do it.

What do you then ask of God in this Petition?

That as God is glorious in himself, What we ask in this petition
so he may be declared and made known unto men: that therefore God would have
himself known and acknowledged by all men, but especially by my self, to be
most holy; that whether we speak, think, or any way use his name, properties,
works, or Word, we may do it holily, and with all reverence: That his wisdom,
power, goodness, mercy, truth, righteousness, and eternity, may more and more
be imparted unto me, and other of Gods people: That he may be acknowledged
just, wise, etc. in all his works, even in his ordaining of some to eternal
life, and other some to everlasting destruction: That his infinite justice, and
infinite mercy over all his creatures (but especially over his Church) may be
reverenced and adored by all men, but especially by my self: That the name of
God may be reverently and holily used of all men, but especially of my self:
That when the glory of God comes in question, between my self and any thing
that belongs unto me, I may prefer that unto this: Finally, that God would
vouchsafe to plant and increase in me and others such graces whereby his name
may be glorified.

What are those graces for which we pray here in particular? What graces we
here pray for.


1. Knowledge of God, Psalm 100. 3. and 67. 2. That God would give us the
knowledge of himself, his Word, and Works; for we cannot glorify his name
unless we know it.

2. Belief of his Word, that we and others may sanctify God in believing his
Word how unlike soever, John 3. 33. Wherefore Moses and Aaron are said not to
have sanctified the name of God, because they believed not, Numb. 20. 12.
Contrariwise Abraham glorified God in believing, Romans 4. 20.

3. Fearing the Lord alone, and not men; That the Lord be our fear, Esa. 8.
12, 13. 1 Pet. 3. 14, 18.

4. Humility, (for our selves and others) without which we cannot glorify
God, as it is meet, Psalm 115. 1. 2 Samuel 7. 18. Psalm. 8. 4, 5. and 144. 3. Luke
1. 48.

5. Patience, (arising from thence) whereby we do willingly submit our selves
unto the correcting hand of God, as Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. and Hezekiah, Esa. 39. 8.

6. Thankfulness, that we may praise him for his benefits, more particularly
where we are to hallow Gods name, as well by praising it for the benefits we
have received, as for his wonderful works in the Creation and government of
the world, the Church especially.

7. Lips opened, and tongues tuned to speak of him with reverence, Psalm. 51.
15. and 44. 1. and 45. 1.

8. A life so ordered, that men may say he is a holy God, who by his grace
makes us an holy people, Matthew. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Tit. 2. 10. That according
as we know the virtues of our good God; so the fruits of them may appear in
ours, and all good peoples lives, that so his name may be honored and praised,
and he may get glory by the godly conversation of us and others.

What do we pray against in this Petition?

We pray against all ignorance of holy things we should know, What things we
here pray against.
Hos. 8. 12. and against infidelity and want of good works, whereby God wants
of his glory: we pray against all lofty and high things that hinder that God
only cannot be exalted, Esa. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. especially the pride
of our hearts, which we are to confess and lament, Prove. 8. 13. Against all
false religion and profaneness, impatience, unthankfulness, Romans 1. 21, etc.
those tongue-wormes of swearing, blasphemy, and unreverent speaking of God,
Exodus 20. 7. Esa. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Prove. 8. 13. together with all
wickedness and ungodliness, whereby Gods Name is dishonored. In a word, we
pray that God would remove, and root out of our hearts, tongues, and lives, all
such vices, by and for which his name is dishonored, especially an evil and
scandalous life, for which the name of God and his religion is evil spoken of
in the world, Romans 2. 23, 24.

What does this teach us?

Our dullness is hereby condemned, who by nature are so ill-disposed to
glorify God, and to use his name holily and reverently.

What is to be considered in the second Petition?

Let thy Kingdom come, The second Petition.
Matthew. 6. 10. Luke 11. 2.

One of the means how to have the name of God sanctified, which is a
dependence of the former Petition.

What is the sum of this Petition?

That God may reign in our hearts, and not sin; and that the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ both by the inward working of his Spirit, and also by the
outward means may be enlarged daily, until it be perfected at the coming of
Christ to judgment; that the Kingdom of sin and Satan being more and more
abolished, Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. Christ may now reign in our hearts by
grace, Col. 3. 15, 16. and we with him for ever in glory, 2 Timothy 2. 12.

What is meant here by Kingdom?

That government which our Savior Christ exercises; What is meant by Kingdom.
first, in the world, then in the last day, both in the whole Church, and in
every member thereof: For by the Kingdom of God we must understand here not
so much that univerall sovereignty, which as Creator he exercises over all
creatures, disposing them all to their proper ends for his glory, Esa. 5. 6.
Psalm. 95. 3, etc. as the spiritual regiment, Psalm 110. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 25. of
the Church, and of all things, for the good of the Church: wherein God has
appointed Christ to be the King, Psalm 2. 6. Hos. 3. 5. the Saints his
Subjects, Rev. 15. 3. the Word his Law, Job 22. 22. the Angels and all
creatures his servants, Heb. 1. 6, the Ministers his Heralds, and Ambassadors,
2 Cor. 5. 20.

Finally, the Devils kingdom, Matthew. 12. 26. that is, wicked Angels, and men
enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, Luke 19. 27. his footstool, Psalm 110. 1.

How is this Kingdom said to come?

1. In regard of the means, What is meant by coming.
where the word of the Kingdom is published, Matthew. 12. 28. and 13. 19. Mark
4. 15. 2. In regard of efficacy, where from the heart obedience is yielded,
Romans 6. 17. 3. In regard of perfection, it has these degrees. 1. Increase of
grace in the time of this life, Matthew. 13. 18. 2. The translation of blessed
souls into heaven in the moment of death, Luke 23. 42, 43. 3. Finally, the
full redemption of glorification of the Saints in soul and body in the life to
come, Matthew. 25. 34.

What do we then desire concerning the kingdom of God in this Petition?

We pray either for that he exercises in this world; or for that he
exercises in the world to come, called the kingdom of glory.

How many sorts are there in that kingdom he exercises in this world?

Two: First, that he exercises over all men, and other creatures called
kingdom of power: Secondly, that he exercises over all the Church called the
kingdom of grace.

What desire we of God concerning the government he exercises over all
Creatures?

That he would govern all the creatures, both in the natural course of
things, and in the civil and domestical government of men, yea, in the rule
of Devils themselves, in such sort as they may serve for the good of his
Church, Psalm. 97. 1. Mat. 6. 13. John 17. 2.

What desire we concerning his government in the Church?

That it may be here in this world enlarged, and that it may be accomplished in
the last day, Psalm 112. 6. Isa. 62. 7.

What do we desire for the enlargement of it in this world?

That by Christ the head of the Church, God would govern his people to the
perfect salvation of the elect, and to the utter destruction of the reprobate,
whether open Rebels, or feigned hollow-hearted Subjects.

What great need is there that we should pray for the kingdom of God?

For that being taught, that we should pray that the kingdom of God may come,
hereby we are put in mind of another kingdom of Satan and darkness, which
opposes strongly against his kingdom, Mat. 12. 24, 25. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.

Why do all men naturally abhor Satan, even to the very name of him?

They do in words and show: but when they do his will, live under his laws,
delight in his works of darkness, subject themselves to the Pope, and other
his instruments; they are found indeed to love him as their father, and honor
him as their Prince, whom in words they would seem to abhor: For as the same
men are affirmed by our Savior Christ to approach unto God with their lips,
and to have their hearts far from him, Mat. 15. 8. so are they in their lips
far from Satan, but near him in their hearts.

What other oppositions are there against Gods Kingdom?

The flesh and the world, Gal. 5. 10, 17.

What be the means we ought to pray for, that our Savior Christ may govern
his Church in this world thereby?

Inward, and outward.

What inward things do we pray for?

That God would give his holy Spirit, as the chief and principal means,
whereby our Savior Christ gathers and rules his Church, conveighing his
spirit of knowledge, and good motions into his people: And consequently, we
pray against the motions and temptations of Satan, and of our own flesh.

What are the outward things we pray for?

The means whereby the Spirit is conveyed; namely, the Word, and the
dependances thereof, the Sacraments and Censures.

What pray we for concerning the Word?

That it being the scepter of Christ's kingdom, Mar. 1. 13. the rod and
standard of his power, Psalm. 110. 2. Isa. 11. 4, 10. Isa. 44. 4, 10. and called
the Word of the kingdom, Mar. 1. 13. and the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13. may
have free passage every where, 2 These. 3. 1. and may be gloriously lifted up
and advanced; and it only having place, all not agreeable thereunto, and all
traditions and inventions of men may be rejected.

What pray we for concerning the Sacraments?

That as they are the Seals of Gods promises, and the whole Covenant of grace,
so they may be both ministered and received in that pureness and sincerity,
which is according to his Word, and all false Sacraments and sacrifices put
under foot.

What pray we for concerning the Censures?

That not only private persons, but the whole Church may be ruled by the line
of Gods Word, that so well doers may be advanced, and evil doers censured and
corrected, according to the degree of their fault; and therefore, that all
impunity or tyrannous tortures of conscience may be taken away.

What further do we pray for?

That God would furnish his Church with all such Officers as he approves, that
being endued with special gifts, may be both able and willing to execute their
charge diligently and faithfully.

What further desire you in this Petition?

That where these things are only begun, they may be perfected; And that every
Church may be polished and garnished, that Sion may appear in her perfect
beauty, and so the Jews may be called, and so many of the Gentiles as belong
unto Christ, and the contrary enemies may be either converted or confounded.

What do we pray for in respect of every member of the Church?

Even as poor captives are always creeping to the prison door, and laboring
to get off their boults: so we out of a sorrowful feeling of the spiritual
bondage we are in to Satan and sin, pray that the kingdom of Christ may come
and be advanced in every one of our hearts, in justice, righteousness, peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. that as Kings unto God, we may subdue
within us all those either opinions or affections that rise up and rebel
against God.

What then are the particulars concerning the kingdom of grace, that we do
crave of God in this Petition?

1. That Satan's kingdom may be abolished, The particulars here prayed for,
respecting the kingdom of grace.
Acts 26. 18. the bands of spiritual captivity loosed, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Col. 1.
13. the power of corruption, that makes us like well of our bondage, abated,
Gal. 5. 24. the instruments of Satan's tyranny, as the Turk and Pope, and all
such out-lawes from Christ defeated, 2 These. 2. 8.

2. That it would please God to gather out of every part of the world those
that belong to his election.

3. That God for the gathering of them, would raise up faithful and painful
Ministers in every part of the world, where there are any which belong to his
election. That all loyterers and tongue-tyed Ministers being removed, Isa. 56.
10, 11. faithful and able watchmen may be set over the flock of Christ, Mat.
9. 38. with sufficient encouragement of maintenance, countenance, protection,
etc. and the word of God may be freely preached every where, 2 These. 3. 1.

4. That it would please God, with the blessing of his spirit, to accompany the
word, so that it may be of power to convert those that belong unto him.

5. That it would please God every day more and more to increase the holy gifts
and graces of his holy Spirit, in the hearts of those whom he has already
called effectually.

6. That the Lord by his word and spirit would rule in the hearts and lives of
his Saints, Col. 3. 15, 16. making them also Kings in part, by overcomming the
corruption which is in the world through lust.

7. That God would raise up godly and religious Magistrates, which should
further and countenance his worship as much as in them lies.

8. That the eyes of all men, especially Princes, may be opened to see the
filthiness of the whore of Babylon, Rev. 17. 16. and the true beauty of pure
Religion, and of the Spouse of Christ, Isa. 60. 3.

9. That God would banish and root out of his Church all those things which may
hinder the proceeding of his kingdom in the hearts of those that belong unto
him.

10. Finally, that he would finish the kingdom of grace, calling his elect
uncalled, Romans 9. 27. confirming such as stand, 2 These. 2. 17. raising the
fallen, Jam. 5. 15, 16. comforting the afflicted, Isa. 61. 3. and hasten the
kingdom of glory.

What do we desire of God in this Petition concerning the Kingdom of glory,
and our good in the world to come?

1. That God would be pleased to take us out of this sinful and conflicting
life, 2. Respecting the kingdom of glory.
into peace with Christ, and translate us unto the kingdom of heaven, Phil. 1.
23.

2. That the number of the elect being accomplished, the final dissolution of
all things may come: That God would hasten the second coming of his Son to
judgment for the elects sake, who with singular love and affection long for
it, saying; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22. 20. 2 Timothy 4. 8. that we
and all his chosen may obtain full salvation, and enjoy the fruition of that
glory prepared for us before the beginning of the world.

3. That God would get himself glory by the final confusion of his enemies.

What are the words of the third Petition?

Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, The third Petition.
Mat. 6. 10. Luke 11. 2.

What is the sum of this Petition?

That God would grant us, that we may voluntarily and willingly subject our
selves unto him and his providence: That renouncing the will of Satan, and our
own corrupt inclination, 2 Timothy 2. 26. 1 Peter 4. 2. and rejecting all things
that are contrary to the will of God, we may do his will, not as we will, nor
grudgingly, but readily, Psalm 119. 60. and heartily, Col. 3. 23. following in
our measure the example of the Angels and Saints that are in heaven, Psalm
103. 20. Finally, that obedience may be given to Christ, in ruling us until we
be as the holy Angels.

What is meant by this word [Thy.]

Hereby we exclude all wills opposed to, or diverse from the will of God;
whether the will of Satan, 2 Timothy 2. 26. or our own, 1 Peter 4. 2. naturally
corrupt and enthralled to Satan; yea, whatsoever unlawful intentions or
desires, repugnant to the will of God, 2 Samuel 2. 7. James 4. 15. For when we
pray for obedience to Gods will, we pray that all wills of wicked Angels, Zach.
3. 2. and men, Psalm. 140. 8. as contrary to the will of God, may be
disappointed. We desire also the suppression of our own will, as that which
being prone to all sin, as a match to take fire, is naught and repugnant to the
will of God, so far are we from having any free will naturally to do that
which is good, Psalm 86. 11. and 119. 37, Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. Romans 8. 6. and
7. 24. which we must bewail both in our selves and others, 2 Pet. 2. 7. Ezekiel.
9. 4. freely acknowledging that we cannot of our selves do the will of God,
but by his assistance, and desiring grace that we may obey his will, and not
the lusts of our flesh.

How manifold is the will of God?

Twofold, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

1. His secret and hidden will, whereof the Scripture speaks thus, If so be
the will of God, 1 Pet. 3. 17. whereunto are to be referred his eternal
counsel, the events of outward things, Pro. 27. 1. times and seasons, etc.
Acts 17. 1.

2. His manifest will, which is revealed and made known unto us in the Word,
both in his promises, which we are to believe, and in his precepts and
commandments, which (as conditions of obedience in way of thanksgiving annexed
unto the promises) we are to perform.

What will are we to understand in this petition?

Not so much that part which God keeps secret from us, as that part thereof
which he has revealed in his Word, wherein is set down what we ought to do,
or leave undone.

How does that appear?

1. Because it is unlawful to search or enquire into the secret will of God,
and impossible for man to know it until it come to pass; whereas to the doing
of this will knowledge is requisite.

2. No man can resist or withstand Gods secret will, neither is it any thank
for us to accomplish it, Acts 4. 28.

3. There are no promises for performing the secret will of God, seeing a man
may do it and perish, as Pilate, etc.

4. God proposes many things in his secret will, for which it is not lawful
for us to pray.

What then must we especially pray for in the secret will of God?

That when God brings any thing to pass by his secret will, which is
grievous to our natures, we may with patience and contentment submit our wills
to his will, Acts 21. 14.

What do we ask of God in this petition concerning his revealed will?

1. That we may know his will, without the which we cannot do it.

2. That we may do all his will being known, and show our selves obedient to
our heavenly Father and Lord.

3. That he would bestow upon us the gifts and graces of his Spirit, that so
our hearts being by grace set at large, strengthened, and directed, Psalm. 119.
32, 36. we may be enabled to do his will.

4. That he would remove from us all things that shall hinder us from knowing
his will, and putting it in execution; as ignorance of the revealed will of
God, Psalm. 119. 18. rebellion, dis^bedience, murmuring, etc. 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23.
all pretenses, and dispensations, or powers, presuming to dispense with the
will of God. In a word, that so many as are subjects in the kingdom of Christ
may do the duty of good subjects, and be obedient to the revealed will of God,
seeking his kingdom and his righteousness, Matthew. 6. 33. so that there is a
mutual relation of this petition to the former, where we pray that God may
rule; as here, that his rule may be obeyed.

What understand you in this petition by Doing?

Not a good intent only in the heart, or profession of obedience in word and
pretense, Matthew. 21. 30. but an actual and thorough performance of what is
required of us, James 1. 25. And therefore we pray here, that the will of God
may not only be intended and endeavored, but also accomplished, although it be
with grief and smart, Phil. 2. 13. Acts 20. 24.

What is here meant by earth and heaven?

By earth, those that are in earth, and by heaven, those that are in heaven:
For here we propound to our selves the patterns of the Angels and blessed
souls, who being freed from all mixture of corruption, do in their kind
perfectly obey God, Psalm. 103. 20, 22. whereby we learn that our obedience
should be done most humbly, willingly, readily, cheerfully, and wholly, (not
doing one, and leaving another undone) even as the will of God is done by the
Angels, Matthew. 18. 10. who therefore are set forth winged, to show their
speediness, Esa 6. 2. and round footed, to express their readiness to all
and every commandment of God, Ezekiel. 1. 7.

But seeing we are sinful, and the Angels holy, how can we imitate them?

We desire to imitate them in the manner, though we know we cannot equal them
in measure and degree of obedience: and hereby we are taught that we should
endeavor to the like holiness, and so grow therein daily more and more till we
be like unto them; not that we can perform it to the full as they do. As also
in this regard God himself says, Be ye holy as I am holy, Lev. 11. 44. 1 Pet.
1. 16. and yet it were absurd to say or think, that any man could come to the
holiness of God, whose holiness he is commanded to follow: And this answers
to our desire of hastening the Lords coming in the former petition.

What then do we desire here for the manner of performance of Gods will?

That we may after the heavenly pattern before mentioned, willingly, without
constraint or repugnancy, Psalm 110. 3. speedily, without delay, Psalm. 119. 60.
sincerely, without hypocrisy, Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29. fully, without reservation,
Psalm. 119. 6. and constantly, without intermission, Psalm. 119. 112. believe the
promises of mercy, and obey the precepts of holiness: and so all unwilling,
and by law only enforced obedience is here condemned, and we enjoined to
perform our service with delight, joy, and alacrity.

Thus far of the three first Petitions, for things concerning God. To come to
the three latter that concern our selves, The three last Petitions.
and our neighbor; what are we generally to note in them?

1. The order and dependence they have from the former three concerning God;
whereby we are taught that there is no lawful use of these Petitions which
follow, or any of them; unless we first labor in the former Petitions
concerning the service of God. For we are then allowed, and not till then, (
Luke 17. 7, etc.) to seek good things for our selves, when we have first
minded, and sought those things that concern the glory of God; because unto
godliness only the promises of this life and that which is to come are
entailed, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

What further?

That as in the former the word [Thy] did only respect God, so in these
following by these words [our and us] we learn to have a fellow-feeling of the
miseries and necessities of others; and therefore in care to pray for them,
which is one trial of the true spirit of prayer.

Is there any thing else common to them all?

That in all these Petitions under one thing expressed, other things are
figuratively included, and under one kind all the rest, and all the means to
obtain them are comprehended, as shall appear.

How are these Petitions divided?

The first concerns man's body, and the things of this life: the two last
concern the soul, and things pertaining to the life to come. For all which we
are taught to depend on God; and namely according to the order observed in the
Creed, (called the Apostles) 1. On the providence of God our Father the Creator
for our nourishment, and all outward blessings. 2. On the mercies of Christ our
Savior for pardon of our sins. 3. On the power and assistance of the holy
Spirit, our sanctifier, for strength to resist and subdue all temptations unto
evil.

What observe you out of the order of these Petitions?

That we have but one Petition for outward things, as less to be esteemed: but
for spiritual things two, as about which our care is to be doubled, Matthew. 6.
33. to teach us how smally earthly things are to be accounted in regard of
heavenly: and therefore that our prayers for the things of this life should be
short, and further drawn out for the things that belong to the life to come.

Why then is the Petition for the temporal things put before the Petitions for
spiritual?

The first place is given to outward things, not because they are chiefest, but
because,

First, it is the manner of the Scriptures, commonly to put things first that
are soonest dispatched.

Secondly, that outward things may be helps to enable us to spiritual duties,
( Genesis 28. 20. 21.) and that in having aforehand earthly things, we may be the
more ready and earnest to entreat for heavenly things: so our Savior Christ
healed the bodily diseases, to provoke all men to come unto him for the cure of
the spiritual.

Thirdly, that outward things may be as steps or degrees, whereby our weak
faith may the better ascend to lay claim and hold on spiritual graces, ( Acts
17. 27, 28.) That by experience of the smaller things we may climb up to
higher; whereby their hypocrisy is discovered, which pretend great assurance
of forgiveness of sins, and of their keeping from the evil one; whereas
they are distrustful for the things of this life.

Fourthly, God has a consideration of our weakness, who are unapt to perform
any duties, or service to God, if we want the things of this life, and that
which is requisite to sustain and suffice nature.

To proceed in order: what are the words of the fourth Petition, which
concerns the things of this life?

Give us this day our daily bread, The fourth Petition.
Matthew. 6. 11. Luke 11. 3.

What is the sum of this Petition?

That God would provide for us competent means, and such a portion of outward
blessings, as he shall see meet for us, Prove. 30. 8. not only for our
necessities, but also for Christian and sober delight, according to our
calling, and his blessing upon us. Likewise, that he would give us grace to
rely our selves upon his providence, for all the means of this temporal
life, and to rest contented with that allowance which he shall think fit for
us, Phil 4. 11, 12.

What is meant by Bread? What meant by (Bread.)


All outward things, serving both for our necessity, and sober delight, Prove.
27. 27. and 31. 14. as health, wealth, food, physic, sleep, raiment, house,
etc. together with all the helps and means to attain them; As good Princes,
Magistrates, peace, seasonable weather, and such like; As also the removal of
the contrary, as war, plague, famine, evil weather, etc. And the blessing of
God upon these creatures which he bestows upon us.

What is here to be observed?

That we must desire bread, not Quails, or other delicates, not riches and
superfluity, James 4. 3. Number 11. 4, 5, 6. but a proportion of maintenance,
credit, liberty, etc. convenient for us, Prove. 30. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 8. and that with
condition, if God shall see it good for us, or so be his good pleasure, Mat. 8.
2. James 4. 15. 2 Samuel 7. 27. which exception is a caution proper to this
Petition for outward things.

What need is there of asking these things?

The frailty of our nature, not able to continue in health scarce one day
without these helps, and as it were, props to uphold this decayed and ruinous
cottage of our mortal bodies, less able to forbear them then many beasts:
for seeing there were a necessary use of our meat in the time of innocence, the
necessity by our fall is much greater.

What learn you from the word [Give?]

First, What meant by (Give)
that from God all things come, Psalm. 104. 27, 28, 29, 30. Acts 14. 17. which
we are ready to ascribe either to the earth called the nurse, or to our money
wherewith we buy them, or to our friends that give them us: As if we should
look upon the Steward only, and pass by the Master of the Family; or upon the
breast that gives suck, and neglect the nurse or bottle we drink of, and
pass by the giver.

What next?

That although in regard of our labor, or buying any thing, it may be called
ours, yet we say, Give Lord, both because we are unable by any service or
labor to deserve the least crum of bread, or drop of water, (much less the
kingdom of heaven and salvation) at the hands of God, Luke 17. 10. Genesis 32.
10. and because our labor and diligence cannot prevail without Gods blessing.

What learn you further?

That seeing God gives to whom he will, and what he will, we learn to be
content with whatsoever we have received: Moreover, to be thankful for it,
seeing all things in regard of God are sanctified by the Word, and in regard of
our selves, by prayer and thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 5. And last of all, not to
envy at other men's plenty, being it is Gods doing, Matthew. 20. 15.

What reason is there, that they should pray for these things of God, which
have them already in their Garners, Cellars, etc. in abundance?

Very great. Because, 1. our right unto the creatures being forfeited in Adam,
we having now nothing to plead, but only Gods Deed of gift made unto us in
Christ the second Adam, and heir of all things, in whom, and with whom, all
things are conveyed to us, Psalm 8. 7, 8, 9. Heb. 1. 2. Romans 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3.
22. so that although we possess them, yet are we not right owners of them but
by faith, which is declared by prayer for them.

2. The things we do possess we may easily a hundred ways be thrust from the
possession of them before we come to use them, according to the proverb, that
many things come between the cup and the lip, 1 Samuel 30. 16, 17. Dan. 5. 5. 2
Kings 7. 17.

3 Although we have the use of them, yet will they not profit us, neither in
feeding nor clothing us, unless we have the blessing of God upon them; yea,
without the which they may be hurtful and poisonable unto us, Esa. 3. 1. Hag.
1. 6. Prove. 10. 22. Dan. 1. 13, 14, 15. Psalm. 78. 30, 31. By all which reasons
it may appear, that the rich are as well to use this petition as the poorest,
praying therein not so much for the outward things, as Gods blessing upon them.

Why do we say, Give us.
Give us?

Hereby we profess our selves Petitioners for all men, especially the household
of faith; that for the most part every one may have sufficient, and where want
is, others may be enabled to supply it out of their abundance, 2 Cor. 8. 14.

Why do we say, This day.
This day, or, For the day?

That we are to pray for bread for a day, and not for a month, or year, etc.
it is to teach us to restrain our care, that it reach not too far* but to
rest in Gods providence and present blessing, and therefore not to be covetous,
Exodus 16. 19, 20, 21. Pro. 30. 8. So that hereby we profess the moderation of
our care, and desire of earthly things, Matthew. 6. 34. with our purpose every
day by labor and prayer to seek these blessings at the hands of God.

Is it not lawful to provide for children and family?

Yes verily; not only lawful, but also needful, Genesis 41, 34, 35. Acts 11.
28. 29. 2 Cor. 12. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 8. But here our affections are only forbidden
to pass measure, as to have a carking and troubling care, seeing the vexation
of the day is enough for it self, Matthew. 6. 34. but commit our ways unto the
Lord; and to roll our matters upon him who will bring them to pass, Psalm 37.
5. Prove. 16. 3.

Why is the Bread called ours, seeing that God must give it us?

To teach us, Out.
that we must come unto it by our own labor, Genesis 3. 17. Psalm 128. 1. 1
These. 4. 11. In which respect, he that will not labor, should not eat, 2
These. 3. 8, 9, 10. For it is called our bread, which comes to us by the
blessing of God on our lawful labors, 2 These. 3. 12. so that neither God nor
man can justly implead us for it.

What is the reason of the word daily?

By daily bread, Daily.
or bread instantly necessary, or such as is to be added to our substance; we
understand such provision, and such a proportion thereof, as may best agree
with our nature, charge, and calling, Pro. 30. 8. For this word in the
Evangelists, Matthew. 6. 11. Luke 11. 3. and in the proper language of the Spirit
of God is the bread fit for me, or agreeable to my condition; Which is an
especial lesson for all estates, and callings, to keep them within their
bounds; not only of necessity, but of Christian and sober delight, and not to
ask them for the fulfilling of our fleshly desires, Psalm 104. 15. John 12.
3. Prove. 30. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 8. Romans 13. 14. Iam. 4. 3. Hereby also we are taught,
that every day we must require these blessings at Gods hands.

What do we then beg of God in this Petition?

1. That it would please God to preserve this mortal life of ours, What we beg
in this Petition.
so long as he sees good in his wisdom that it makes for his glory, and our
good.

2. That he would bestow upon us all good things, needful for the preservation
of this life.

3. That he would give us care and conscience to get those needful things by
lawful means: which condemns: First, those that use wicked and unlawful
means toward men. Secondly, those that go to the devil.

4. That he would give us grace to use painfulnesse and faithfulness in our
calling, that laboring with our hands the thing that is good, we may eat our
own bread, Ephesians. 4. 28. 2 These. 3. 12.

5. That we may add unto our labor prayer, (that it would please God to
bless our labors in getting those things) and thanksgiving, (for them being
gotten) as whereby on our part all Gods blessings are assured and sanctified
unto us, 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.

6. That we may put our confidence not in the means, but in Gods providence,
and contain our selves within the care for the means, leaving events unto Gods
only disposition, Phil. 4. 6. Psalm. 37. 5.

7. That it would please God to give us faith and grace, as well in want as in
abundance, to depend on his providence for outward things, Phil. 4. 12.

8. That we may be contented with, and thankful for that portion of temporal
blessings, which it shall please the Lord to measure out unto us as his gift,
Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 16. 6. not envying such to whom he gives more.

So much of the Petition for things belonging to this life: What do we desire
in those two which belong unto the life to come?

Perfect salvation, standing in the deliverance from the evils past, contained
in the former, and those to come, comprised in the latter: By the former we
pray for justification, and by the latter for sanctification.

To begin then with the former: What are the words of the fifth Petition?

And forgive us our debts, The fifth Petition.
as even we forgive them that are debtors unto us, Mat. 6. 12. Luke 11 4.

Where we are to observe:

1. The Petition for the forgiveness of our sins.

2. The reason added for the confirmation thereof, or a reason of the
persuasion that they are forgiven.

What is the sum of this Petition?

That we may be justified, and be at peace with God, that God giving us a true
knowledge and feeling of our sins, would forgive us freely for his Sons sake,
and make us daily assured of the forgiveness of our sins, as we are privy to
our selves of the forgiveness of those trespasses which men have offended us
by, Job 33. 24. Psalm. 35. 3. Jer. 14. 7. Col. 3. 13.

What is meant here by debts?

The comparison is drawn from debtors, What is meant by debts.
which are not able to pay their creditors, to whom all we are compared, for
that we have all sinned; Therefore by debts we must understand sins; (as Saint
Luke expounds the metaphor) and that not in themselves, as breaches of the
Law of God, (for who would say that we owe, and are to pay sin unto God?) but
with respect to the punishment, and satisfaction due to Gods justice for the
offense of sin: For our debt being properly obedience, whereto we are bound
under penalty of all the curses of the Law, especially eternal death, Romans 8,
12. 13. 18. Gal. 5. 3. we all in Adam forfeited that bond whereby the penalty
became our debt, and is daily increased in us all by sinning, Luke 13. 4. Mat.
18. 24, etc. Romans 6. 23.

What learn you from hence?

Here hence two things are employed: One, a frank and humble confession, that
we have sinned both originally and actually; Another, that there is no power in
us to make satisfaction for our sins.

What use is there of Confession?

Great, for that we have naturally a senselessness of sin: or else, being
convinced thereof, we are ready to lessen it and make it light; the contrary
whereof appears in the children of God, 1 John 1. 8, 9. Psalm. 32. 3, 4. Prove.
28 13. Job 31. 33. 1 Samuel 15. 19, 20. Psalm. 51. 3, 4, 5, 6. Acts 22. 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15.

How can a man confess his sins, being not known, and without number?

Those that are known we must expressly confess, and the other that are
unknown, and cannot be reckoned generally, Psalm. 19. 12.

How appears it that we are not able to pay this debt?

Because by the Law as an obligation every one being bound to keep it wholly
and continually, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. so that the breach thereof even
once, and in the least point, makes us debtors presently, (as having forfeited
our obligation) there is no man that can either avoid the breach of it, or when
he has broken it, make amends unto God for it, considering that whatsoever he
does after the breach, is both imperfectly done, and if it were perfect, yet it
is due by the obligation of the Law, and therefore cannot go for payment, no
more then a man can pay one debt with another.

What does it draw with it, that causes it to be so impossible to be satisfied?

The reward of it, which is everlasting death both of body and soul, Romans 6.
23. the greatness and also number whereof is declared by the parable of ten
thousand talents, which no man is able to pay, being not able to satisfy so
much as one farthing.

But are we not able to satisfy some part of it, as a man in great debt is
sometime able to make some satisfaction, especially if he have day given him?

No: and therefore we are compared to a child newborn, red with blood, and
not able to wash himself, nor to help himself, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5. And to captives
close shut up in prison and fetters, kept by a strong one, Luke 4. 18. Matthew.
12. 29. so that there is as small likelihood of our deliverance out of the
power of Satan, as that a poor Lamb should deliver it self from the gripes
and paws of a Lion.

What is the means to free us from this debt?

By this petition Christ teaches us, that being pressed with the burden of our
sin, we should flee unto the mercy of God, and to entreat him for the
forgiveness of our debt, Matthew. 11. 28. Esa. 55. 1. even the cancelling of our
obligation, that in Law it be not available against us. In which respect the
preaching of the Gospel is compared to the year of Iubile, when no man might
demand his debt of his Brother, Luke 4. 19.

How shall we obtain this at Gods hands?

By the only blood and suffering of Christ, as the only ransom for sin:
contrary to the Papists, who confessing that original sin is taken away by
Christ in Baptism, do teach that we must make part of our satisfaction for
our actual sin, and therefore some of them whip themselves, as if their blood
might satisfy for sin, which is abominable to think.

What do you then understand here by forgiveness?

Such remission as may agree with Gods justice, which will not endure him to be
a loser, wherefore it is forgiveness of us by taking payment of another, Job
33. 24. even of our surety Jesus Christ in our behalf, 1 John 2. 2.

What mean you by saying, Us, and Ours?

We include with our selves in this petition as many as are in Christ enabled
by a true faith to lay hold on him, and to plead his payment and satisfaction,
Psalm. 130. 7, 8. and 51. 18.

Do we here pray for the sins of this day, as before for the bread of this
day?

Not only for them, but also for all that ever we have done at all times
before, to the end that we might be the further confirmed in the assurance of
the remission of all our sins.

What is further to be considered in this Petition?

That as in the former by Bread more was understood, so here under one part of
our Justification, to wit, the remission, or not imputation of sins unto death,
by means of the satisfaction of Christ's sufferings, we do also conceive the
other part, which is the imputation of his holiness unto life eternal, as
employed under the former, and inseparably annexed thereto. For as Christ has
taken away our sins by suffering, so he has also clothed us with his
righteousness, by fulfilling of the Law for us, Dan. 9. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

What do we then ask of God in this Petition?

Six things, viz.

1. Grace, What we ask of God in this fifth petition.
feelingly to know, and frankly and tremblingly to confess, without excuse or
extenuation, the great debt of our sins, Psalm. 51. 3. and our utter inability
to satisfy for the same, or for the least part thereof, Psalm. 103. 3. and 142.
2.

2. That God would bestow upon us Christ Jesus, and for his sake remove out of
his sight all our sins, and the guilt and punishment due unto us for the same.

3. The power of saving faith, Luke 17. 5. to lay hold on the meritorious
sufferings and obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto our full Justification,
Esa. 53. 5.

4. The Spirit of prayer, that with grief and sorrow for our sins we may
crave pardon for our sins, and increase of faith, Zach. 12. 10. Mark 9. 24.

5. An assurance of the forgiveness of our sins by the testimony of the Spirit
of Christ, Romans 8. 15, 16. and exemplifying and applying the general pardon of
sins once for all granted unto us at our conversion, unto the several sins and
debts of every day and moment of our life.

6. We pray for remission of sin, not as intending our selves to undergo the
punishment, or any part thereof, Jer. 14. 7. But contrariwise, that the whole
debt (which is properly the punishment, as has been showed) may be accepted at
the hands of Christ our Surety, and we fully discharged and acquitted, so that
nothing may remain on our account, but the righteousness of Christ, Psalm. 3.
8, 9. whereby the favor and kingdom of God is purchased for us.

So much of Petition: What is set down in the reason?

A true note to certify us whether our sins are forgiven us or not, The
reason of the petition.
by that we forgive, or not forgive others, that have offended us.

Does this reason bind God to forgive us?

No otherwise then by his gracious and true promises, this being a necessary
consequent and fruit of the other, and not a cause. For when we say, As we, or
for we also forgive, etc. we argue with the Lord, not for merit, but from the
model of Gods grace in us, Matthew. 6. 14, 15. which being incomparably
inferior to the mercy and love of God; and yet disposing us to forgive and let
fall (in regard of hatred or private revenge, ( Romans 12. 19.) any wrongs and
injuries of our brethren against us, may both stir up the compassion of the
Lord toward us his children, Neh. 5. 19. and assure us of the attaining of
this our request, James 2. 13. And therefore that we may not be destitute of so
important an argument, Mark 11. 25. 1 John 3. 14. both to plead for mercy with
God, and to assure our selves of success, we desire of God a portion of that
mercy which is so abundant in him, that we may be tenderly affected one toward
another, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgiveth us, Ephesians.
4. 32. Col. 3. 13.

But seeing God alone forgiveth sins, Matthew. 9. 2. Mar. 2. 7. Job 14. 4. Esa.
43. 25. here understood by the word Debt: How is it said that we forgive sins?

We forgive not the sin so far as it is sin against God: but so far as it
brings grief and hinderance unto us, we may forgive it.

Are we hereby bound to forgive all our Debts?

No verily; we may both crave our debts of our debtors; and if there be no
other remedy, go to Law in a simple desire of Justice; (yea in lawful war
we may kill our enemies, and yet forgive them) being free from anger and
revenge; yet so, that if our Debtors be not able to pay, we are bound in a duty
to forgive them, or at least to have a conscionable regard of their inability.

How is this reason drawn?

From the less to the greater, thus: if we wretched sinners upon earth can
forgive others, how much more will the gracious God of heaven forgive us?
Matthew. 5. 7. and 6. 14, 15. if we having but a drop of mercy can forgive
others, how much more will God, who is a sea full of grace? 1 John 2. 10. and
3. 14. especially when we by forgiving sometimes suffer loss: whereas from God
by forgiving us nothing falls away.

Wherein appears the inequality between our debt unto God, and man's debts
unto us?

First, in the number; our debts to God being compared to ten thousand; men's
debts to us, to one hundred.

Secondly, in the weight; our debts to God being compared to ten thousand
Talents, men's debts to us to an hundred pence.

How rises this great inequality in the weight?

From the great inequality between God and man: for if to strike a King be much
more heinous then to strike a poor boy; what is it then to strike God, who is
infinitely greater then all the Kings of the earth?

What is to be gathered out of this reason?

That we should daily pray unto God, that he would mercifully work in us a
merciful affection, and give us loving and charitable hearts toward all men,
free from malice and revenge, and desirous of their salvation: And that as this
is a testimony to our hearts, that God will forgive us, if we for his sake can
heartily forgive such as have offended us: so on the other side, if we can show
no favor unto others, we can look for none at the hands of God: And therefore
to pray, without forgiving such as have offended us, were not only a mere
babbling, but also a procuring of Gods wrath more heavily against us: which
condemns the hypocrisy of many, which assuring themselves in great
confidence of the forgiveness of their sins, yet cannot find in their
hearts to forgive others; end so by mocking the Lord, bring a curse upon
themselves in stead of a blessing; seeing heart, and hand, and mouth should go
together.

What further learn we by this reason?

That as our forgiveness is nothing, unless the danger of imprisonment be
taken away, which inability of paying the debt does draw with it: so it
avails us nothing to have our sins forgiven us of God, unless the
punishment also be forgiven. Contrary to the Papists, who teach that sin and
the guilt thereof is taken away by Christ, but that we must satisfy for the
punishment of it: wherein they make God like unto those hypocrites, (here also
condemned) who will seem to forgive, and yet keep a prick and quarrel in
their hands, watching all occasions of advantage, which say, they will forgive,
but not forget.

So much of the former Petition belonging to the life to come: What are the
words of the latter, which is the sixth and last Petition of the Lords Prayer?

And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, The sixth Petition.
Matthew. 6. 13. Luke 11. 4.

What is the sum of it?

In it we pray for sanctification and strength against our sins; The sum of
the sixth Petition.
that sin may not only be pardoned unto us, but daily mortified in us, Romans
6. 1, 2. and we either kept by the providence of God from temptations, Prove.
30. 8. 2 Cor. 12. 8. are preserved by his grace from being hurt thereby, 1 Cor.
10. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 9. and as we pray that by the power of God we may be
strengthened against all tentations; so do we also pray, that by the same power
we may be raised up to new obedience: For under one part of sanctification,
that is the avoiding and mortifying of sin, is employed the other part also,
which is ability unto new obedience, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Romans 6. 11.

What is here to be observed in regard of the order, that this Petition
consequently follows upon the former?

That therefore to strengthen our faith for the obtaining of this Petition, we
must be assured of the former; that seeing God has forgiven us our sins, he
will be pleased also to mortify our flesh, and quicken our spirit, which are
the two parts of sanctification, and never severed from true justification.

What learn you of this?

That we cannot rightly desire God to forgive us our sins, unless we crave
also power to abstain from the like in time to come, else our prayers is but
babbling: so that here we would be stirred to pray for strength to avoid those
sins whereof we craved pardon for before: So far is it that men should
think that they are justified, when they have not so much as a purpose to
leave their sin. For who being delivered from a great disease will return to
it again, and not rather desire a Diet whereby he may escape it. Swine indeed
after they are washed, and dogs after their vomit return, the one to their
mire, the other to their vomit, Prove. 26. 1^. 2 Pet. 2. 22. As do also the
Papists, who after auricular confession, being discharged in their opinion,
will go to their sins afresh; but those that are truly washed by the blood of
Christ, will never give themselves over to their sins again.

If they cannot return to their vomit, what need have they to pray?

Yes, very great, because God has ordained prayer one means of keeping them
from revolt, and they ought to be so much the more earnest in prayer, as they
are more subject to be beaten and buffeted with tentations then others, Zach.
1. 11. Luke 11. 21.

What learn you from hence?

Much comfort in temptations, in that it is a token of Gods favor, and of
pardon of our sins, that we are subject to temptations.

What other cause is there to pray, that we be not lead into temptation?

For that the condition of them that are called to the hope of life, Of the
temptations, and the cau^es why we must pray against them.
will be worse then the state of those that never tasted of the good word of
God, if they give themselves to evil; As a relapse in diseases is more
dangerous then the first sickness was, John 5. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 22. Mat. 12. 43.

May we pray simply and absolutely against all temptations?

No verily:

For first, the best men that ever were (yea, the Son of God himself) were
subject to temptations.

Secondly, all temptations are not evil, but some are trials of our faith and
hope, and oftentimes make for our good: In which regard, they are pronounced
blessed that fall into diverse temptations; and therefore ought we not to pray
simply and without exception to be delivered from them, James 1. 2. Deuter. 8.
2. and 13. 3. but only from the evil of them.

What then do we pray for concerning them?

That if the Lord will be pleased to take trial of the grace he has bestowed
upon us, either by afflictions or by occasion of temptation to sin offered us,
that we be not given over to them, or overcome by them; but that we may have a
good issue, and escape from them, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And that if either we must go
under trouble, or offend the Lord, we may rather choose affliction then sin,
John 36. 21.

Why are they called Temptations?

Because by them God tries our obedience, and to notify our faith and
patience, both to our selves and others, whether we will follow him or not; and
therefore we may be assured, that so often as we beat back, or overcome the
temptations, we have as many undoubted testimonies of his love.

What is here meant then by the word Temptation?

Sin, and whatsoever things by the corruption of our nature are occasions to
lead us into sin; as prosperity, adversity, etc. Prove. 30. 9. which otherwise
simply are not to be numbered among these temptations we desire here to be
delivered from.

How many ways may a man be tempted?

Three:

1. By God.

2. By Satan and his wicked instruments.

3. By a man's own corruption.

How may God be said to tempt? How God tempts us.


Though God tempts no man unto evil, as he is tempted of none, James 1. 13.
yet sometimes he leads men into temptations of probation, Mat. 4. 1. and 6.
13. and that first by unusual probatory precepts, as when he commanded Abraham
to kill his son, Genesis 22. 1, etc. Secondly, by sending an extraordinary
measure of prosperity or adversity, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Thirdly, by letting loose
Satan (his band dog) to buffet and molest the godly, as Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12.
7. or to seduce the wicked, as Ahabs Prophets, 1 Kings 22. 22. Fourthly, by
desertion, leaving men to themselves, whether for a time, Hos. 5. 15. as
Ezechias in the business of the King of Babels Embassage, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. or
utterly, as those whom he justly gives up to their own lusts, Romans 1. 26, 28.
and the power of Satan, Acts 5. 3.

How agrees it with the goodness of the Lord, to lead thus into temptation?

When all things are of him, and by him, it must needs follow, that the things
that are done are provided and governed of him; yet in such sort, as none of
the evil which is in the transgressor cleaves unto him.

But how can that be without stain of his righteousness?

It is a righteous thing with God to punish sin with sin, and to cast a sinner
into further sins, by way of just punishment. Therefore we desire God not to
give us over to our selves, by withdrawing his Spirit from us, as when men do
delight in lies, he gives them over to believe lies, 2 These. 2. 11. and for
Idolatry, he justly punishes them with corporal filthiness in the same
degree, Hos. 4. 14. Romans 1. 24. Now being naturally prone to sin, when by the
just judgment of God we are left to our selves, we rush into all evil, even
as a horse into the battle, to whom we put the spurs, or as an Eagle flies
to her prey.

May not earthly Magistrates thus punish sin?

No verily, it were a cursed thing in Magistrates so to do: But God is above
all Magistrates, who even for our natural corruption may justly give us over
to all naughty affections.

Why do the Papists say, and suffer us not to be led into temptation?

In a vain and foolish fear of making God to be guilty of sin, if he should
be said to lead us into temptation; and therefore they lay the Lords words (as
it were) in water, and change his tongue, and set him to the Grammar School to
teach him to speak, which teaches all men to speak, whose folly is so much
the greater, as it is the usual phrase of Scripture, Exodus 4. 21. and 9. 16. 1
Kings 22. 20, 21, 22. Romans 1. 24. 2 These. 2. 11.

What inconvenience follows upon this addition?

Very great: For by this bare permission of evil, they rob God of his glory
(working in the most things that are done of men) yea even of the best things,
the doing whereof is attributed to his permission, Heb. 6. 3.

May we not offer our selves unto temptation as Christ did?

In no wise: for he was carried extraordinarily by the power of his Godhead
into the desert, to be tempted for our sakes, that in his victory we might
overcome.

What learn you of this?

1. That no godly man should choose his dwelling among those of a sinful
profession: As a chaste man among stews, or a temperate man among drunkards,
belly-gods, etc.

2. If we fall into such companies or occasions at unawares, as did Joseph,
Genesis 39. 12. and David, 1 Samuel 25. 13. 22. that we pray God for his assistance,
to carry our selves godly, and in no wise to be infected by them.

What is meant by [deliver us from evil?]

This expounds the former, Deliver us from evil: What is meant by it.
by a flat contrary; as thus, [leade us not into temptation] but pull us out of
it, even when we fall into it by our own infirmity) and that with force: For by
delivering, here is meant, a forcible rescuing of our nature, Romans 7. 24.
neither able nor willing to help it self out of these dangers.

What does this teach us?

That men are deeply plunged into sin, as a beast into the mire, which must be
forcibly pulled out, although a beast will help it self more then we can do
our selves, of our selves; not that there is not a freedom and willingness in
that which is well done, but as that force comes from that which is without,
so the grace comes not from us, but from God; therefore the Church says,
Cant. 1. 4. draw me, we will run; and Christ, John 6. 44. No man can come to
me, except the Father which has sent me draw him: Whence we learn, that to
have this desire of being drawn out, is a singular favor of God.

What is Gods hand to pull us out of this evil?

The Ministry of his Word, whereby he frames our wills through the power of his
Spirit to yield to his work.

What gather you of this?

That we kick not at the Ministers for reproving our sins, seeing that they
strive to pluck us out of the mire, but that we rejoice and yield to their
exhortation.

What is meant here by evil?

First, What is meant by evil.
that evil one, 1 John 5. 18, 19. Satan, (who pretends to have power over
us;) and in him, all his instruments and provocations to sin. Then secondly,
the effect of temptation, which without the special grace of God is extremely
evil; to wit, sin and damnation, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Is not the Devil the author of all evil?

Yes: he is the first author, but properly those evils are called his, which in
his own person he suggesteth.

From how many kinds of evils then desire we deliverance?

From two:

1. The inward concupiscences of our hearts, which are our greatest enemies,
James 1. 14, 15.

2. The outward, as the Devil and the world, which do work upon us by the
former; and therefore if we can subdue the outward, these inward cannot annoy
us.

From what evils should we desire principally to be delivered?

Those whereunto we are most bent, and naturally inclined, or wherein our
Country especially, or our neighbors amongst whom we converse, do most
delight. That we make the hedge highest, where Satan striveth most to leap
over, Matthew. 8. 28. who although he knows not our secrets, yet seeing by his
subtilty and sharpness of discovering us even by a beck or countenance is very
great, we must desire wisdom of God, to discern his temptations, and power
also to resist them.

Show now briefly, as you have done in the rest, what things we pray for in
this last Petition?

1. That seeing we cannot be tempted without the will of God, What things we
paray for in the sixth Petition.
Job 1. 10. nor resist without his power, 2 Cor. 12* 9. if it be his blessed
will he would give us neither poverty nor riches, Prove 30. 8. nor any such
thing as may endanger our spiritual estate, but remove those causes away which
lead us into temptation.

2. That he would tie up Satan, and restrain his malice and power, 2 Cor. 12.
8. or else make us wise to know and avoid his strategems, 2 Cor. 2. 11. and
preserve us from the evil that is in the world, Ioh. 17. 15. and abate the
power of the corruption that is within us, Romans 7. 24, 25.

3. That in our trialls (if he see good to prove us) he would keep us from
charging him with any injustice, or hard measure, Job 1. 22. and that he would
give us grace to behold his holy hand therein; and to make that holy use of
them for which he has sent them, Esa. 27. 9.

4. That he would not take his holy Spirit from us in our trialls: But always
give us sustentation in our temptations, and to keep us from falling, and not
suffer us to be overcome by the temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Jude verse 24.

5. That leaving us at any time to our own weakness for our humiliation, he
would graciously raise us up again with increase of spiritual strength and
courage, Psalm. 51. 12.

6. That he would keep us from all carnal security, from despair and
presumption of his mercies.

7. That he would put an end to all trialls, and to these days of conflict, in
his own good time, treading Satan with his forces for ever under feet, Romans
16. 20.

8. That he would increase and perfect the work of his grace in us, enabling
us to every good work, Heb. 13. 21. and instead of temptation to the contrary,
affording us all helps unto well-doing, and all things that may further us in
holiness, as good company, godly example, holy counsels, and encouragements,
etc.

Hitherto of the Petitions: There remains the conclusion, containing both a
Thanksgiving, which is the second part of Prayer, and a confirmation of the
former requests: what are the words of this close of the Lords Prayer?

For thine is the kingdom, Conclusion of the Lords Prayer.
and power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. Matthew. 6. 13.

Which words, though they be not repeated by St. Luke, yet are expressly
mentioned by St. Matthew, and therefore causelessly, and without warrant omitted
by the Church of Rome.

What observe you therein?

Their Sacrilege, who steal away this Thanksgiving from prayer, as if it
were no part of it; so that it is no marvel that in Popery all the whole body
of their Doctrine is of the salvation of men, Gods glory being buried in a deep
silence.

Whence is this form of Thanksgiving drawn?

Out of Daniel, 7. 14. and 1 Chronicles. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. where David uses the
like phrase of praising of God; but that which David enlarges there, our
Savior shortneth here; and yet comprehends the marrow of all.

What is the sum thereof?

That we ground our assurance of obtaining our Prayers in God from whom all
things we ask do come, and to whom therefore all glory must return.

What observe you in this?

That Christ makes this Thanksgiving consisting in the praise of God to be a
reason of all the Petitions going before: and therefore a further assurance of
obtaining our suits: for so good men in praying for new blessings, do always
join thanksgiving for the former.

What do you here understand by [kingdome.] What is meant by Kingdom.


Gods absolute sovereignty and right over all things, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. which
answers to the second Petition: and therefore this reason of Gods right and
authority over all, ought to move us to pray unto him, and to him alone, as to
one that has only right to any thing we have need of.

What is meant by [power?]

The omnipotency of God, What is meant by Power.
whereby he is able to do all things, Luke 1. 37. That beside his right noted
in the former word, he is also able to bring to pass whatsoever he will; both
which concur in God, though not always in earthly Princes: which seems to
answer unto the third Petition, and ought to give us encouragement to pray unto
him, who is able to effect any thing we pray for according to his will, and to
strengthen us to any thing which in duty we ought to do, although there be no
strength in us.

What is meant by [glory?]

That due, What is meant by Glory.
which rising from the two former of kingdom and power, does rightly belong
unto God, as following upon the concurrence of the other two. For if whatsoever
we desire be granted unto us in that he reigns powerfully; it is reason, that
from the establishing of his kingdom and power, all glory and praise should
return unto him again. Therefore hereby we do thankfully refer and return
all good things to the honor and service of God that gives them, Psalm 65.
1, 2. otherwise we have no comfort of our prayers: And it answers to the
first Petition, and ought to move us to pray unto him, and to assure us that
our prayers are granted; seeing by our prayers duly made and granted, he is
glorified: And it is one of the most powerful reasons, that the servants of
God have grounded their confidence on, of being heard, that the name of God
therein should be glorified.

What mean you by the word [thine?]

Hereby these Titles of Kingdom, What meant by Thine.
Power, and Glory, are appropriated unto God, to whom they do belong, and all
creatures excluded from fellowship with him in these Attributes. For howsoever,
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, are communicated unto some creatures, (namely
Kings, and Princes, Dan. 2. 37.) as Gods Instruments, and Vicegerents, Psalm
82. 6. yet God alone claims them originally of himself, and absolutely
without dependence or control; others have them not of themselves, but as
borrowed, and hold them of him as Tenants at will, Romans 8. 15. Prove. 8. 25. Job
33. 13.

What is meant by the words, [for ever, or for ages?]

By ages he means eternity, What meant by for ever.
Dan. 2. 4. and thereby puts another difference between the kingdom, power,
and glory of God, which is eternal, without any beginning or end, 1 Timothy 1.
17. and that in Princes, whose kingdoms, powers, and glory fade.

How is that a close of confirmation to our requests?

Because we do not only in general ascribe Kingdom, Power, and Glory unto
God, as his due; but also with respect to our prayers and suits, believing and
professing, that he as King of heaven and earth has authority to dispose of
all his treasures, Rev. 3. 7. as omnipotent, is able to do exceeding
abundantly, above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. Finally, as the God
of glory, is interessed in the welfare of his servants, for the maintaining of
the honor of his Name, Psalm. 35. 27. and truth of his promise, Psalm 119. 49.
Therefore there are here contained three reasons to move God to grant our
Petitions. Because,

First, he is our King, and so tied to help us who are his Subjects.

Secondly, he has power, and thereforefore is able to help us.

Thirdly, the granting of our Petitions will be to his glory and praise;
whereupon we firmly believe, that God the mighty and everlasting King, (1 Timothy
1. 17.) can, and for his own glory will grant the things we have thus
demanded, Ephesians. 3. 20. Jer. 14. 7. Ezekiel. 36. 22.

What is understood by this last word, [Amen.]

Not only, So be it, as commonly men say, but also, so it is, or shall be,
What is meant by Amen.
as we have prayed, Rev, 22. 20, 21. For it is a note of confidence, and
declaration of Faith, (without which our prayers are rejected) whereby we
assure our selves, that God will grant those things which we have prayed to
him for.

Why are we taught to conclude with this word?

There being two things required in prayer: a fervent desire, James 5. 17. and
faith, James 1. 6. which is a persuasion that these things which we truly
desire, God will grant them for Christ's sake. This is a testimony both of our
earnest affection of having all those things performed, which in this Prayer
are comprehended; and the assurance of our faith to receive our desires; at
least so far forth as God sees good for us: And so hereby we do not only
testify our earnest desire, that so it may be, but also express our full
assurance that so it shall be as we have prayed, according to the will of God:
and being already let in, Matthew. 7. 8. by the key of faithful prayer, into the
rich treasure of his mercies, we also set our seal, John 3. 11. in the word
of faith, Amen.

Is it lawful to use no other form of words, then that which is set down in
the Lords Prayer?

We may use another form of words, Whether lawful to use any other form of
Prayer.
but we must pray for the same things, and with like affection as is prescribed
in that Prayer.

This form being so absolute, what need we use any other words in praying?

Because as to refuse this form, savoureth of a proud contempt of Christ's
ordinance: so to confine our selves to these words alone, argues extreme
idleness in this duty, wherein variety of words is required for the pouring
out of our souls before the Lord, Hos. 14. 3. and oftentimes according to the
occasions, some one petition is more then the rest to be insisted on, and
importuned, Mat. 26. 44. Wherefore our blessed Savior has commended this
form unto us, as an excellent copy or lesson to be both repeated and
imitated, or at least aimed at by us his Scholars, for which cause, both he
himself, John 17. 10. and his Apostles, Acts 4. 24. are recorded to have
prayed in other words, which yet may be referred to this. Finally, the liberty
which the Lord affourdeth us is not to be abridged or despised, who admits
all languages, words and forms agreeable to this pattern; whether read,
rehearsed by heart, or presently conceived, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. Psalm 90 and 92.
in the titles, Numb. 10. 35, 36. so be it we pray both with spirit, and
affection, and understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15.

May there not then besides this Prayer of the Lord, be now under the Gospel a
set form of Prayer in the Church?

Yes verily, so that it be left at the liberty of the Church (not of private
men without consent of the Church) to alter it.

Wherefore is it necessary that there be a set form of Prayer?

To help the weaker and ruder sort of people especially, and yet so as the set
form make not men sluggish in stirring up the gift of prayer in themselves,
according to diverse occurrents, it being incident to the children of God, to
have some gift of prayer in some measure, Zach. 12. 10

Remains there yet any thing necessary to be considered of Prayer?

Something would be spoken of the kinds and circumstances thereof.

What kinds are thereof Prayer?

Prayer is either public or private, and both of them either ordinary or
extraordinary, Acts 6. 4, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 12. Mat. 6. 6. Acts 10. 4. Joel 2. 15.
Jonah 3. 6.

What is public Prayer?

It is prayer made of and in the Congregation assembled for the service of God,
What public Prayer is.
Psalm. 84. 1, etc.

What is private Prayer?

It is that Prayer which is made out of the Congregation, What private Prayer
is.
and it is either less private, as when the whole Family, or private friends
meet in that exercise, 2 Samuel 6. 20. Esther 4. 16. or more private, when either
one of the members of the Family, Nehem. 1. 4, 5, 6. Genesis 25. 21. or some by
reason of special duty they have jointly together made their prayers, 1 Pet.
3. 7.

Is it not enough for every one in a Family to make prayers with the rest of
the body of that Household?

No, it is required also that we pray solitarily by our selves, Math. 6. 6. For
as every man has committed special sins, which others in the Family have not,
and has special defects, and has received special favors, that others have
not: so in these regards it is meet that he should have a special resort unto
God in Confession, Petition, and Thanksgiving.

What is ordinary Prayer?

It is that prayer which is made daily upon ordinary occasions, What ordinary
prayer is.
Psalm. 55. 17. Dan. 6. 11.

What is the extraordinary?

That which is made upon special occasion, What extraordinary prayer is.
or extraordinary accident falling out, by reason whereof it is both longer and
ferventer, Psalm. 119. 62. Acts 12. 5. Joel 2. 15. Jonah 3. 6.

Are the same persons always to keep the private extraordinary Prayers, that
keep the public?

No: not such persons as are under the commandment of others, unless it be
public, or with consent of their commanders, Numb. 30. 13, 14, etc.

What are the ordinary circumstances of Prayer?

Gestures, Circumstances of prayer.
Place, Time.

What behavior and gesture must we use in Prayer?

We must use such holy behavior, 1. Gesture.
and comely gestures of body, as are beseeming the Majesty of God, with whom we
have to deal, and so holy an exercise which we have in hand; namely, such as
may best express and increase the reverence, humility, fervency and affiance,
that ought to be in our hearts; as the bowing of our knees, Ephesians. 3. 14. lifting
up of our hands and eyes to heaven, Lam. 3. 41. John 17. 1, etc. which yet are
not always, or absolutely necessary, Luke 18. 13. so our hearts be lifted up,
Psalm. 25. 1. and 143. 8. and the knees of our conscience bowed before the Lord,
Phil. 2. 10. and nothing done unbeseeming the company with whom we pray, and
the kind of prayer.

Is not the behavior all one in every kind of prayer?

No: In private prayer it suffices that we use such words, gestures, etc. as
may express our reverence and faith toward God, 1 Cor. 14. 2. In public
prayer our behavior must be such as may also witness our communion one with
another, and desire of mutual edification, 1 Cor. 14. 4. and verse 17. 40.
When we pray by our selves we have more liberty of words and gestures then in
company, 1 Kings 18. 42. In extraordinary prayers the public must be done with
open show of the affection, either sorrow or joy, Esa. 1. and 58. Joel 2. 13.
which in the private must be covert and secret, Matthew. 6. 17.

Where must we pray?

Generally all places are allowed, Of the place of prayer.
1 Timothy 2. 8. the ceremonial difference of places being removed, John 4. 21,
etc. and Christ our propitiatory every where present before us, Matthew. 18. 20.
Notwithstanding, according to the kinds before mentioned, the public place of
resort for the worship of God best fitteth common prayers, Esa. 56. 7. Joel 2.
17. and the private house or Closet is most convenient for private
supplication, Matthew. 6. 6. howsoever the sudden lifting up of the heart in
secret unto God, may be as occasion is, without gesture, in any place or
company, Neh. 2. 4.

When must we pray?

Continually, Of the time of prayer.
as the Apostle enjoyneth, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. For the whole course of a Christian
is a perpetual intercourse with the Lord, either suing for mercy, or waiting
for the answer of his suits, or rendering thanks for graces received, Psalm. 5.
3. Luke 2. 37. Nevertheless ordinarily the Sabbath among the days of the
week, Psalm. 92. Title, and morning and evening among the hours of the day,
ibid verse. 2. are to be preferred* whereto such time must be added wherein we
enter into any business, Col. 3. 17. Pro. 3. 6. or receive any of the
creatures or blessings of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. Extraordinarily
other days or hours must also be set apart for prayer, especially in cases
requiring longer continuance therein, Psalm. 55. 17. and 119. 62, 164.

What circumstances are annexed unto such extraordinary prayer?

An holy fasting or feasting, Of Fasting.
1 Cor. 7. 5. Zach. 8. 19. Neh. 8. 10. the one, to further our zeal in
petition; the other, in thanksgiving.

What mean you by Fasting?

Not any natural abstinence, arising from sickness; nor medicinal, used to
prevent or remove the same; nor civil, enjoined sometimes by authority, as in
case of dearth; sometimes enforced by necessity, as in siege, 2 Kings 6. 25.
seafaring, etc. nor yet moral, for subduing of carnal concupiscence, 2 Kings
25. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 9. 27. and preservation of chastity, required (especially in
some constitutions, 1 Cor. 9* 27.) by virtue of the seventh Commandment: But
religious, Joel 1. 14 that is referred to religious ends, for the furtherance
of the special practice of repentance, and the enforcing of our prayers.

Is fasting a good work?

Fasting is not properly a good work, but an help, an assistance thereto,
namely, to prayer.

Whether is the outward exercise thereof a certain mark of a godly man?

The Pharisees which fasted Luke 5. 33. came not to our Savior Christ to
learn of him, (48.) as the Disciples of John did, Matthew. 9. 14. although it
were in weakness) but to discredit him, namely, to make the world believe that
he was a belly-god, as the Church of Rome does charge the children of God now,
to open a school to all liberty of the flesh, following the steps of their old
fathers the Pharisees.

What is an holy Fast? What an holy Fast is.


The chastising of our nature, and laying aside the delights of the senses for
a time, Joel 2. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 5. to the end thereby to humble our selves, and
to make us more apt to prayer. Or more fully: Fasting is a religious abstinence
commanded of God, whereby we forbear not only the use of meat and drink, but
also of all other earthly comforts and commodities of this life, so far as
necessity and comeliness will require, to the end that we being humbled and
afflicted in our souls by the due consideration of our sins and punishment,
may (grounded upon the promise of God) more earnestly and fervently call upon
God, either for the obtaining of some singular benefit, or special favor we
have need of, or for the avoiding of some special punishment, or notable
judgment hanging over our heads, or already pressed upon us, Acts 16. 30, 31,
32. and 14. 23. 2 Chronicles. 20. Joel 1. and 2. 12. 16.

Is there any necessity of this exercise of Fasting?

Yes verily; in that it is necessary to humble our selves under the mighty and
fearful hand of God,; and to afflict our souls with the consideration and
conscience of our sins, and the punishment due unto them; unto which this
outward exercise of Fasting is a good aid: for howsoever the kingdom of God
consists not properly in the matter of meat and drink, whether used or
forborne, Romans 14. 17. yet fasting, as an extraordinary help unto the chief
exercises of Piety, has the warrant and weight of a duty as well from
precepts, as examples, both out of the old Testament, ( Lev. 23. 27. etc. Joel
2. 22. Esa. 22. 12.) and the new, ( Mat. 9. 14, 15. Acts 13. 3.) And our
Savior Christ, Luke 5. 35. does expressly say, that the time shall come when
his Disciples shall fast: where both by the circumstances of the persons and of
the time, the necessity of fasting is enforced.

How so?

By the persons, for that the Apostles themselves had need of this help of
Fasting for their further humiliation; and by the time, for that even after the
Ascension of our Savior Christ, when the graces of God were most abundant on
them, they should have need of this exercise.

What is gathered hereof?

That it is a shameful thing for men to say that Fasting is Jewish, or
Ceremonial.

What do you gather, in that our Savior would not have his Disciples to fast
till after his Ascension?

His singular kindness, in that he would not suffer any great trouble, or
cause of Fast to come unto them, before they had strength to bear them, or
were prepared for them.

When is the time of Fasting?

As often as there are urgent and extraordinary causes of Prayer, Of the time of
Fasting.
either for the avoiding of some great evil, or notable calamity, 1 Samuel 7. 6.
Est. 4. 16. or for the obtaining of some great mercy, or special benefit at
the hand of God, Neh. 1. 4. Acts 10. 30. For in that our Savior Christ
teaches, Luke 5. 34. that it must not be when he who is as it were the
Bridegroom is with his Disciples, to furnish them with all manner of benefits
they had need of: we are taught, that the time is, when any great calamity is
hanging over us, or fallen upon us, whereby the gracious presence of Christ is
taken from us; or when there is any weighty matter to be taken in hand.

What gather you hereof?

That the fast of Popery is foolish, which is holden at set times, whether the
time be prosperous, or not prosperous; whether the affairs be common or
ordinary, or whether they be special or extraordinary.

When then is this religious exercise of Fasting to be performed of Christians?

When God calls upon us for this duty by the occasions arising from his
providence, and our own necessities, Matthew. 9. 15.

What are those occasions, whereby the Lord calls us to fasting?

They are generally two, as has been noted, viz.

1. Evils, which being felt or feared, we desire to remove, or prevent as
sins, 1 Samuel 7. 6. 1 Cor. 5. 2. and the judgment of God for sin, Est. 4. 16.
Jonah 3. 7. Mat. 17. 21.

2. Good things, spiritual, Acts 10. 30. or outward, Neh. 1. 4. which we
desire to enjoy, and therefore do thus seek them, and prepare our selves for
the receiving of them.

When is this Fast to begin and end?

As in all holy rests, after preparation, Luke 23. 54. it is to begin in the
morning of the day of the Fast, and to continue to the morning of the day
following, Mark 16. 2. Luke 24. 1.

It seems by this, that the Law of Fasting, will not suffer a man to sup the
night of that day when the Fast is holden?

The Fast is so long continued as has been said; but so, as there be that
refreshing whereby health may be preserved: for such as be sick or weak, are
to take somewhat for their sustenance, thereby to be better able to serve God
in the Fast, provided that they do not abuse this to license of the flesh.

Is it of necessity that the Fast should always begin in the morning, and
continue until morning?

No; It may be from morning to evening, Judges 20. 26. 2 Samuel 3. 35. or from
evening till evening again, Lev. 23. 32. and according to the greatness of
the affliction, the Fast is to be prolonged even to the space of three days,
as appears by the examples of the Jews, Est. 4. 16. and Paul, Acts 9. 9.

What are the kinds of Fasting?

It is either public, Of the kinds of Fasting.
or private.

What is the public Fast?

It is when for a general cause the Churches do fast, Of public Fast.
viz. when the Governors and Magistrates, Joel 2. 15. stirred up by
consideration of common sins, Neh. 9. 1, etc. Calamity, Jonah 3* 7, 8.
necessities, or business of great importance, do in the name of God blow the
trumpet and call a solemn assembly, or assemblies: in which case he that
obeys not, is culpable before God and man, Lev. 23. 29. And it is either more
public, when all Churches fast generally; or else less public, when some
particular Churches are humbled in fasting.

What is the private Fast?

When upon the view either of public causes, Of private Fast.
considered of by such as are in Authority, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Ezekiel. 13. 17. or of the
like, but more private occasions, (as domestical or personal, etc.) a
Christian is moved either with his family, or special friends, Zach. 12. 12. 1
Cor. 5. or by himself solatary, Matthew. 6. 17. to humble himself before the
Lord: for it is more or less private: less private, as when a particular
house; more private, when a particular person is humbled in fasting.

Is there any difference in the manner of holding of a public and private Fast?

Yes: in a public Fast the sorrow and grief ought to be declared openly to
the view of all, which ought to be covered as much as may be in the private
Fast, wherein the more secrecy is used, the greater proof is there of
sincerity, and hope of blessing: wherefore our Savior Christ reproves the
private Fast of Hypocrites, that would outwardly appear to men to fast, and
commands the contrary, Matthew. 6. 16, 17.

Whom does God call to this exercise of Fasting?

All Christians enabled by understanding and grace to judge, Who are to fast
and aright to perform this weighty duty, Zach. 12. 12, etc. unless any be
exempted by present debility, Matthew. 12. 7. 1 Samuel 14* 29, 30. but differently,
according to the diverse occasions of fasting, and the kinds thereon depending,
(whereof before has been spoken.)

May those that are under the government of their Parents, or Masters, fast
without leave of them?

No, but in the public all may fast.

Are all persons meet for this exercise of fasting?

By the unfitness of his own Disciples for it our Savior Christ teaches,
that they that are meet for this exercise must not be Novices in the profession
of the truth; no more then he that is accustomed with the drinking of old wine
can suddenly fall in liking of new wine, Luke 5. 33.

Is it so hard a matter to abstain from a Meals meat, and such bodily
comforts for a small time, which the youag sucking babes, and the beasts of
Nineveh did, and diverse beasts are better able to perform then any man?

No verily, but hereby appears that there is an inward strength of the mind
required, not only in knowing of our behavior in this service of God, but
also of power and ability to go under the weight of the things we humble our
selves for, which strength if it be wanting, the fast will be to those that are
exercised in it, as a piece of new cloth sewed into an old garment, which
because it is not able to bear the stresse and strength of, has a greater
rent made into it then if there were no piece at all.

What gather you hereof?

That it is no marvel that where there is any abstinence and corporal
exercise in Popery, yet that the same makes them nothing better, but rather
worse, having not so much as the knowledge of this service of God, much less
any spiritual strength and ability to perform it with.

What then are the parts of a true Christian Fast?

They are partly outward, Of the parts of a Christian fast.
partly inward. 1. Bodily exercises, serving to the inward substances, 1 Timothy
4. 8.

2. An inward substance sanctifying the bodily exercise, and making it
profitable to the users.

What is the bodily exercise in fasting?

It is the forbearing of things otherwise lawful and convenient, in whole or
in part, for the time of humiliation, so as nature be chastised, but not
disabled for service; and the delights of the sense laid aside, but yet without
annoyance and uncomelinesse.

What are those outward things that are to be forborne during the time of
fasting?

First, food, Esther 4. 16. Jonah 3. 7. from whence the whole action has the
name of Fasting; and the word does signify an utter abstinence from all meats
and drinks, and not a sober use of them, which ought to be all the time of our
lives: Wherefore this outward exercise is thus described, Luke 5. 33. The
Disciples of John and the Pharisees fast, but thine eat and drink.

What is here to be considered?

A charge upon Popery: For the greater sort of people amongst them, in the day
of their Fast fill their bellies with bread and drink; and the richer sort,
with all kind of delicates, (flesh, and that which comes of flesh only
excepted:) So that the fasting of the one and the other is but a fullness, and
the latter may be more truly said to feast then a fast.

It seems you make it unlawful for those that fast to eat any thing during
their fasting.

Not so: if for help of weakness the taking of meat be moderately and
sparingly used, as before has been observed.

What other things are outward?

The ceasing from labor in our vocations on the day of the Fast, Number. 29. 7.
to the end we may the better attend to the holy exercises used in fasting; in
which respect such times are called Sabbaths, Levit. 23. 32. The laying aside
of costly apparel, or whatsoever ornaments of the body, and wearing of homely
and courser garments, Exodus 33. 4, 5. Jonah 3. 5, 6. The forbearing of Sleep,
Music, Mirth, Perfumes, etc. Dan. 6. 18. and 10. 2, 3. And this abstinence is
required of all that celebrate the Fast: But of married persons there is
further required a forbearance of the use of the marriage bed, and of the
company each of other, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Joel 2. 16.

What is the meaning of the abstinence from these outward things?

By abstinence from meat and drink, by wearing of courser apparel, by ceasing
from labor in our Callings, and by separation in married persons for the time,
we thereby profess our selves unworthy of all the benefits of this present
life, and that we are worthy to be as far underneath the earth as we are
above it: yea, that we are worthy to be cast into the bottom of hell, which
the holy Fathers in times past did signify by putting ashes upon their heads,
the truth whereof remains still, although the ceremony be not used.

What is the spiritual substance of duty, whereto the bodily exercise serves?

It is an extraordinary endeavor of humbling our souls before the Lord, and of
seeking his face and favor, Ezra 8. 21. wherein that inward power and strength
whereof we speak is seen.

Wherein does it consist?

1. In the abasing of our selves, Joel 2. 13. by examination, confession, and
hearty bewailing of our own and the common sins, Ezra 9. 3, 4. Neh. 9. 1, 2,
etc. Dan. 9. 3, 4, 5, etc.

2. In drawing near unto the Lord by faith, Luke 15. 18, 21. and earnest
invocation of his name, Iona. 3. 8. Esa. 58. 4. The former is grounded upon the
meditation of the Law, and threats of God; the later upon the Gospel and
promises of God touching the removing of our sins, and Gods judgments upon us
for them.

How agrees this with the Popish Fast?

It fails in both parts: for in stead of humbling themselves, and afflicting
their souls, they pride themselves, and lift up their minds, in thinking they
deserve something at Gods hands for their fasting; which is great abomination.
Neither have they upon the days of their Fast any extraordinary exercise of
prayer, more then upon other days; of all which it may appear how small cause
they have to boast of their fasting, which in all the warp thereof has not a
thread which is not full of leprosy.

What is required in our humiliation?

Anguish and grief of our hearts, conceived for our sins, and the punishment of
God upon us, for which we ought to be humbled in fasting: For the effecting
whereof we are to set before our eyes,

1. The glass of Gods holy Law, with the bitter curses threatened to the
breakers thereof.

2. The examples of vengeance on the wicked.

3. The judgments now felt or feared of us.

4. The spiritual contemplation of our blessed Savior, bleeding on the Cross
with the wounds which our sins have forced upon him, Zach. 12. 10, etc.

What is required in our drawing near unto the Lord by Faith?

Not only fervently and importunately to knock at the gate of his mercy for
the pardon of our sins, removal of judgments, and grant of the graces and
blessings we need, Psalm. 51. 1, 2, etc. verse. 14. and 112. 4. but also to make
a sure Covenant with his Majesty, Nehem. 9. 38. of renewing and bettering our
repentance thence forward in a more earnest and effectual hatred of sin, and
love of righteousness, Esa. 55. 7. Jonah 3. 8.

What fruit or success may we look for, having thus sought the Lord?

Who knows whether by this means we may stand in the gap, and cause the Lord
to repent of the evil intended, and to spare his people? Joel 2. 14, 18, etc.
Jonah 3. 9, 10. At the least for our particular we shall receive the mark and
mercy promised to such as mourn for the abominations generally committed,
Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6. together with plentiful evidence of our salvation, and
assurance of the love of God toward us, Matthew. 6. 18. Pro. 28. 13. 1 John 1.
9. strength against temptations, patience and comfort in afflictions, with all
other graces plentifully vouchsafed (especially upon such renewing of
acquaintance) by him who is the rewarder of all that come unto him, Heb. 11. 6.
so that we need not doubt, but that as we have sown in tears so we shall reap
in joy, Psalm. 126. 5. and as we have sought the Lord with fasting and mourning,
so he yet again will be sought ( Ezekiel. 36. 37.) and found of us with holy
feasting and spiritual rejoicing.

What is an holy feasting?

A comfortable enjoying of Gods blessings, Of a holy feast.
to stir us up to thankfulness and spiritual rejoicing: Or, (to describe it
more largely) It is a solemn Thankes-giving unto God for some singular benefit
(or deliverance from some notable evil, either upon us, or hanging over us)
which he has bestowed upon us, especially after that in fasting we have
begged the same at his hand, Zach. 8. 19. Ezekiel. 9. ad 32. for this is a duty
especially required for the acknowledgment of such mercies as we have by the
former course obtained, Psalm 30. 11, 12. and 50. 15. Esther 9. 22. and so
answering thereto, that from the one the other with due reverence may be
conceived.

What ought especially to be the time of this duty?

The time that is nearest unto the mercy and benefit which we have received, Of
the time of feasting.
as we see in the story, Esther 9. where the Jews that were in the country,
and in the provinces, did celebrate their feast on the 14. day of the month
Adar, because they had overthrown their enemies the 13. day before: and the
Jews in Sushan, because they made not an end of the slaughter of their enemies
before the 14. day was past, they celebrated it the 15. day. Look 2 Chro. 20.
26. and that example of Jacob, checked for deferring the payment of his vow at
Bethel.

Wherefore ought we to take the time that is next the deliverance?

Because we being most strongly and thoroughly affected with the benefit we
receive the first time it is bestowed upon us, especially where there is not
only a notable benefit befallen unto us, but thereby also we are freed from
some notable evil that was upon us, or near unto us, we are then most fit to
hold a feast unto the Lord.

Why is the ordinance of a yearly Feast by Mordocheus rather commanded upon
the day after the slaughter of their enemies, then the day of the slaughter?

To set forth that rejoicing ought not to be so much for the destruction of our
enemies, as that thereby we obtain peace to serve God in.

Wherein does this feast consist?

The scope and drift of it is, In what an holy feast consists.
to rejoice before the Lord, and to show our selves thankful for the benefit
received, not only in that we are delivered, but that we are delivered by
prayer that we have made unto God, whereby our joy increases, and whereby it
differs from the joy of the wicked, which rejoice that they are delivered as
well as we.

How may that be best performed?

Partly by outward and bodily exercises, and partly by spiritual exercises of
godliness.

What are the outward exercises?

A more liberal use of the creatures, both in meat and apparel, then is
ordinary.

May we eat and drink on that day more then on others?

No: the exceeding is not in the quantity of meat and drink, but in a more
dainty and bountiful diet then ordinary, Neh. 8. 10. which yet is to be
referred to the exercise of godliness, and therefore ought to be used in that
moderation and sobriety, as men may be made more able thereunto; even as the
abstinence in fasting is used to further humiliation of the mind, and affecting
of the soul.

What is the exercise of godliness?

It is either in piety and duty unto God, or in kindness unto men.

What is the duty unto God?

To lift up our voice in thanksgiving unto him, as for all other his mercies,
(whereof this benefit should cause the remembrance, as one sin causes the
remembrance of others, Psalm 51.) so for that present benefit; and for that
purpose to call to remembrance, and to compare the former evils, which either
we were in, or were near unto, with the present mercy, and every part of the
one with the members of the other.

What other duty of Piety is to be performed unto God?

By a diligent meditation of the present benefit to confirm our faith and
confidence in God, that he that has so mightily and graciously delivered us at
this time, will also in the same, or the like dangers, deliver us hereafter, so
far as the same shall be good for us.

What is the kindness we should show toward men?

An exercise of liberality, according to our power, out of the feeling of the
bountiful hand of God toward us.

To whom must that be showed?

To our friends in presents; and, as it were, in New Years gifts, Rev. 11. 10.
and portions to be sent to the poor and needy, Neh. 8. 10.

What remains further of these holy Feasts?

The sorts and kinds of them which are as before we have heard of Fasts; to
which I refer the Reader.

Hitherto of Prayer, and the extraordinary circumstances thereof, Fasting, and
Feasting: what is a Vow?

A solemn promise made unto God by fit persons of some lawful thing, Of Vows.
that is in their choice and power to perform it.

It is thought that Vows are Ceremonial, and not to pertain to the times the
Gospel?

There are indeed good, yea, excellent persons that think so, which carry so
much the more a dislike of Vows, because they have been abused in Popery.
Howbeit, it appears by the fifty Psalm, verse 14, 15. that it is a constant
and perpetual service of God; as shall appear.

What is the proper end and use of a Vow?

It is twofold:

First, Genesis 28 20.
to strengthen and confirm our faith.

Secondly, Judge. 11. 30. 31.
to testify our thankfulness unto God; 1 Samuel 1. 11.
but no way to merit any thing at Gods hand: So that whereas the exercise of a
Fast is in adversity; and of a Feast in prosperity; the Vow may be in both.

Who are the fit persons that may vow.

Such as have knowledge, Who are to vow.
judgment, and ability to discern of a Vow, and of the duties belonging to
the performance of the same, Numb. 30. 6.

Are all such bound to vow?

Not simply all; for it is no sin not to vow, Deuteronomy. 23. 22. but those only,
which either being in distress feel a want of feeling of Gods assistance,
thereby to strengthen their faith for neecessary aid: or they who being
delivered from some necessary evil, or have received some singular good, where
no vow has gone before, should witness their thankfulness, Deuteronomy. 13. 21, 22.
Numb. 30. 2. and 6. 2. etc.

What have we herein further to consider?

That the Vow must be of lawful things; else it is better not to pay the Vow,
then to pay; as Herod and the forty mentioned in the Acts, 23. 14. And as the
Munks, Friars and Nuns vow wilful poverty, perpetual abstinence from
Marriage, and Canonical obedience, and the people pilgrimage.

May we vow any thing which is lawful to be done?

We may not vow any vile or base thing: As if a wealthy man should vow to give
to the poor some small value far under his ability; for what either token of
thankfulness can that be, or what comfort in his troubles can he take of the
performance thereof?

What have we secondly to consider?

That the vow must be of such things as are in our choice to perform. What is
to be vowed.


How many ways fail men against this?

Two ways:

1. In vowing that which we are not able to perform.

2. In vowing that which otherwise by the Law of God we are bound to perform.

Who be they that vow that which they cannot perform?

They are either they whose strength does fail through the common frailty of
all men (as those that vow perpetual continency) whose lets come from
themselves; or they which cannot perform it, by reason of subjection unto
others; as wives unto their husbands, children to their parents, servants to
their Masters, etc. in whose power they are to perform their vows, or not to
perform them, Numb. 30. 3, 4.

Why may not a man vow such things as he is otherwise bound to do?

For that they are due unto God without the service of a vow; and therefore it
were a dalliance with God, to make show of some special and extraordinary
service, where the common and ordinary is only performed, as if a man would
present as a gift unto his Lord the rent of his own house due for the
occupation thereof.

What may we then lawfully vow?

An increase of Gods service; as to pray more often every day then ordinary is
used; or to be more liberal to the poor, with some strain of our ability,
building of Colleges, Almes-houses, etc.

What is the duty of those that have vowed?

1. To have a diligent care to perform their vows, The duty of those that
have vowed.
Eccles. 5. 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 23. 21, 22, 23. For if it be a reproachful thing to
deal with God as with a man, it is more reproachful to deal worse with God,
then we dare deal with any man.

2. Not to delay the performance of it, Eccles. 5. 3. For God corrected sharply
in Jacob the deferring of the payment of his vows, Genesis 35. 1. 1. By his
daughters deflowring. 2. By the rage and murder committed by his sons.

Is the necessity of performing vows so great, that they may no ways be
omitted?

Not so: for to the performance of a greater duty, a man may omit his vow for a
time, and after a time return, and be not a Vow-breaker: As the Rechabites for
safety of their lives came and dwelt at Jerusalem, notwithstanding a former
vow, that they would not dwell in an house, Jer. 35. 9, 10, 11. and yet God
witnesses, that the vow was not broken thereby: so to help our neighbors in
some present necessity, we may cease from any vowed duty at that time, and not
sin; wherein the Papists greatly fail, who having vowed unlawfully, yet think
they may not intermit their vows.

If a man in vowing does not consider sufficiently the greatness of the
matter, may he not break that vow that he has not so advisedly made?

No, the vowing being otherwise lawful, that rashness is to be repented, but
the vow must be kept.

What have we to learn of all this?

That we be advised in that we do, and not to enquire after we have vowed, to
find some starting hole where to go out; but either not to vow at all, or if
we vow, to have a good remembrance of it, and a diligent care in the due time
to perform it, Prove. 20. 25.

Having spoken of those good things which we do give unto God: Let us proceed
to that which we do give unto our needy Neighbor: What is Alms?

It is a duty of Christian love, whereby such as have this worlds good, do
freely impart to such as are in want, Of Alms.
1 John 3. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. Mat. 5. 42.

How can it be both a duty, and withal free?

1. That it is a duty, appears by many formal precepts touching this matter,
Deuteronomy. 15. 7, etc. Heb. 13. 16. in that it is called our justice or
righteousness, Psalm. 112. 9. Matthew. 6. 1. in that every man is a Steward of
Gods blessings for the benefit of others, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Finally, in that
according to the performance or neglect even of this duty men shall be judged
at the last day, Mat. 25. 35. 42.

2. It is free, not as being left by God unto our choice, whether we will do
it or no, but as proceeding from an heart as 2 Cor. 9* 7.
freely, and as cheerfully performing this obedience to God, and relief of our
brother, without compulsion of humane Law.

Who are to give Alms? Who are to give Alms.


1 John 3. 17.
Whosoever has this worlds good; that is, such a portion out of which by
frugality something may be spared, though it be but Luke 21. 2, 3.
two mites; and therefore, not only 1. Tim. 6. 17.
rich men and householders are to give; but also such as labor with their
hands, Ephesians. 4. 28.
out of their earnings and wages, children out of their Parents allowance,
wives out of any portion they have in several without their husbands, or
allowance from their husbands, or out of the common stock they enjoy with
their husbands; provided the husbands consent (in whom the possession
fundamentally remains) be either expressed, or by silence, or not gainsaying
implied. Finally, even they that live upon alms, must 2 Cor. 8. 2. 14.
spare something unto those that have little or no supply.

May there not be some cases, wherein such as are accomptable to others, may
give without their knowledge, yea against their will?

Yea, as appears in the wise and commendable ^ Sam. 25. 3.
example of Abigail; to wit, when the life and whole estate of the giver or
receiver, may be now, or not at all,; thus, or not otherwise preserved; for
Mat. 12. 7.
extreme necessity dispenses with the ordinary course of duty, both to God
and man.

Whereof must we give Alms?

Of that Neh 8. 10.
good thing (that is wholesome and profitable to the receiver) which is justly
our own, not another man's; unless in case of extremity before mentioned; for
otherwise, of goods evil gotten, or wrongfully detained, not alms, but Luke
19. 8.
restitution must be made.

How much must we give? How much must be given.


We must 2 Cor. 9. 6. Gal. 6. 7. Prove. 11. 25.
sow liberally, that we may reap also liberally, notwithstanding in the
quantity and proportion of alms respect must be had;

1. To the Luke 3. 11. 1 Cor. 16. 2.
ability of the giver, who is not bound so to give, as utterly to 2 Cor. 8. 13.
impoverish himself, and to make himself of a Acts 20. 25.
giver, a receiver (saving that in a common and extreme necessity of the
Church, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2. 9 Luke 12. 35.
every one must be content to abate out of his revenue, that the rest may not
perish; and some whose hearts God shall move, may Act. 4. 34, 35 with Acts 5. 4.
voluntarily, and commendably, sell all, and put it into the common stock:)
yea, it is unlawful so to give unto some one good use, as to 1 Timothy 5. 8.
disable our selves for the service of the Commonwealth, Church, or Saints in
general, or for the relief of our family, or kindred in special.

Secondly, to the condition of the receiver, that his 2 Cor. 9. 12. Job 31. 17,
18, etc. Iam. 2. 15, 16.
necessity may be supplied, not as to make him of a receiver, a giver; for this
is to give a patrimony, not an alms, and belongs rather to Justice, binding
men to provide for those of their own household, then to mercy.

To whom must we give? To whom alms must be given.


To such Matthew. 5. 41. Romans 12. 20.
as are in want, with this difference,

First, in present extremity, we must preserve life in whomsoever, Luke 10. 33*
with Ioh. 4. 9.
without enquiring who and what a one the party be.

Secondly, in Psalm. 41. 1.
cases admitting deliberation, we must confine our alms to such as God has
made Deuteronomy. 15 7. 11 Lev. 25. 35.
poor, as Orphans, Aged, Blind, Lame, the trembling hand, etc. wherein such
gifts are most commendable as extend unto perpetuity, as Luke 7. 5.
the erecting, or endowing of Churches, 2 King. 6. 1. etc. 2 Chro 34. 22.
Schools of good learning, Ioh. 5. 2, 3. 9
Hospitalls, etc. But as for such as turn begging into an art, or occupation,
they are by order to be 2 These. 3. 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 5. 8. Mat. 15. 5, 6.
compelled to work for their maintenance, which is the Deuteronomy. 15. 7. What order
must be observed in giving.
best and greatest alms.

What order must we observe in giving?

We must begin with such as are nearest to us in regard of domestical, civil,
or Christian neighborhood (according as the laws of Nature, Nations, and
religion direct us) unless other circumstances, as the extremity of want, or
Gal 6. 10.
the indignity of the person to be relieved do dispense: and so proceed to
such 1 Kings 17. 13.
as are further off, according as our ability can extend.

What are the times and places fittest for those duties?

For public alms, the fittest 1 Cor. 16. 2.
time is, when we meet together for the solemn worship of God; likewise the
fittest Luke 21. 1. Job 31. 16. Prove. 3. 28.
place, where provision is made for public Collections: For private, when and
wheresoever the necessity of our poor brother offerth it self.

With what affection must we do Almsdeeds? With what affections alms must
be given.


1. With pity and compassion on our needy brother, Psalm. 112. 4.

2. With humility and secrecy, not seeking praise from men, but approving our
selves to God, Matthew. 6. 1, etc.

3. With cheerfulness, Romans 12. 8. because God loves a cheerful giver.

4. With simplicity, not respecting our selves, but the glory of God, and the
good of our fellow members, Romans 12. 8. 2 Cor. 8. 4, 5.

How many ways may almsdeeds be performed?

Not only by giving; but also,

Deuteronomy. 15. 8. Mat. 5. 42.
First, by lending to such as are not able to Luke 6. 36. Psalm. 37. 26.
lend to us again, (some being no less relieved by lending, then others by
gift) provided we take Exodus 22. 25.
nothing for the loan, yea in some cases either Neh. 5. 11.
remit part of the loan, or commit it into the hands of our poor brother,
Luke 6 35.
without assurance to receive from him the principal again.

Secondly, by selling Prove. 1. 26.
when we do not only bring forth the commodity, as of corn, etc. which others
keep in; but also in a merciful commiseration of our poor brother abate
something of the extreme price.

Thirdly, by forbearing Nehem. 5. 18.
whatsoever is our right in case of great necessity.

What fruit may we expect of this duty? The fruits of Almsdeeds. 2 Chro. 2^.
14.


Not to merit thereby at the hands of God: But yet,

1. To make God our debtor, Prove. 19. 17. according to his gracious promises;
who also in Christ will acknowledge and requite it at the last day, Mat. 10.
42. and 25. 35. 2 Timothy 1. 18.

2. To seal the truth of our Religion, 1 Samuel 1. 27.

3. To assure us of salvation, Heb. 6. 9, 10. 1 John 3. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 19.

4. To make amends to man for former covetousness and cruelty, Dan. 4. 24.
Luke 19. 8.

5. To sanctify our store, Luke 11. 41. and bring a blessing on our labors,
Deuteronomy. 15. 10. yea and upon our posterity after us, Psalm. 112. 2. and 37. 16. 2 Timothy 1. 16.

We have spoken at large of the participation of the grace of Christ, and the
benefits of the Gospel: Now we are come unto the means whereby God does
effect these things.

Show therefore how and in what manner God does offer and communicate the
Covenant of Grace unto mankind?

By vocation or calling, Of Vocation.
Romans 8. 30. Heb. 3. 1. when God, by the means of his Word and Spirit,
acquainting men with his gracious purpose of salvation by Christ, inviteth them
to come unto him, Hos. 2. 14. and revealing unto them his Covenant of grace,
Mat. 11. 27. and 16. 17. John 14. 21. Psalm 25. 14. brings them out of
darkness to light, Acts 26. 18.

Is this Calling of one sort only?

No: External.
there is an external gathering common to all, together with some light of the
Spirit, and certain fruits of the same, attained unto by some that are not
heirs of the promise: for many are called with this outward, and ineffectuall
calling, who are not chosen, Isa. 48. 12. Mat. 22. 14.

And there is an internal and effectual calling, Internal.
peculiar to those few that are elect; whereby unfaigned faith, and true
repentance is wrought in the heart of Gods chosen; and God (become in Christ
their Father) does not only outwardly by his Word invite, but inwardly also,
and powerfully by his Spirit allure and win their hearts to cleave to him
inseparably unto salvation, Genesis 9. 27. Psalm. 25. 14. and 60. 6. 5. 4. Joel. 2.
32. Acts 2. 39.

How do both these kinds of Callings differ?

Howsoever we are to judge charitably of all outwardly called, 1 Cor. 1. 2.
because who among them is also inwardly called, is only known to God, 2 Timothy
2. 19. yet does this outward calling differ from the inward.

1. In that it is wrought only by outward means, and common illumination, Heb.
4. 2. without the spirit of regeneration, Jude verse. 19. or any portion of
saving faith, Luke 8. 13.

2. In that they are admitted only to an outward and temporary league of
formal profession, Acts 8. 13. Romans 9 4, 5. not to that entire fellowship with
Christ required unto salvation, 1 John 2. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9.

What are the means which God has appointed to call us by? Means of
Vocation; Inward, Outward.


They are partly inward, and partly outward, 1 These. 5. 19, 20. Act. 10. 44.

What are the inward?

The Spirit of God, Inward.
which is given by the outward things, Gal. 3. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 1. 14.

What mean you by the Spirit of God in this place? The Spirit of God.


That power of God which works in the hearts of men things which the natural
discourse of reason is not able to attain unto.

Being incomprehensible, how may we come to some understanding and sense of it?

By the things whereunto it is compared:

1. To wind, Acts 2. to show the mavelous power of it in operation.

2. To oil, Heb. 1. 9. that is of a hot nature, that pierces and suppleth.

3. To water, John 4. that cools, scowreth, and cleanses.

4. To fire, Mat. 3. Acts 2. that severeth dross and good metal.

How is the operation of it?

Diverse; as softening and hardening, enlightening and darkening, which it
works after a diverse manner, by the word in the hearts of the elect and
reprobate, according to the good pleasure of Gods secret will only, and after
that, according to the good pleasure of his revealed will; so that the lawful
use thereof is rewarded with a gracious increase of blessing, and the abuse
punished with further hardness to condemnation.

What then does the Spirit work in the wicked?

Finding them hard, it hardens them more to their further condemnation.

What does the same Spirit work in the godly?

Faith, whereby they take hold on Christ with all his benefits, Ephesians. 2. 8.

What are the outward things which God has given to call us by?

They are either common to the whole world, or proper to the Church.

What are the things common to the whole world?

Gods works not unprofitably given, although not sufficient to salvation.

Is not the knowledge of the wisdom, power and goodness of God, in the
Creation and government of the Heaven and Earth, with the things that are in
them, sufficient to make us wise to salvation?

No:

First, it serves rather for further condemnation without the Word, Romans 1. 19,
20, 21.

Secondly, as by and with the Word, the due meditation and consideration of
Gods works is a good help to further us in Religion, and in the graces of Gods
Spirit, 1 Cor. 1. 21, 22.

Since then God does not reveal the Covenant of grace, Of the Church visible.
nor afford sufficient means to salvation to the whole world, but only to the
Church: explain here what you mean by the Church.

We speak not here of that part of Gods Church which is triumphant in glory,
who being in perfect fruition have no need of these outward means of communion
with him, Rev. 21. 22, 23. But the Subject here is the Church militant: and
that we consider also as visible in the parts of it, consisting of diverse
assemblies and companies of believers, making profession of the same common
faith: Howbeit many times by persecution forced to hide themselves from the eye
of the world, Rev. 12. 14.
and happily by the rage of the enemy so scattered, that as in the days of
Elias, 1 Kings 19. 10. they can hardly be known, or have intercourse between
themselves, and so the exercise of the public ordinances may for a time be
suspended among them.

But are none to be accounted members of this Church, but such as are true
believers; and so inseparably united unto Christ their head?

Truly and properly none other, 1 John 2. 19. Howbeit, because God does use
outward means with the inward, for the gathering of his Saints; and calls
them as well to outward profession among themselves, Acts 2. 42. Cant. 1. 7. as
to inward fellowship with his Son, whereby the Church becomes visible; hence it
is that so many as partake of the outward means, and join with the Church in
league of visible profession; are therefore in humane judgment accounted
members of the true Church, and Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1. 1. until the Lord
(who only knows who are his) do make known the contrary, as we are taught
in the Parables of the Tares, Matthew. 13. 24. and Matthew. 13. 47, etc. And of the
draw-net, and the threshing floor, where lies both good corn and chafe,
Matthew. 3.

Has Christ then his Church visible upon earth?

Yea, throughout the world, (as we have shown) in the particular congregations
of Christians, Romans 3. 3. called to the profession of the true faith and
obedience of the Gospel: In which visible assemblies, and not else where, the
true members of the true Church invisible on earth are to be sought, Romans 11.
5. and unto which therefore all that seek for salvation must gladly join
themselves, Esa. 60. 4.

Does the visible Church consist of good and bad, or of good only?

It consists of good and bad, as at the beginning we may see it did in Cain
and Abel; whereupon our Savior compares the Church to a net, in which are
fishes good and bad; and to a field, which in it has wheat and cockle, Matthew.
13. 24. 47, etc.

What are the marks and infallible notes, whereby to discern a true visible
Church with which we may safely join?

First, and principally, the truth of Doctrine which is professed, and the
sincere preaching of the Word, The infallible marks of a true visible Church.
together with the due administration of the Sacraments, according to the
commandments of Christ our Savior, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

Secondarily, the right order which is kept, with sincere and conscionable
obedience yielded to the Word of God.

Why do you make the first to be the principal mark of visible profession?

Because they are the only outward means appointed of God for the calling and
gathering of his Saints, and which prove the Church to be a pillar of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15.

Can the Church want this, and yet be a Church?

Yea; it may want these in the time of war or persecution; and in such a time
we may safely join our selves to a company which allows of the public
Ministry of the Word of God, and administration of the Sacraments; howsoever
the exercise of the same by reason of these Garboiles are wanting for a time.

Are we to join with all Churches that have these marks?

Yea; neither must we separate from them any farther then they separate from
Christ, Phil. 1. 18. Cant. 1. 5. as shall be showed.

What say you to the other notes that are commonly given of the Church?

Either they are accidental, and in great part separable, or utterly
impertinent and forged, for the upholding of the Romish Synagogue.

But is not Antiquity a certain note of the Church?

No; for errors are very ancient, and the Church when it began, was a Church;
yet had no antiquity.

Is not multitude a note?

No; for Christ's flock is a little flock, Luke 12. 32. and Antichrist very
great, Apoc. 13. 3, 4* 8. and 18. 3.

Are not miracles a mark of the Church?

No; for beside that wicked people may work them, Mat. 7. 22, 23. the Church
of Christ has been without miracles, and the coming of Antichrist is foretold
to be with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 These. 2. 9. Apoc. 13.
13, 14. Such as those are whereof the Papists brag and boast of, which are
indeed no true miracles.

May the Church err and be corrupted, or fall, and become no Church?

First, Whether the Curch may err.
we must distinguish of errors: some are fundamental, such as raze the
foundation of the Church, (as the denying that Christ came in the flesh, or the
denying of the resurrection) and in these the Church cannot err; others are of
less moment, and in these it may err.

Secondly, the Catholic Church, considered in her true members, can never
utterly fall, Matthew. 16. 18. Psalm 1. 6. 1 These. 5. 24. Howsoever no
Congregation be so pure, that it may be said at any time to be free from all
corruption, Cant. 1. 4. or so constant, but that at times it may be shaken in
the very foundation of truth, as it may appear by the Church of Corinth,
Galatia, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 1.

Thirdly, the Church being considered with respect of the place, God does not
always continue a succession of true believers within the same limits and
borders; and hence we say, that diverse Churches are fallen, as those of Asia,
etc. Neither is any place so privileged, but that for sin the Candlestick
may in time be thence removed, Rev. 2. 5.

How may we judge of a Church corrupt, or ceasing to be a Church?

Where God utterly taking away the means of his Word and Worship, Acts 13. 46.
has apparently given the bill of divorce, Esa. 50. 1. there are we not to
acknowledge any Church at all, as at this day in Jerusalem, once the holy City:
But where these means are yet continued, we are to acknowledge a Church of
Christ, Rev. 2. 12, 13. howsoever more or less corrupt, according to the
greater or less abuse of Gods Word and Worship.

Since Churches may be so diversely corrupted, from which, and how far are we
to separate?

From Churches mortally sick of heresy, In what cases we may separate from a
corrupt Church
Tit. 3. 10, 11. or Idolatry, as it were a contagious plague or leprosy, we
are to separate, Rev. 18. 4. Howbeit whiles there is yet any life, rather from
the scab or sore then from the body; that is, from the prevailing faction,
maintaining fundamental errors, and forcing to idolatrous worship: Such is
our separation from the present Church of Rome, not from such therein, who
either meaning well in general, are ignorant of the depth of Satan, Rev. 2.
24. or secretly dissent from the damnable corruptions, 1 Kings. 19. 18. with
whom, as a body yet retaining life, we desire to join, Phil. 1. 18. so far
as we may with safety from the foresaid contagion.

Are we to continue fellowship with all other Churches, not so deadly and
dangerously corrupt?

From Churches holding the foundation in substance of faith and worship, though
otherwise not free from blemish, we are not to separate, 1 Kings 15. 14. and
22. 43. farther then in dislike and refusal of that wherein they do apparently
separate from Christ, in respect either of manners, doctrine, or form of
public worship.

What are the Enemies of the Church?

Besides these spiritual wickednesses which fight against our souls, Of the
enemies of the Church.
there are outward enemies also that visibly oppose the Church of Christ.

How does Christ defend his Church against those enemies?

This is partly to be done by the Civil Magistrate, to whom it belongs by
Civil means to maintain the Church in that truth and liberty which Christ
has given unto it: and partly by the breath of Christ's own mouth in the
preaching of the Gospel, yet not perfectly but by the brightness of his
coming in the latter day.

What is the estate of the Church when these enemies prevail?

The Church is often oppressed and darkened so by them, that it does partly
degenerate, and is partly hid, but never wholly destroyed, nor altogether
invisible.

Is not the Church always visible in her parts?

The persons are always visible, for Christ has, and ever had from the
beginning, his Church visible upon earth, Romans 11. 1, 2, 3, 4. that is, some
companies of Believers, making profession of the same common faith: yet the
persecution may be such, that the visible Church may not appear thoroughly for
a time, the professors being forced thereby to hide themselves from the eye of
the world, Rev. 12. 14. and happily by the rage of the enemy so scattered, that
as in the days of Elias, 1 Kings 10. 14, 18. they can hardly be known, or
have intercourse between themselves; and hence it is that the Church is
compared to the Moon, sometimes in the full, sometimes in the wane.

What distinction is thereof the members of the visible Church?

Generally, they are all of the family of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 15. which as sheep
of his flock are to hear his voice, and to follow him, Joh. 10. 2, 3, 4. But
more especially, out of these Christ the chief Priest and Shepherd has
instituted some to be above, some to be under, ordaining some to have
pre-eminence and government, others to be governed and guided by them, Heb. 13.
17.

Whom has Christ appointed to be Governors and guiders over the rest?

1. Church Officers and Ministers, Of the Governors of the Church.
appointed to teach and govern the flock of Christ, and to feed it with the
wholesome food of the Word and Sacrament, 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Luke 12.
2. Joh. 21. 15. 1 Pet. 5. 2.

2. Princes and Civil Magistrates, whom Christ has charged to see to the
ways of his household, and so to rule and order it outwardly, that all, both
Ministers and People, do their office and duty, even in things concerning God,
Psalm. 78. 71, 72. 2 Chro. 35. 3. and 34. 32.

Having now spoken of the Church, Things proper to the visible Church.
and the members of it, what are those things which are proper to the visible
Church?

The Word, The Word: Sacraments. Censures.
Romans 10. 17. John 5. 25. and 6 68. and the dependents thereof, viz.
Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. and Censures, Matthew. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 5. of
which in their proper places.

What is the Word?

That part of the outward Ministry which consists in the delivery of
Doctrine, Of the Word. 1 Chro. 17. 7. Acts 2. 40, 41. and 11. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 13.
John 17. 10. Ephesians. 1. 23. Rom 3. 19. and and 7. 9, 10. Gal. 3 22. 23. Acts 2.
37 Matthew. 23. 28. Gal. 2. 18, 19. Heb. 4. 16. Hosea 14. 2, 3. Romans 8. 13, 26.
and this is the ordinary instrument which God uses in begetting of faith.

What order is there used in the delivery of the Word for the begetting of
faith?

1. The Covenant of the Law is urged to make sin and the punishment thereof
known, whereupon the sting of conscience pricketh the heart with a sense of
Gods wrath, and makes a man utterly to despair of any ability in himself to
obtain everlasting life. After this preparation, the promises of the Gospel
are propounded, whereupon the sinner conceiving hope of pardon, sueth to God
for mercy, and particularly applies to his own soul those comfortable promises
which in the Word is propounded.

What is the inward means for the begetting of faith?

The holy Spirit of God.

Is it not lawful to separate the inward means from the outward?

In no case: for those things which God has joined together no man may
separate, Matthew. 19.

How does it appear that God has joined both these means together?

Because he says by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 59. 21. that this is the Covenant
that he will make with his people, to put his Spirit and Word in them, and in
all the posterity of the Church: The Apostle in like manner, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
20. joyneth these two together, Quench not the Spirit, and despise not
prophesying.

It would seem by these words of the Apostle, that the Spirit of Adoption and
Sanctification, proper to the faithful, may be lost, whilst he exhorts that
we should not quench the Spirit?

By no means, but as God does assure the faithful of their continuance in him,
so he does declare by these exhortations, that the only means whereby we should
nourish this holy fire in us, is to take heed to the preaching of the Word.

Is by the word prophesying only meant the preaching of the Word?

No, but by a figurative speech, all those outward means whereby God uses to
give his holy Spirit; as are the Sacraments, and the discipline of the Church,
over and above the preaching of the Word; which being principal of all, is
here set down for the rest.

Why does the Apostle set the Spirit before the preaching of the Word, meant by
Prophecy, considering that by and after preaching of the Word, the Lord gives
his Spirit?

1. Because the Spirit is the chief of the two, the Word being but the
instrument whereby the Spirit of God works.

2. For that the work of the Spirit is more general, and reaches to some to
whom the preaching of the Word cannot reach.

3. For that the Word is never profitable without the Spirit, but the Spirit
may be profitable without the Word, as after will appear.

What do you learn of this, that the means of Gods Spirit and Word are
usually conjoined together?

That no man is to content himself with this fantasy, to think that he has
the Spirit, and so to neglect the Word, because they go together.

Who are by this condemned?

The Anabaptists, Papists, and Libertines, which ascribe to the Spirit that
which they like, although wickedly, seeing the Spirit does not ordinarily
suggest any thing to us, but that which it teaches us out of the word, Ioh.
14. 26.

What other sort of men are here condemned?

The Stancharists, who esteem the Word to be fit to chatechise, and to
innitiate or enter us in the rudiments of Religion: But too base to exercise
our selves continually in it; whereas the Prophets and Apostles, most excellent
men, did notwithstanding exercise themselves in the Scriptures, Mar. 4. 1, 2,
etc. compared with Isa. 2. 1, 2, etc. 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16.

Are none saved without hearing of the Word?

Yes: For first children which are within the Covenant, have the Spirit of God,
without the ordinary means of the Word and Sacraments, Mat. 2. Romans 8. 9, 14.
Secondly, some also of age in places where these means are not to be had.
Thirdly, some also which living in places where such means are, yet have no
capacity to understand them, as some natural fools, mad men, or deaf borne,
to show that God is not tied to means.

What must we here take heed of?

That we presume not upon this, since that notwithstanding this secret working
of God; yet it is as impossible to come to heaven, if having the means and
capacity of receiving them we contemn the means, as it is impossible to have a
harvest, where no seed time has gone before, Mat. 13. or to have children
without the Parents seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. seeing amongst such the Spirit of God
works faith only by the preaching of the word: Indeed where the Lord places
not the preaching of the Word, there he can and does work faith without it;
but where he has placed it, he will not do it without it. In times and places
where Popery has prevailed, many were, (and may be so at this day in Spain
and Rome) converted by the very bare reading of the Word, yea without the
reading of the Word; but not so among them, who have or may have it, either by
going from home to it, or fetching it home to them.

How is the diverse working of Gods Spirit by the Ministry of the Word set out
unto us?

By the parable of the seed, three parts whereof fell into barren and
unprofitable ground, one into good and fruitful, Mat. 13. 3. and 9. 18, 19, 24.

Are not three parts of the four in the Church likely to be condemned by this
Parable?

No, in no case: For it is both curious and uncomfortable Doctrine, it being a
far different thing to have three sorts of wicked men in four sorts, and to
have thrice as many of one sort.

What is the first thing you observe here common to the godly with the wicked?
What things are common between godly and wicked hearers.


To understand something of the word of grace, and to give consent unto the
same.

If they understand it, how is it that the first sort of unfruitful hearers
are said not to understand, Mat. 13. 19.

They have some understanding, but it is said to be none; because it is no
clear knowledge, (whereof they can give a reason out of the Word) nor
effectual, which arises from hence; for that they come without affection, and
go away without care.

What are we here to learn?

1. To take heed not to deceive our selves in a bare profession, or light
knowledge of the Word; and that we come to hear it with zeal, and depart with
care to profit.

2. To beware also of the great subtilty of Satan, who as a swift bird,
snatcheth the Word out of the unprepared hearts, even as also does a thief,
which takes away whatsoever he finds loose.

What observe you in the second sort, common to the godly with the wicked?

To have some kind of delight in the Word, and a glimpse of the life to come,
Mat. 13. 20. Heb. 4. 5.

What difference is there between a godly joy and this?

1. This is like the blaze of the fire, and is never full and sufficient;
whereas the godly joy is above that of gold and silver.

2. The wickeds delight is for another purpose then is the godlies: For it is
only to satisfy a humor, desiring to know something more then others; whereas
the godlies joy is to know further, to the end they may practice.

Why is it said they have no root? Mat. 13. 21.

Because, though they understand the things, yet are they not grounded upon the
reasons and testimonies of the Word; nor transformed into the obedience of the
Gospel, and therefore when persecution comes, they wither away.

Proceed to the third sort.

They are they which keep it (it may be with some suffering of persecution) yet
the thorns of covetousness, or of worldly delights, overgrow the good seed,
and make it unfruitful.

So much of the three sorts of unfruitful soil, and therein, of the things
common to the godly with the wicked: What are the things proper to the godly,
Things proper to godly hearers.
signified by the good and fruitful ground?

1. The receiving of the seed in a good heart.

2. The bringing forth of fruit with patience, Luke. 8. 15.

What is there meant by receiving the seed into a good heart?

By the seed is meant the word of promise, whereby God has said he will be
merciful to us in Christ: By the receiving it into a good heart, is meant the
receiving it by faith in Christ.

Where it is said that the Word must be received into a good heart, it may
seem that a man has a good heart before he receives that seed?

Doubtless, naturally they are all alike, and there is never a barrel better
herring (as they say) but as the face answers the face in the glass: so one
of the sons of Adam is like another in their nativity they have by their
parents) till they be regenerated: And therefore it is called a good heart, in
respect of Gods changing of it by the ingraffed word, James 1. 21. and by these
words he puts difference between the fruits of the three former, and the
fruits of this last: For that there is no difference in the outward show of
fruits; but only in regard that those fruits proceed from an unclean heart;
and these from a heart that is cleansed.

How may we know that we have true faith, and so approve our selves that we are
good ground?

By good fruits, which are the effects of faith.

What are the effects of faith?

Reconciliation, and sanctification, Romans 8. 1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 2. 6. Col. 2. 1, 2,
3. the fruits of the former are set down, Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. The fruits of
the latter are repentance and new obedience, which have been already declared.

What special tokens observe you out of the former, whereby we may discern a
justifying faith from the faith of the worldlings?

The end of our faith being the salvation of our souls, How justifying faith
differs from the faith of worldlings.
which shall be at the day of judgment, if we can willingly forsake father and
mother, sister and brother, wife and children, and abandon the world, and say,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, we may assure our selves we are in a happy case.

What special marks of justifying faith observe you out of the latter?

1. To be zealous of Gods glory.

2. To love Gods children; for these be the special effects of our holy faith.

What is the Word further compared with, and likened unto?

The Apostle Peter, 1 cap. 2. ver. 1, 2. compares it unto milk: As newborn
babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby; teaching
us, that the Word is not only of use for our begetting unto God; but for our
daily nourishment, that we may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Peter 3. 18. so it is called a light, a lantern, and is
appointed to be our guide, our Counselor, our Comforter, etc.

Is this meant only of the Word preached?

Doubtless, the blessing of God both in an especial manner wait upon that
ordinance, when it is said; That when Christ ascended up on high, he gave gifts
to men, some Apostles, (Ephesians. 4. 12.) and some Pastors and teachers, for the
gathering of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ; yet withal,
the reading of the Word with Prayer and diligence, is of singular use and
benefit, and commended unto us by our Savior. Search the Scriptures, John 5.
39. and how read thou? Luke 10. 26. and by the example of the Bereans, who
searched the Scriptures daily, and examined the things they heard in the
public ministry of them, Acts 16. 11.

So much of the Word.

What are the dependances annexed to it?

Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. and Censures, Matthew. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 5. the one,
sealing the Promises; the other, the threatenings of the Gospel.

What are Sacraments? Of the Sacraments.


The seals of the Promises of God in Christ, wherein by certain outward
signs, and sacramental actions confirming the same, commanded by God, and
delivered by his Ministers, Christ Jesus with all his saving graces is
signified, conveyed and sealed unto the heart of a Christian. For Sacraments
are seals annexed by God to the word of the Covenant of grace, Romans 4. 11, 1
Cor. 11. 23. to instruct, assure, and possess us of our part in Christ and his
benefits, Gal: 3. 27. and to bind us to all thankful obedience unto God in
him, Romans 6 4.

Was not Gods Word sufficient? What need have we of Sacraments? The Sacraments
of great use.


This argues our infirmity, and manifests Gods great love and mercy; who for
the furthering of our understanding, has added visible signs to his word,
that our ears might not only be informed of the truth, but our eyes also
might more plainly see it; and for the greater strengthening of our faith,
vouchsafes to confirm the covenant of grace unto us, not only by promise,
but also by outward seals annexed thereunto. The like means had Adam himself
in Paradise to put him in remembraece of Gods will: And if he in his perfection
needed a token of Gods favor, (which was the tree of life) how much more we
that are corrupt and sinful? if we were Spirits or Angels, we should not need
these helps; but since God knowing our frailties, and what is best for us, has
given us these seals to our further comfort, let us use the receipt of so
skillful a Physician, unless we will hasten our own deaths.

How does God by the Sacraments assure us of his mercies in Christ?

By the exhibiting to the worthy receiver by such outward signs, (whether
Elements, or Actions) as himself for the relief of our weakness has
prescribed, whole Christ, God and men, with all his benefits, 1 Cor. 10. 4. in
whom all the promises of God are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

Do they seal nothing else but the promise of God unto us?

Yes, they seal our promise unto God, that we take him only for our God and
Redeemer, whom alone by faith we rest on, and whom we will obey.

How do they bind us unto God?

We receiving them as pledges of his infinite love in Christ, do thereby
profess our selves bound to express our thankfulness by all duties to his
Majesty, Col. 2. 6, 7. and for his sake one to another, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5.

Describe yet more largely what a Sacrament is.

A Sacrament is an Ordinance of God, What a Sacrament is.
wherein by giving and receiving of outward Elements, according to his will,
the promises of the Covenant of grace, made in the blood of Christ being
represented, exhibited and applied unto us, are further signed and sealed
betwixt God and man. Or it is an action of the whole Church, wherein by
certain visible signs, and outward things done according to Gods institution,
inward things being betokened, Christ with all his benefits is both offered
unto us, and received by us: offered (I say) to all in the Church, but
exhibited only to the faithful, for the strengthening of their faith in the
eternal Covenant, and the bringing them more effectually to the practice of
Gods Commandments, Exodus 12. 16. Luke 1. 59. and 3. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 23. Mat.
26. 26. Romans 4. 19. and 6. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

Why call you it Action?

Because it is not a bare sign alone, but a work, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.

Why call you it an action of the whole Church?

Because it is a public action, and appertains to the whole Church; and
therefore ought to be done in the presence of the Congregation, by the example
of John, Matthew. 3. 11, 12. and commanded of Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 20, 22. it
being a greater indignity for the Sacraments to be administered privately, then
for the civil judgment, which is open and public: That we say nothing of the
sacrifices under the Law, which were not so excellent as these; and yet it was
not lawful to offer them in private: which reproves the disorder of the
Papists, who turn the Communion into a private Mass, and minister the Lords
Supper to one alone, without the presence of the Congregation.

But may not the Sacraments be so administered upon necessity; as namely to a
sick man ready to depart out of this life?

There is no such necessity; for a man believing wanting that opportunity of
coming to the Lords Supper, wants not the effect thereof; seeing the Lord
promised by Ezekiel, that he would be a Tabernacle to his people being
banished from it, Ezekiel. 37. 27. And therefore the want of the Sacraments does
not hurt, when with convenience a man cannot enjoy them: but the contempt, or
neglect of them, when they may conveniently be come unto.

What the^ is the fittest time and place for the administration of the
Sacraments?

The fittest time is the Lords, or some other day of public meeting: The most
convenient place is the Church, and usual place of the assembly of the
Congregation.

Did not Abraham minister the Sacrament of Circumcision in his private house?

His house was at that time the Church of God, and therefore not private; and
so in the time of persecution, the godly did oft-times meet in Barnes, and such
obscure places, which were indeed public: because when the Church of God were
there, the house or place availed nothing to make it public or private: even
as wheresoever the Prince is, there is the Court also said to be, though it
were in a poor Cottage.

What difference is there between a Sacrament and a Sacrifice?

In a Sacrifice there is an offering made to God; in a Sacrament, there is an
offer made by God to us. In the Sacrifices Christ was signified as given for
us, in the Sacraments as given to us, the Sacrifices only signs, the
Sacraments seals also.

Who is the Author of a Sacrament?

God alone; because he only can bestow those graces which are sealed in a
Sacrament.

How does God ordain a Sacrament?

By his Word.

How many parts of Gods Word are there, whereby he does institute and and
ordain a Sacrament?

Two.

First, a Commandment to do it.

Secondly, a promise of a blessing upon the right using of it.

Was not the Rainbow a Sacrament, being a sign ordained by God?

No; for though it were a sign, yet it was no sign of salvation by Christ.

What is the matter and substance of every Sacrament?

One and the same Jesus Christ, although diversely communicated in diverse
Sacraments; and in some more forcible then in others; because of some elements
communicating with, or taking hold of, or reaching to more of our senses.

What things then are required in a Sacrament?

Three.

First, the outward signs, and Sacramental actions concerning the same.

Secondly, the inward thing signified thereby, viz. Christ Jesus with his
saving graces, and spiritual actions concerning the same.

Thirdly, a similitude betwixt them both: As in Baptism for example, that as
water does wash the body, so does the blood of Christ wash away the spots of
the soul.

What signs are used in Sacraments?

Some only representing, as water, bread, and wine; some applying, as washing,
eating, drinking, and such like.

What are the things signified?

First, Christ Jesus and his merrits; and secondly, the applying of the same
unto us in particular.

Wherein does the signs of the things signified differ?

1. In Nature.

2. In the manner of receiving.

3. In the parties which do receive them.

4. In the necessity of the receiving of them.

Wherein do they agree?

In this, that the sign does so fitly represent the things signified, thereby,
that the mind of a Christian is drawn by the sign to consider of the things
signified.

What is then the Sacramental union betwixt the signs and the things
signified?

Such as betwixt a sealed will, and the things conveyed in the same; From
whence it is, that the names, effects, and properties of the one are given to
the other.

What is the cause that moved the Lord to grace the outward signs in the
Sacraments, with the names of the things signified?

The outward elements have the names of the spiritual things they set forth,
1. Because of their fit proportion and agreement, in regard of the resemblance
and similitude of the elements and the things signified, in which respect they
are called signs. 2. To show the inseparable conjunction of the things
signified with the sign, in the worthy receiver; in which regard they are
called Seals, as in the person of Christ his two natures are so inseparably
united, that often times the properties and effects of the one are attributed
to the other.

What is the ground of this Sacramental union?

In general the institution of Christ, whereby fit things are appointed so to
be used, with a promise annexed. In special, the applying of that word unto
certain special signs with prayer; in particular, and unto me, the ground is
my reverent and worthy receiving.

What is the use of Sacraments?

God has ordained them, The use of Sacraments.
to the end that by comparing and conferring the outward things with the
inward, they might help,

1. Our understanding, in which regard they are as it were images and glasses,
Gal. 3. 1.

2. Our remembrance, in which respect they are Monuments, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor.
11. 24.

3. And especially the persuasion of our hearts, by reason whereof they are
seals and pledges, Romans 4. 11. for they are appointed by God to strengthen us
in the promises of salvation, which God has not only made to us in word, but
also confirmed the same by writ: and lest that we should any ways doubt (as
naturally we are inclined) he has set to his seals, according to the manner
of men, that nothing might be lacking which should increase our strength.

What Doctrine is here to be gathered?

1. What root of blindness, of forgetfulness, and especially hardness of
heart to believe, is in us, that the Word and Oath of God is not sufficient to
pluckup, but that we must have such aides.

2. The mercy of God, that applies himself to our weakness.

3. What miserable men they are that refuse the Sacraments.

Repeat the principal ends for which God has instituted the Sacraments?

To help our insight as clear glasses, The ends why Sacraments are instituted.
to releeve our memories as lasting monuments, and to confirm our faith as
most certain seals and pledges, from whence they become our bonds of
obedience, and the marks and badges of our profession: so the ends for which
they are appointed are these four.

1. The clearing of our knowledge.

2. The helping of our memories.

3. The strengthening of our faith.

4. The quickening of our obedience.

How may we more clearly consider of those things which are ministered in the
Sacraments?

By considering distinctly the things given and received, and the persons
giving and receiving.

What are the things given and received?

They are partly outward, and partly inward.

What are the outward?

The visible creatures, ordained for signs and figures of Christ, as under the
time of the Gospel, Water, Bread, and Wine.

Why has God made choice of these creatures?

Both in respect they are for their natural properties most fit to represent
the spiritual things, as also for that they are most generally used of all
Nations of the world.

What are we to learn from hence?

The wonderful wisdom of God, that has chosen base and common things for so
high and singular mysteries, whereas he might have chosen things more rare, and
of greater price, to set out such excellent benefits as are offered to us in
the Sacraments, wherein there is great difference between the time of the Law
and of the Gospel.

What are the inward things?

The invisible and spiritual graces, namely, Christ with all his benefits.

What learn you of this?

Not to stick to the outward elements, but to lift up our hearts unto God,
accounting the elements as a Ladder whereby to climb up to those celestial
things which they represent.

So much of the things, what are the persons?

The Giver and Receiver. The persons that are actors in Sacraments, and their
actions.


How many Givers are there?

Two; the outward, giving the outward, and the inward, giving the inward things.

Who is the inward giver?

God himself, even the holy Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost.

What are the actions of God in a Sacrament?

They are principally two.

1. To offer and reach forth Christ and his graces.

2. To apply them to the hearts of the faithful Communicant.

Who are the outward Givers?

The Ministers especially, representing unto us the Lord, whose Stewards they
are, 1 Cor. 4. 1.

What is the Ministers office herein?

To consecrate the elements, and then to distribute them.

Wherein consists the consecration of the elements?

Partly, in declaring the institution of the Sacraments, and partly in going
before the Congregation in prayer unto God: First, in praising God, who has
ordained such means for the relief of our weakness: Then in suing to God that
he would be pleased to make those means effectual for which end they were
ordained.

Is not the substance changed of the elements by this consecration?

No verily; only the use is altered, in that they are separated from a common
to a holy use; which change and alteration continues only while the action is
in hand.

Does the Minister with the sign give the thing signified also?

No, he only dispenses the signs, but it is God that gives and dispenses
the things signified, Matthew. 3. 11.

Is God always present, to give the thing signified to all them that the
Minister gives the sign?

No not to all, for some in receiving the signs receive together with them
their own judgment, 1 Cor. 11 29. yet he is always ready to give the thing
signified to all those that are fit to receive the Sacraments; and to such
persons the signs and things signified are always conjoined.

Who are the persons that are to receive the Sacraments?

All Christians that are prepared thereunto.

Is there any special preparation required to the receiving of the Sacraments?

Yes verily: for seeing men ought to come with preparation to the hearing of
the Word alone, they ought much more to come when the Sacraments are
administered also, wherein God does offer himself more familiarly and visibly
to us.

What is the preparation that is required in them that come to receive the
Sacraments?

There is required in those that are of years of discretion, Of preparation to
the Sacraments.
to a worthy participation of the Sacraments, knowledge, faith, and feeling,
both in the Law, and in the Gospel.

Seeing no man is able to attain to the knowledge of the Law and the Gospel
perfectly, much less the simple and common people, tell me how far is this
knowledge, faith, and feeling necessary?

First, concerning the Law, it is necessary that the receiver of the Sacraments
be able to understand and believe the common corruption of all men, both in the
bitter root of original sin, and in the poisoned fruits thereof, together
with the curse of everlasting death due thereunto, and that he be able to apply
both these, that is, the sin and wages thereof, to himself.

Secondly, concerning the Gospel, that he be able (in some measure) to
understand the Covenant of Grace, which God in Christ has made with the sons
of men; and then that by faith he be able (in some measure) to apply the same
to himself.

What arises from this knowledge, faith, and feeling, to a further
preparation thereunto?

A true and earnest desire to be made partaker of the Sacraments, Matthew. 3. 13.
with a conscionable care to perform special duties in and after the action
of receiving. Acts 8. 36.
Luke 22. 15.


What duties in the action of receiving are to be performed?

First, Duties in the action of receiving.
a grave and reverent behavior, befitting such holy Mysteries.

Secondly, an attentive heedfulnesse in comparing the outward signs and
actions in the Sacraments, with the inward and spiritual things which they
betoken.

What duties are to be performed after the partaking of the Sacraments?

If we have a sense and feeling of the gracious work of God by them, Duties
after receiving.
we are to rejoice with thanksgiving; if not, we are to enter into judgment
with our selves, and to humble our selves for our want thereof. And though we
ought to be humbled, if we feel not the work of God in us, in or after the
Sacraments, as that which argues want of preparation before, or attention in
receiving of them, yet ought we not therefore to be altogether dismayed: for as
the sick man feels not the nourishment of his meat, because of his malady,
and yet notwithstanding is nourished; so it is in such faithful ones as do
not so sensibly feel the working of God in and by the Sacraments, through the
weakness of their faith, and although we cannot feel it immediately, yet
after (by the fruits thereof) we shall be able to discern of our profiting
thereby.

Has the administration of the Gospel been always after the same manner?

For substance it always has been the same, but in regard of the manner,
proper to certain times, it is distinguished into two kinds; the Old and the
New, Heb. 11. 2. 13. and 13. 18. Act. 10. 43. and 13. 11. Luke 16. 16. Joh. 1.
17. Heb. 11. and 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8.

What call you the old Testament? The Old Testament and the Sacraments of it.


That which was delivered unto the Fathers, to continue until the fullness of
time, wherein by the coming of Christ it was to be performed, Heb. 1. 1. and
9. 10. Act. 7. 44. 2 Cor. 3. 7. 11.

What are the properties of this Ministry?

First, the commandments of the Law were more largely, and the promises of the
Gospel more sparingly, and darkly propounded, the latter being more generally
and obscurely delivered, as the manifesting was the further off.

Secondly, the promises of things to come, were shadowed with a multitude of
types and figures, which when the truth should be exhibited, were to vanish
away, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33. Heb. 11. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 13. 18. Heb. 8. 13. 9. and 1.
8, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 3. 11. 13. Gal. 4. 3, 4. Col. 2. 16, 17.

What were the chiefest states and periods of this old Ministry?

The first, from Adam to Abraham; the second, from Abraham to Christ.

What were the special properties of the last of these two periods?

First, it was more specially restrained unto a certain Family and Nation.

Secondly, it had with it solemn repetition, and declaration of the first
covenant of the Law.

Thirdly, besides the ceremonies, which were greatly enlarged under Moses, it
had Sacraments also added unto it. Luke 1. 54, 55. Psalm. 44. 19. 26. Romans 9. 4.
Act. 13. 17. Deuteronomy. 4. 1. 6, 7, 8. and 37. 1. 6, 7, 8. 14. and 2. 26. 18, 19.
Joh. 1. 16, 17. Exodus 24. 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Romans 10. 5. Heb. 9. 1, 2, 3. Joh.
7. 22.

What were the ordinary Sacraments of this Ministry?

The Sacrament of admission into the Church was circumcision, instituted in the
days of Abraham; the other of continual preservation and nourishment, the
Paschall Lamb, instituted in time of Moses, Exodus 12. 48. Act. 7. 8. Joh. 7.
22. Genesis 17. 9, 10, Romans 4. 11. Col* 2. 11. Deuteronomy. 30. 6, 7, 8. Exodus 12. 3, 4.
Numb. 9. 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 16. 2. 1 Cor. 5. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 19 Joh. 9. 56. with Exodus
12. 46.

What is the new administration of the Gospel?

That which is delivered unto us by Christ, to continue unto the end of the
world, The new administration of the Gospel.
Joh. 1. 17. Heb. 1. 2. and 2. 3, 4. and 3. 5, 6. 1. Cor. 3. 11.

What are the properties thereof?

First, it is propounded indifferently to all people, whether they be Jews or
Gentiles, and in that respect is Catholic or universal.

Secondly, it is full of grace and truth, bringing joyful tidings unto
mankind, that whatsoever was formerly promised of Christ, is now accomplished,
and so in stead of the ancient types and shadows, the things themselves with a
large and clear declaration of all the benefits of the Gospel are exhibited.
Esa. 41. 1, 2, 3. and 68. 3, 4, 5. and 65. 12. and 66. 12 19, 20. Joh. 16. 10.
Mat. 18. 19, 20. Romans 15. 25 26. Ephel. 3. 5, 6 8, 9. Col. 1. 5, 6. Joh. 1. 17.
and 14. 21. Romans 1. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.


What be the special points of the words of this ministry?

That Christ our Savior, whom God by his Prophets had promised to send into
the world, is come in the flesh, and has accomplished the work of our
Redemption; that he was conceived of the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, and dyed upon the cross; that
body and soul thus separated, his body was laid in the grave, and remained
there under the power of death, and his Soul went into the place appointed for
the souls of the righteous, namely, Paradise the place of the blessed, that
the third day body and soul being joined together again, he rose from the
dead, and after ascended into Heaven, where he sits at the right hand of
his Father, until such time as from thence he shall come unto the last
Judgment. Romans 1. 1., 2, 3. Joh. 1. 14. 25. and 19. 28. 30. Heb. 9. 12. 16.
18. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Luke 1. 35. Matthew. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and 27. 2. 26.
ver. ad 50. and 12. 40. and 27. 59. 60. Romans 6. 9. Luke 23. 43. 46, 47. Matthew.
16. 21. and 28. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 4. 8. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Mark. 16. 19. Act. 1. 2,
3. 10, 11. Ephesians. 4. 10. Heb. 1. 3. 2 Timothy 4. 3.

What are the Sacraments of this Ministry?

The sacrament of admission into the Church is Baptism, which seals unto us
our spiritual birth; the other the sacrament of our continual preservation,
is the Lords Supper, which seals unto us our continual nourishment.

What Sacraments be there of the Covenant of Grace?

They be of two sorts; some of the Old Testament before Christ's coming:
others of the New, under Christ.

What Sacraments were there of the Old Testament?

Besides diverse extraordinarily given, The Sacraments of the old Testament.
(1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.) and serving but for a season, there
were two of ordinary and perpetual use, from their institution until the
coming of Christ, (to which those other may be referred) first, Circumcision
for entrance into the covenant of Grace, Genesis 17. 10. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. secondly,
the Passover for continuance and confirmation therein, Exodus 12. 3. 1 Cor. 5.
7. To which two, the two Sacraments of the new Testament answer.

How do the Sacraments of the New Testament differ from those of the Old?

In respect not of the Author, How they differ from the New.
God; the substance, Christ; or the receivers, the people of God; which are in
both the same, ( Romans 4. 11. 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4.) but of continuance, ( Matthew.
28. 19, 20.) evidence, (1 Cor. 11. 26.) easy performance, and efficacy; in all
which those of the New Testament have great pre-eminence, (2 Cor. 3. 9.)

What Sacraments be there of the New Testament?

Only two; to wit, Baptism, succeeding in the place of Circumcision; and the
Supper of the Lord, The Sacraments of the New Testament.
answering to the Passover, ( Romans 4. 1. Genesis 17. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3.
and 12* 13. Matthew. 26. 26. and 28. 19.) By the former, we have our admission
into the true Church of God; by the latter, we are nourished and preserved in
the Church after our admission.

How may it appear that there be no more then two Sacraments of the New
Testament?

First, That there be only two Sacraments of the New Testament.
when the number of Sacraments were most necessary, as under the Law, they had
but two, wherefore we need require no more, (1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3.)

Secondly, having meat, drink, and clothes, we ought therewith to be
content; (1 Timothy 6. 8.) now by the Sacrament of our entrance our spiritual
clothing is sealed unto us, ( Gal. 3. 27.) and by that of our growth is sealed
our feeding, (1 Cor. 10. 16.)

Thirdly, those two seals assure us of all Gods graces, as of our
regeneration, entrance, and ingraffing into Christ; so of our growth and
continuance in him: and therefore we need no more, (1 Cor. 12. 13.) For there
are as many Sacraments as there are things that need to be betokened to us
about our justification. Now they be two; our birth in Christ, and our
nourishment after we are born: as in the bodily life, we see that we need no
more, but to be born, and then to have this life preserved. The Sacrament of
Baptism shows us the first; the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the second.
Therefore those five other Sacraments, of Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony,
Orders, and extreme Unction, joined by the Papists are superfluous, because
some of them have no warrant at all out of the Word of God, and God has not
promised a blessing upon the using of them; others of them, though they be
agreeable to the Word, yet are without the nature and number of the Sacraments.

What is Baptism?

It is the first Sacrament of the New Testament, Of Baptism, and what it is.
by the washing of water ( Ephesians. 5. 26.) representing the powerful washing of
the blood and spirit of Christ, (1 Cor. 6. 11. Heb. 10. 22.) and so sealing our
regeneration, or new birth, our entrance into the Covenant of Grace, and our
ingraffing into Christ, and into the body of Christ, which is his Church, (
Joh. 3. 5. Tit. 3. 5. Act. 8. 27.) The word Baptism in general signifies any
kind of washing, but here it is specially taken for that sacramental washing,
which seals unto those which are within Gods Covenant, their birth in Christ,
and entrance into Christianity.

How was this Sacrament ordained and brought into the Church in the place of
Circumcision?

At the Commandment of God ( Joh. 1. 33.) by the Ministry of John, therefore
called the Baptist, Matthew. 3. 1. after sanctified and confirmed by our Savior
Christ himself, being baptized by John, (Mat. 3. 13.) and giving commission to
his Apostles and Ministers, to continue the same in his Church unto the end, (
Mat. 28. 18.)

Why call you it the first Sacrament?

Because Christ gave order to his Apostles, that after they have taught, and
men believe, they should baptize them, that so they might be enrolled amongst
those of the household of God, and entered into the number of the Citizens and
Burgesses of the heavenly Jerusalem.

What abuse does this take away?

That which sometimes the ancient Church was infected withal, namely, that
they baptized men at their death, and let them receive the Lords Supper twice
or thrice a year, whereas this is the first Sacrament of the Covenant.

What are the essential parts of this Sacrament of Baptism?

As of all other Sacraments, two; the outward signs, and the inward things
signified: where also is to be considered, the proportion and union which is
between those two parts, which is as it were the very form and inward
excellency of a Sacrament.

What are the outward signs in Baptism?

They are the outward element of water, and the outward sacramental actions
performed about it.

What are those Sacramental actions?

First, the Ministers blessing and consecrating the water: And secondly, the
right applying it so consecrated, to the party to be baptized.

May none but a lawful Minister baptize?

No; for baptism is a part of the public Ministry of the Church, and Christ
has given warrant and authority to none to baptize, but those whom he has
called to preach the Gospel: Go, Preach and Baptize, Matthew. 28. 29. those
only may stand in the room of God himself, and Ministerially set to the seal
of the Covenant. And it is monstrous presumption for Women, or any other
private persons, (who are not called) to meddle with such high Mysteries, nor
can there be any case of necessity to urge, as will appear afterward.

Touching the first action of the Minister; how is he to bless and consecrate
the water?

First, by opening to them that are present the Doctrine of Baptism, and the
right institution and use of it, what inward mysteries are signified and sealed
up by those outward signs. So did John, when he baptized, he preached the
Doctrine of Repentance, and taught the people the inward baptism of the
Spirit, signified by his baptizing with water, Matthew. 3. 11.

Secondly, by acknowledging in the name of the congregation man's natural
pollution, that we stand in need of spiritual washing, by giving thanks to
God the Father for giving his Son for a propitiation for our sins, and
appointing his blood to be a fountain to the house of Israel to wash in, and
for ordaining of this service to be a Sacrament and seal of so great a
mystery.

Thirdly, by making profession of Faith in Gods promises in that behalf, and
praying that they may be made good unto the party that is to receive the seal
thereof: for as every thing is sanctified by the Word of God and prayer, so in
especial manner the Sacramental water in baptism is blessed and consecrated
by the Word of institution, and prayer to God for a blessing upon his own
Ordinance.

What is the second Sacramental action?

The action of washing, that is, of applying the Sacramental water unto the
party to be baptized, diving or dipping him into it, or sprinkling him with it,
Matthew. 28. 19.
In the name of the Father, the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Is the action of diving or dipping, Whether diving or dipping be essential
to Baptism.
material and essential to the Sacrament? or is there absolute ground and
warrant for sprinkling, which is most commonly practiced with us in these cold
Countries?

Some there are that stand strictly for the particular action of diving or
dipping the baptized under water, as the only action which the institution of
this Sacrament will bear, and our Church allows no other, except in case of the
childs weakness, and there is expressed in our Saviors baptism, both his
descending into the water and rising up: so that some think our common
sprinkling to be (through ease and tenderness) a stretching the liberty of
the Church further then either the Church would, or the symbolicalnesse of the
outward sign with the thing signified can safely admit, it typifying our
spiritual burial and resurrection, Romans 6. 8.

Others conceive the action of sprinkling of water upon the face of the
baptized very warrantable, especially in young children to whom further wetting
may be dangerous, and the grounds are these:

First, it seems that neither dipping is essential to the Sacrament of
Baptism, nor sprinkling, but only washing and applying water to the body as a
cleanser of the filth thereof.

Secondly, then, as in the other Sacrament, a spoonful of wine is as
significant as a whole gallon; so here, a handful of water is as significant
as a whole river.

Thirdly, the action of sprinkling bears fit resemblance with the inward
grace, as well as dipping, and has authority in the Scriptures: read 1 Pet. 1.
2. and Heb. 12. 14. there is speech of the sprinkling of the blood of Christ,
and the blood of sprinkling speaks better things then the blood of Abel.

Fourthly, it is not unlikely that the Apostles baptized as well by sprinkling,
or pouring upon, as by diving and dipping into, since we read of diverse
baptized in houses, as well as others in rivers. However the washing the body
by water, is essential, ( Ephesians. 5. 26.) though whether way it be done, seem
not to be essential, (so water be applied to the body for the cleansing of
it.)

Thus much of the Sacramental element, and Sacramental actions, which are the
outward part of baptism: What now is the inward part?

Those spiritual things which are signified, The inward part or thing
signified in Baptism.
and represented, and exhibited in and by the outward element and actions: as
the water signifies the blood of Christ, the Ministers consecrating the water
signifies God the Fathers setting apart his Son for the expiation of the sins
of the world by his blood; the Ministers applying the water to the body of the
baptized to cleanse it, signifies Gods applying the blood of his Son to
cleanse the soul for justification and remission of sins: and not only to
signify, but to seal up unto the believer, that the inward part is effected
as well as the outward.

How come these visible things to signify such invisible mysteries?

First, The similitude between the sign and thing signified.
there is a natural fitness and aptness in the outward things to express
the inward, as for water to be a resemblance of the blood of Christ; thus they
agree:

First, water is a necessary element, the natural life of man cannot be
without it, and the blood of Christ is as necessary to his spiritual life.

Secondly, water is a comfortable element: as the Heart pants after the water
brooks, Psalm. 42. 1. The thirst of the body cannot be quenched but by water;
hence the height of misery is described by a barren and dry ground, where no
water is, Psalm. 63. 1. so the thirst of the soul cannot be quenched but by
the blood of Christ, Joh. 4. 13.

Thirdly, water is a free element; as it is necessary, useful, and
comfortable, so it is cheap, and easy to come by without cost; so is the blood
of Christ, Esa. 55. 1. Hoe, he that thirsts come and drink freely.

Fourthly, water is a common element, none are barred from it, any may go to
the river and drink; and the blood of Christ is offered as generally to all,
rich and poor, high and low, bond and free, every one may lay claim unto him,
come and have interest in him; Joh. 1. 12. Who ever receives him, who ever
believes, the proposal is without restraint, none can say, I am shut out or
excepted.

Fifthly, water is a copious and plentiful element, there is no less in the
river for thy drinking of it, there is enough for all men: so is the blood of
Christ all-sufficient, it can never be drawn dry; of his fullness we may all
receive, and yet he be never the more empty; hence the Scripture speaks of
plenteous redemption.

Sixthly, lastly and especially, water is a cleansing and a purifying element;
and it resembles the blood of Christ fitly in that, for 1 John 1. 7. The blood
of Christ cleanses us from all sin.

And here we may also observe the symbolicalnesse between the Sacramental
action of washing, and the inward grace signified.

First, nothing is washed but that which is unclean; even so the Sacramental
washing implies our natural pollution: whosoever submits to this Sacrament of
Baptism, does by so doing acknowledge himself to be defiled; whoever brings a
child to be baptized, does by so doing, make confession of original
corruption and sinfulness; as John's hearers were baptized of him in Jordan
confessing their sins, Mat. 3. 6.

Secondly, as the applying of the water to the body, washes and cleanses; so
it is with the blood of Christ, it cleanses not the soul, but by being
applied to it, in the merit and efficacy of it, by the sanctifying Spirit, of
which the outward ministerial washing is a sign and seal, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

What is there besides the natural fitness of the outward things to express
the inward?

2. There is also considerable Gods divine institution, ordaining and
appointing these things to typifie to the soul Christ crucified in his
cleansing quality: for otherwise though there were never such aptness in the
creature, yet it has nothing to do to meddle with a Sacrament, unless the
Lord do specially appropriate it to serve for such a purpose; and then with
Gods institution, there goes a blessing and a special virtue and power
attends on a divine Ordinance; that which makes the outward signs significant,
is Gods Word and appointment.

But is Christ and the cleansing power of his blood only barely signified in
the Sacrament of Baptism?

Nay more; the inward things are really exhibited to the believer as well as
the outward; there is that sacramental union between them that the one is
conveyed and sealed up by the other: hence are those phrases of being born
again of water and of the holy Ghost, Joh. 3. 5. of cleansing by the washing of
water, Ephesians. 5. 26. so arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, Acts 22.
16. so Romans 6. 3. we are buried with Christ by baptism, etc. the Sacraments
being rightly received, do effect that which they do represent.

Are all they then that are partakers of the outward washing of baptism,
partakers also of the inward washing of the Spirit? Does this Sacrament seal up
their spiritual ingraffing into Christ to all who externally receive it?

Surely no; though God has ordained these outward means for the conveyance of
the inward grace to our souls, yet there is no necessity that we should tie the
working of Gods Spirit to the Sacraments more then to the Word; the promises of
salvation, Christ and all his benefits, are preached and offered to all in the
ministry of the Word, yet all hearers have not them conveyed to their souls by
the Spirit, but those whom God has ordained to life; so in the Sacraments, the
outward elements are dispensed to al who make an outward profession of the
Gospel, (for in infants their being born in the bosom of the Church is in
stead of an outward profession) because man is not able to distinguish corn
from chafe: but the inward grace of the Sacrament is not communicated to all,
but to those only who are heirs of those promises whereof the Sacraments are
seals; for without a man have his name in the Covenant, The benefit of baptism
to a common Christian.
the seal set to it confirms nothing to him.

What is the advantage then or benefit of baptism to a common Christian?

The same as was the benefit of Circumcision to the Jew outward, Romans 2. 28.
Romans 3. 1, 2. there is a general grace of Baptism which all the baptized
partake of as a common favor, and that is their admission into the visible
body of the Church, their matriculation and outward incorporating into the
number of the worshippers of God by external communion: and so as Circumcision
was not only a seal of the righteousness which is by faith, but as an
overplus God appointed it to be like a wall of separation between Jew and
Gentile; so is Baptism a badge of an outward member of the Church, a
distinction from the common rout of Heathen; and God thereby seals a right upon
the party baptized to his ordinances, that he may use them as his privileges,
and wait for an inward blessing by them; yet this is is but the porch, the
shell, and outside; all that are outwardly received into the visible Church,
are not spiritually ingraffed into the mystical body of Christ. Baptism
always is attended upon by that general grace, but not always with this
special.

To whom then is Baptism effectual to the sealing up this inward and special
grace? To whom baptism is effectual.


We must here distinguish of persons baptized; the Church does not only
baptize those that are grown and of years, if any such being bred Pagans be
brought within the pale of the Church, and testify their competent
understanding of Christianity, and profess their faith in the Lord Jesus, and
in Gods precious promises, of remission of sins by his blood, and their earnest
desire to be sealed with Baptism for the strengthening of their souls in this
faith: but the Church also baptizeth her infants, such as being born within her
bosom of believing parents are within the Covenant, and so have right unto the
seal thereof.

Does the inward grace always accompany the outward sign in those of years
baptized?

No; but only then when the profession of their faith is not outward only and
counterfeit, but sincere and hearty, they laying hold on Christ offered in the
Sacrament by a lively faith which is the hand to receive the mercies offered,
Acts 8. 37. If thou beleevest with all thy heart thou may be baptized, says
Philip to the Eunuch; for it were absurd to extend the benefit of the seal
beyond the Covenant; now the Covenant is made only to the faithful, Joh. 1.
10. Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes not, whether he be baptized or no, shall be condemned. Simon Magus
(Act. 8. 13.) and Julian, and thousands of Hypocrites and Formalists shall find
no help in the day of the Lord by the holy water of their baptism, without it
be to increase their Judgment.

But what say you of infants baptized that are born in the Church, does the
inward grace in their baptism always attend upon the outward sign?

Surely no; the Sacrament of baptism is effectual in infants, only to those
and to all those who belong unto the election of grace, which thing though we
(in the judgment of charity) do judge of every particular infant, yet we have
no ground to judge so of all in general; or if we should judge so, yet it is
not any judgment of certainty; we may be mistaken.

Is every elect infant then actually sanctified and united unto Christ in and
by baptism?

We must here also distinguish of elect infants baptized, whereof some die in
their infancy, and never come to the use of reason; others God has appointed
to live and enjoy the ordinary means of faith and salvation.

What is to be thought of elect infants that die in their infancy, and have no
other outward means of salvation but their baptism?

Doubtless in all those the inward grace is united to the outward signs, and
the holy Ghost does as truly, and really, and actually apply the merits and
blood of Christ in the justifying and sanctifying virtue unto the soul of the
elect infant, as the minister does the water to its body, and the invisible
grace of the Sacrament is conveyed to the outward means.

But how can an infant be capable of the grace of the Sacrament?

Very well; How infants may be capable of the grace of the Sacrament.
though infants be not capable of the grace of the Sacrament by that way
whereby the grown are, by hearing, conceiving, believing; yet it follows not
that infants are not capable in and by another way. It is easy to distinguish
between the gift conveyed, and the manner of conveying it; faith is not of
absolute necessity to all Gods elect, but only to those to whom God affords
means of believing. It is the application of Christ's righteousness that
justifies us, not our apprehending it; God can supply the defect of faith by
his sanctifying Spirit which can do all things on our part in the room of
faith, which faith should do: Do we not know that the sin of Adam is imputed
to children, and they defiled by it, though they be not capable to understand
it? even so the righteousness of Christ may be, and is by Gods secret and
unknown way to elect infants; and so to those that are born deaf, and fools,
not capable of understanding: for though God tieth us to means, yet not
himself; he that has said of infants to the belongs the kingdom of God, knows
how to settle upon them the title of the Kingdom; and we have no reason to
think, but that even before or in, at or by the act of Baptism the Spirit of
Christ does unite the soul of the elect infant to Christ, and cloth it with
his righteousness, and impute unto it the title of a son or daughter by
Adoption, and the image of God by sanctification, and so fit it for the state
of glory.

But what is to be thought of the effect of Baptism in those elect infants
whom God has appointed to live to years of discretion?

In them we have no warrant to promise constantly an extraordinary work to whom
God intends to afford ordinary means; What benefit elect infants that live to
years have by Baptism for the present.
for though God do sometimes sanctify from the womb as in Jeremy, and John
Baptist, sometime in Baptism as he pleases, yet it is hard to affirm (as some
do) that every elect infant does ordinarily before or in Baptism receive
initiall regeneration, and the seed of faith and grace: For if there were such
a habit of grace then infused, it could not be so utterly lost or secreted as
never to show it self but by being attained by new instruction. But we may
rather deem and judge that Baptism is not actually effectual to justify and
sanctify, until the party do believe and embrace the promises.

Is not Baptism then for the most part a vain empty show consisting of
shadows without the substance, and a sign without the thing signified?

No; it is always an effectual seal to all those that are heirs of the
Covenant of grace, the promises of God touching Justification, Remission,
Adoption are made and sealed in Baptism to every elect child of God, then to
be actually enjoyed when the party baptized shall actually lay hold upon them
by faith: Thus Baptism to every elect infant is a seal of the righteousness
of Christ to be extraordinarily applied by the holy Ghost, if it die in its
infancy; to be apprehended by faith, if it live to years of discretion. So
that as Baptism administered to those of years is not effectual unless they
believe, so we can make no comfortable use of our Baptism administered in our
infancy until we believe. The righteousness of Christ and all the promises of
grace were in my Baptism estated upon me and sealed up unto me on Gods part;
but then I come to have the profit and benefit of them, when I come to
understand what grant God in Baptism has sealed unto me, and actually to lay
hold upon it by faith.

Explain this more clearly.

We know that an estate may be made unto an infant, and in his infancy he has
right unto it, though not actual possession of it until such years; now the
time of the child's incapability, the use and comfort of this estate is lost
indeed, but the right and title is not vain and empty, but true and real, and
stands firmly secured unto the child to be claimed what time soever he is
capable of it. Even so infants elect have Christ and all his benefits sealed up
unto them in the Sacrament of Baptism, yet through their uncapablenesse they
have not actual fruition of them, until God give them actual faith to
apprehend them: Is Baptism lost then which is administered in our infancy? was
it a vain and an empty Ceremony? no, it was a complete and an effectual
Sacrament, and Gods invisible graces were truly sealed up under visible signs:
And though the use and the comfort of Baptism be not for the present enjoyed
by the infant, yet by the parent it is who believes Gods promises for himself
and for his seed, and so by the whole Congregation, and the things then done
shall be actually effectual to the infant, when ever it shall be capable to
make use of them.

But are there not some who utterly deny the baptizing of infants to be
warrantable? The lawfulness of infants baptism.


Yes; but not to insist upon answering their peevish arguments, sufficient and
clear ground for the practice of our Church in this behalf may both be picked
out of that which has been spoken before; and further evidenced by these
following arguments.

1. The first we draw from the use of Circumcision in the old Testament, which
answers to Baptism; yet that was applied to the infant the eight day: there
can be no reason given to deprive infants of Baptism, but that which may be
given against Circumcision, the main whereof is their incapablenesse of the
grace of the Sacrament.

2. To them to whom the Covenant belongs, to them belongs the seal of the
Covenant that confirms the right unto them; but to the infants of faithful
parents the Covenant belongs: To you and to your children are the promises
made, says Peter, Act. 2. 39. and to them belongs the Kingdom of God: if the
thing it self, then the sign and seal of it. And the Apostle says, Your
children are holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. there is a foederall sanctity, or external
and visible holiness at least in children of believing parents, and they are
to be judged of the true flock of Christ until they show the contrary.

Yea, but it is objected that they do not believe, which is in the Scripture
required of those that are to be baptized, that they make profession of their
faith?

3. The Scripture requiring faith in the party to be baptized, speaks of grown
men; when the Apostle gives a rule that none should eat but those that labor,
it were monstrous from thence to deny meat to children or impotent persons:
besides, it is not simply an improper speech to call the infant of believing
parents a Believer; our Savior reckons them among Believers, Mat. 18. 6. he
took a child and said, Whosoever offends one of these little ones that
believe in me; what do we deem of Christian infants? is there no difference
between them and Pagans? Certainly as it were hard to call them Infidels, so it
were not harsh to call the^ Believers. And further it is the received judgment
of our Church, that the faith of the parents (or of those that in stead of
parents present the child in the Congregation) is so far the infants as to give
him right unto the Covenant. And lastly, as we have said before, the Spirit of
God in elect infants supplies the room of faith: and however it be, Adams
corruption cannot be more effectual to pollute the infant, then Christ's blood
and innocence is to sanctify them; and Gods wisdom wants not means to apply
it, though we cannot attain unto the manner.

But the Anabaptists urge we have no rule in Scripture for baptizing infants,
nor example?

4. But do we read any thing in Scripture that may infringe the liberty of the
Church therein? nay, do not the Scriptures afford many friendly proofs by
consequence of it? we read of such an one baptized, and all his household, the
house of Lydia, of the Jailer, of Crispus, of Stephanus, etc. why should we
imagine that there were no infants there, or that they were left out? And if
the Scriptures not expressing directly the baptizing of infants, were
sufficient reason why that Sacrament should be denied them, then by the same
reason the Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be denied to women; for (to my
remembrance) it is not expressed in all the new Testament, that any woman did
partake of it; which thing yet were senseless to doubt of.

Thus much of the lawfulness of infants baptism: But is baptism of absolute
necessity to salvation?

Baptism, Baptism not of absolute necessity to salvation.
as we have seen, is a high Ordinance of God, and a means whereby he has
appointed to communicate Christ and his benefits to our souls; and therefore
not to be neglected or slightly esteemed, but used with all reverence and
thankful devotion when it may be had; yet where God denies it either in
regard of the shortness of the infants life, or by any other unavoidable
necessity; there comes no danger from the want of the Sacraments, but only from
the contempt of them.

Who are here to be confuted?

First, the Papists, who have contrived in their own wicked brains a room near
hell which they call ( Limbus infantum) a receptacle for the souls of infants
which die without Baptism; and whereas they fain they are deprived of Gods
presence, and never partake of joy and happiness: a dream not worthy the
confuting, being not only uncharitable, but impious.

Secondly, many ignorant people amongst us, who for want of better teaching
harbor in their minds such Popish conceits, especially that Baptism does
confer grace upon all by the work done, (for they commonly look no higher)
and they conceive a kind of inherent virtue, and Christendom (as they call it)
necessarily infused into children by having the water cast upon their faces:
hence the minister is often posted for to baptize in a private chamber, to the
dishonor of that Ordinance: and which is more intolerable, in case of the want
of a Minister, women will undertake to be Baptizers, which is a monstrous
profanation of so high a service.

How may these errors of opinion and practice be avoided?

They proceed from gross ignorance, and therefore the means to cure them is to
be informed in the right nature and use of the Sacraments, and in the extent
and limitation of the necessity of them.

How may that be done?

We must know that Sacraments properly do not give us any right unto God and
his Christ, but only seal up and confirm that right and interest which
already we have in Gods Covenant and promise: God promised to Adam life, and
then he gave him the Tree of life to be a pledge of his promise; It was not the
Tree of life that gave Adam life, but the promise. Adam might have lived by the
promise without the Tree; but the Tree could do him no good without the
promise. Thus God promises Christ and his benefits to the faithful and to
their seed, and then he gives us Baptism to seal these promises; it is not
Baptism that saves us, but the promises; it is not water that purges our
sins, but the blood of the Covenant: why then was the Sacrament added? for our
weakness to be a strengthening to our faith, not to give any strength or
efficacy to the Covenant made in the blood of Christ: Gods Word is as sure as
his bond, his promise is as effectual as his seal, and shall as surely be
accomplished; the Sacraments only give strength to our faith in apprehending
it.

What infer you from this?

That where God is pleased to dispense his seals and Sacraments, they are great
comforts and pledges of his love; and to despise or slight them were a
horrible sleighting even of the Covenant it self. But where he denies means
and opportunity of enjoying the signs, the things signified are never the
farther off, or less effectual. It is said, Genesis 17. 14. that the
uncircumcised should be cut off from Gods people, because he had broke the
Covenant, but it is meant only of voluntary and wilful refusing of
Circumcision; for the people of God in the wilderness were forty years without
the outward sign of Circumcision, they were not without the inward grace.
David's child died the seventh day, a day before the time appointed for
Circumcision, and yet both his words and his carriage express that he doubted
not of the salvation of it: so the thief upon the Cross believing in Christ,
was received with Christ into Paradise, though he were never baptized; he had
the inward grace of Baptism, the washing of the blood of Christ, though not
the outward sign: when God affords means we must wait upon him for a
blessing in them, and by them; when he does not afford means we must not tie
the working of his grace to them: God who sanctifies some in the womb, knows
how to sanctify all his elect infants, and by his Spirit apply the merits of
Christ unto them without the outward water. Some have the outward sign and not
the inward grace, some have the outward sign and the inward grace, some have
the inward grace and not the outward sign; we must not commit Idolatry by
deifying the outward element; the rule will hold, It is not the want of the
Sacraments, but the contempt or wilful neglect of them that is dangerous.

What other errors of opinion and practice do you observe about Baptism?

As some through ignorance and superstition have too high a conceit of the
outward signs, Baptism to be highly accounted of.
so others through ignorance and profaneness have too mean and base an
opinion of them: some there are who esteem of Baptism as of a mere
Ecclesiastical ceremony and Church complement, as if there were no serious
virtue or efficacy in it, or profit to be expected by it, or had no other use,
but to give the child a name, and there is an end, they look no further.

How does it appear that some have so slight an opinion of this Ordinance?

By their answerable practices, That many have a slight esteem of this
Ordinance.
such as these and the like: 1. Often Baptism is deferred and that upon every
trifling occasion, as if it were a business of no great weight and moment, but
might attend every ones leisure, and many times through delay the child dies
without it; which though it does nothing prejudice the childs salvation, yet
it will lie heavy upon the parents conscience for neglecting Gods Ordinance
when he afforded opportunity.

2. Often the Minister is sent for home to perform that service with few in a
private chamber, when no eminent necessity urges, to the dishonor of so
sacred a business, which ought to be a most solemn and public action of the
whole Congregation

3. Though the child be brought to Church, yet often some by-day is chosen, and
not the Lords Sabbath; and it is then done as if it were only women's work to
be present at Baptism, who have most leisure to spend time about matters of
smaller consequence.

4. If it be on the Sabbath, then the maine care and preparation is about
matters of outward pomp and state, every thing is fitted and prepared for the
purpose, but only that which should chiefly be, viz. the hearts and minds of
those that go about a business of that nature.

5. While the Sacrament is in performing the demeanor of many, show that they
have a slight opinion of that service, some turning their backs upon it, and
going out of the Church so soon as sermon is done, as if the word was worth the
minding, but not the Sacrament; others prating and talking all the while, as if
there were nothing for them to learn by, but no duty for them to perform in
that action*

6. Lastly, infants are brought to the Sacrament of Baptism in their infancy,
but are never by their parents taught the doctrine of Baptism when they come
to years of understanding, Baptism is not made use of, as it ought, in the
whole course of men's lives; these things show that men commonly have a mean
conceit of this Ordinance.

What is the best way to reform these irreligious practices?

A serious pondering and considering of the high dignity of this divine
ordinance, What are the means to reform this slight esteem.
that will cause a devout and reverent demeanor in that holy business.

1. Every one should consider that it is no customary formallity, but an
honorable ordinance instituted by the lawful authority of God himself, who
never imposed any service upon his Church in vain. It was honored by our
Savior Christ himself, who sanctified it unto us by submitting unto it in his
own sacred person, confirmed by his practice, by his precept, etc.

2. Every one should consider, that there are infinite mercies sealed up by it
to the faithful, and to their seed. It is a visible admittance of thy child (if
thou be a Parent) into the Congregation of Christ's flock, signifying its
interest in the heavenly Jerusalem which is above: Is this a business to be
mumbled over in a corner? Christ came from Galile to Jordan to be baptized; is
the receiving of thy child into the bosom of the Church in a full
Congregation, no comfort unto thee? is it not mercy to see the blood of Christ
ministerially sealed up unto thy Infant, to purge it from that pollution which
it has brought into the world with it, which also thou make confession of by
presenting it to this mysteriall washing? Is it not joy to thy heart, to hear
the whole Congregation of Gods Saints pray for thy child; and that God has
honored thee so much, as to count thy very child holy and within his
Covenant? think on these things.

3. Every one that is present at Baptism should consider, that that being a
public action of the Congregation, every particular person ought reverently to
join in it. Shall the whole Trinity be present at Baptism, Mat. 3. and we be
gone? join ought every one in prayer to God for the Infant, join in praises to
God for his mercy, that we, and our children are brought forth, and brought up
within the pale of his Church, whereas the rest of the world are like a
wilderness: and thank God for adding at the present a member to his Church;
join every one ought in meditation of the pollution of nature, of the blessed
means of redemption by Christ, of the happy benefits that God seals up unto us
in our Baptism, even before we knew them; of the vows and promises which we in
our childhood made by those who were undertakers for us, and finding our
failings every time we are present at Baptism we should renew our own Covenant
with God, and labor to get new strength to close with his promises, which in
our Baptism he made unto us. Thus if we were wise to make a right use of it we
might learn as much at a Baptism as at a Sermon.

4. Parents should always bear in mind the promises which their children have
made to God by them, and they for their children, laboring to bring them up
accordingly in the instruction and information of the Lord, teaching them (so
soon as they understand) the meaning of that Sacrament, unfolding unto them
Gods precious promises, and their strict engagements. The negligence of parents
herein, is a cause of monstrous profanesse in many, they bring children t^
receive Christ's badge, but bring them up to the service of the Devil; and God
has not so much dishonor by Heathens and Pagans, as by those who have taken
upon them the name of Christians. Lastly, Baptism should be of continual use
thorough a Christians whole life: it is administered but once, but it is always
lasting in the virtue and efficacy of it. Baptism loses not its strength by
time; in all thy fears and doubts look back to thy Baptism, the promises of
God sealed up unto thee there, now lay hold on them by faith, and thou shall
have the actual comfort of thy Baptism, and feel the effect of it, though
thou never saw it. In thy failings, slips, and revolts, to recover thy self
have recourse to thy Baptism, new Baptism shall not need, the Covenant and
seal of God stands firm, he changes not; only renew thy repentance, renew
thy faith in those blessed promises of grace which were sealed up unto thee in
thy Baptism.

So much for Baptism: What is the Lords Supper?

It is the second Sacrament of the new Testament, Of the Lords Supper, and what
it is.
wherein God by the signs of bread and wine signifies sensibly, and
exhibiteth to every faithful receiver the body and blood of Christ, for his
spiritual nourishment and growth in Christ, and for so sealing unto him his
continuance, with increase in the body of Christ, which is his Church,
confirms him in the Covenant of grace. Or thus: It is a Sacrament of the
Gospel, wherein by the outward elements of Bread and Wine, sanctified and
exhibited by the Minister, and rightly received by the communicant, assurance
is given to those that are ingraffed into Christ, of their continuance in him,
and receiving nourishment by him unto eternal life.

Are there diverse graces offered to us in Baptism and the Lords Supper?

No, the Covenant solemnly ratified in Baptism is renewed in the Lords Supper,
between the Lord himself and the receiver, and the same graces offered again,
but to diverse ends: In Baptism, to the investing and entering of us into
Christianity, (for of that entrance Baptism is a seal:) In the Lords Supper,
to the nourishing and continuance of us in it, of which growth and continuance
in Christiannity it is a seal: And therefore as unto the Sacrament of
Baptism, so unto this of the Lords Supper, the Popish feigned Sacrament of
confirmation is notably injurious.

Wherein then does Baptism differ from the Lords Supper?

1. In regard of the thing signified, The difference between Baptism and the
Lords Supper.
Baptism (as has been said) is a seal of our entrance into the Church of
God; the Supper of the Lord of our continuance in the same; the one of our new
birth, the other of our spiritual food: The former is ordained to this end,
that being out of Christ by nature, we might by the Sacrament of our new birth
be ingraffed into his body, Titus 3. 5. John 3. 5. the latter, that being in
Christ by grace, we might continue and increase in him, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11.
23. 1 Pet 3. 21.

2. In regard of the outward sign; water in the one, bread and wine in the
other.

3. In regard of the Communicants: Unto Baptism both Infants, and those that
are of years of discretion are to be admitted; but unto the Supper of the
Lord, only those of years of discretion.

4. In regard of the time; The Supper of the Lord is to be received as often as
the Lord shall give occasion, Baptism but once.

Why is this called the Lords Supper, seeing we use not to make it a Supper?

It is called the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20. not because he appointed it a
Supper to us; Why it is called the Lords Supper.
but because our Lord Jesus Christ sitting at his last Supper ordained it in
stead of the Passover; for in the night that he was betrayed, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
imediately after he had eaten the Passover with his Disciples, he did both
himself with them celebrate this holy Sacrament, Mat. 26. 26, etc. and
withal, gave charge for continuance of the same in the Church until his
second coming, 1 Cor. 11. 20.

What may we learn by this; that both our Savior Christ and his Apostles
likewise administered this Sacrament after Supper?

That we must not come unto it for our bellies, but have our minds lifted up
from these earthly elements to our Savior Christ represented by them; for men
after Supper set not bread and wine, but banqueting dishes upon the Table;
which serves to reprove,

1. Such profane persons as come for a draught of Wine only.

2. Those that rest only in the outward Elements.

But does not the example of our Savior Christ and his Apostles tie us to
administer this Sacrament in the night time?

No; because they had special cause so to do, which we have alone.

What cause had our Savior so to do?

He was to administer it after Supper:

First, because it was to come in lieu and stead of the Passover, and
therefore was presently after the eating of it.

Secondly, that it might go immediately before his passion, the better to show
whereunto it should have relation; where also is another difference; our
Savior Christ's Supper representing his death, which followed the Supper, and
was to come, our Sacrament representing the death of Christ already suffered
and past.

What cause had the Apostles?

They did it in the night, because it was not safe for the Church to meet in
the day for fear of persecution: Wherefore, herein the laudable custom of the
Church of administering it in the Morning, when our wits and capacities are
best, is to be followed: In which respect also there is some difference between
this Sacrament and the Sacrament of Baptism, which may without any
inconvenience be administered in the afternoon.

What is the fittest day for the Administration of this Sacrament?

The Lords day is the fitttest day for the administration of the Sacrament: For
although our Savior Christ did administer it on another day, (for the reasons
before declared) yet he did not bid us so to do: But the Apostles example, and
religious practice herein is to be followed, which did celebrate the Supper of
the Lord on the Lords day.

So much of the time: Now for the nature of this Sacrament, how may it be
known?

First, by the matter; and secondly, by the form of it.

What is the matter of the Supper of the Lord?

Partly outward, Of the matter of the Lords Supper.
as the elements of bread and wine; partly inward, as the body and blood of
Christ. For as many grains make but one loaf, and many grapes but one cup of
wine: so I believe that those outward elements signify Christ and him
crucified, with all the benefits of his death and passion, even whole Christ,
with all the fruits of his mediation, Mat. 26. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.

Wherefore did the Lord make choice of Bread and Wine for the outward Elements
of this Sacrament?

Because meaning to set forth our spiritual nourishment by them, they are of
all the means of our corporal nourishment the chiefest, Psalm. 104.

Why did he not content himself with one of these only?

He took both, that he might hereby show how plentiful and assured redemption
we have in Christ whom these do represent. Wherefore it is no marvel, that
the Papists in the prohibiting of the cup, do answerably teach our salvation
to be neither wholly in Christ, nor assuredly.

What Argument do you observe in the institution of the Sacrament against this
Robbery?

The foreseeing Spirit of Christ, knowing the sacrilege that Popery would
bring in for the robbing of the people of the use of the Cup, has prepared a
preservative against it, speaking here more fully of the cup (which he did not
of the bread) Drink ye all of this, Mat. 26. 27.

What Bread used our Savior Christ?

Ordinary bread, such as was used at the common Table; at that time it was
indeed unleavened bread, but it was so, because no other was then lawful at
the feast of the Passover.

Are not the Bread and Wine changed into the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament?

No; That the bread and wine are not changed into the body and blood of Christ.
they are not changed in nature, but in use, 1 Cor. 10. 16. For the words of
eating and drinking do properly belong to the outward elements of bread and
wine, and by a borrowed speech do improperly belong to the body and blood of
Christ, to note unto us the communion we have with our Savior Christ, of whom
we are as verily partakers by a lively faith, as of the bread and wine, by
eating and drinking them: And thus we say, that these elements are changed in
use; because being separated from a common use, they are consecrate to sign
and seal to us our spiritual nourishment and growth by the body and blood of
Christ Jesus, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 10 3, 4. For as the Sacrament of Baptism
does seal to us a spiritual regeneration; so the Lords Supper a spiritual
feeding; and even as well the body and blood of Christ is in Baptism given us
for clothing, as they are given in the Lords Supper for nourishment: Therefore
the bread and wine are not the true body and blood of Christ, but the signs
and tokens of them, as in Baptism the water was only a sign of Christ's
blood, not the blood.

What further reason have you to overthrow the carnal presence of Christ in
the Sacrament?

1. If the bread were turned into Christ, then there should be two Christ's,
one that gives, another that is given: for our Savior Christ gave the bread,
etc.

2. If the bread be the very body of Christ, there should then be no sign of
the thing signified, and so no Sacrament, Romans 4. 11. Where their miserable
shift, that the whiteness is the seal and sign, is not worthy the answer.

3. The wicked receiver might then eat and drink Christ's body and blood, as
well as any true believer, John 13. 2. 30.

4. The Minister cannot give the inward grace, but the outward Element in the
administration of the Sacrament, Luke 3. 16.

What reason was there to move our Savior Christ to use such a borrowed speech
in this so great a mystery?

Because it is ordinary and usual in the Scripture, to give the name of the
thing signed and signified to the sign: as it is called the tree of life,
which was but a sign of life Genesis 2. 9. So in the Sacraments of the old
Testament, Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17 10. that is, the token
of Covenant, verse 11. Or the Lamb, or Kid, the Passover, whereof it was a
sign only, Exo. 12. The self same manner of speech is also used in the new
Testament of Baptism called the new Birth, taking away of sins, whereof it
is only a seal: So that unless the Lord would in this Sacrament have
departed from the wisdom of the Spirit of God, accustomably received, he must
needs here also tread in the same steps of a borrowed and figurative speech.

Howbeit, it may seem, that to have used a more proper speech would have been
more meet for him, being near unto his death, and more convenient for their
understanding.

He did after his last Supper use as figurative speeches, as this in the 14,
15, 16. of John, and that without all danger of darkness of speech, there
being often times more light in a borrowed then in a proper speech: And a Trope
of force must be yielded, when he says, that the cup is the new Testament.

It makes further for the corporal presence, that our Savior Christ says in
his supper, that his body was then broken, and not that it should be broken
after.

That is also usual to the Scripture, for further certainty to speak of things
to come, as of them that are present.

But there is nothing impossible unto God?

1. The question is here not of the power, but of the will of God, what he will
have done.

2. God cannot do those things, in doing whereof he should contradict
himself: and therefore the Scripture fears not, without dis-honour to God,
to say that he cannot lie, nor cannot deny himself, Tit. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 13.

Why is the cup called the cup of the New Testament?

Because it is a seal of the promise of God, touching our salvation in Christ,
which being in old time under the Law, shadowed by the shedding of blood of
beasts, is now after a new manner accomplished in the blood of Christ himself.

Thus much of the matter of this Sacrament: wherein consists the form
thereof?

Partly in the outward actions both of the Minister, Of the form of this
Sacrament* of the Lords Supper.
and of the receiver: partly in the inward, and spiritual things signified
thereby (these outward actions being a second seal set by the Lords own hand
unto his covenant.)

What be the Sacramental actions of the Minister in the Lords Supper?

Four: The Sacramental actions of the Minister.
First, to take the bread and wine into his hand, and to separate it from
ordinary bread and wine.

What does this signify?

That God in his eternal decree has separated Christ from all other men to be
our Mediator, and that he was set apart to that office, and separated from
sinners, Exodus 12. 5. Heb. 7. 26.

What is the second?

To bless and consecrate the bread and wine, by the Word and Prayer.

What does that signify?

That God in his due time sent Christ into the world, and sanctified him,
furnishing him with all gifts needful for a Mediator.

How are the Bread and Wine to be blessed and consecrated?

By doing that which at the first institution Christ did.

What is that?

1. He declared the Doctrine of the mystery of the Sacrament unto his Apostles,
Of the consecration of the Bread and Wine.
which received it, by teaching the truth of that which these outward signs
did signify.

2. He thanked his heavenly Father for that he had so loved the world, that he
gave him which was his only Son to die for it, through the breaking of his most
holy Body, and the shedding his most precious blood. Also he gave him thanks
for that he had ordained these outward elements, to seal our spiritual
nourishment in Christ.

3. By a trope of the chief part of Prayer (which is Thanksgiving) for the
whole, the Evangelist gives to understand, that our Savior Christ sued to God
his heavenly Father, that his death in it self, sufficient to save, might by
the working of his holy Spirit be effectual to the elect; and that those
outward signs of bread and wine might through the operation of his holy Spirit
be effectual to the purposes they were ordained unto.

How shall it be known that he gave thanks and prayed, for these things,
seeing there is no mention of these things in the Evangelists?

1. The very matter it self that is handled, does guide us to the knowledge of
these things.

2. The like manner of speech in other places of Scripture, where there being
no mention what words he used, yet must needs be granted, that he gave thanks,
and prayed proportionably to the prayer and thanks here used: For taking the
Barley loaves and Fishes, and giving thanks, what can be understood, but that
he giving thanks to God, that had given those creatures for their bodily
nourishment, prayed that he would bless them, and make them effectual to that
purpose and end? Mat. 14. 14. and 15. 36. John 6. 11. And as it is not lawful
to eat and drink the common meat and drink without such prayer and
thanksgiving: so is it not lawful to communicate these elements without
thanksgiving and prayer.

So much for the second Action (which the Minister indeed performs with the
Communicants, but yet as chief in the action.)

What is the third?

To break the Bread, and pour out the Wine.

What does it signify?

The passion and sufferings of Christ, with all the torments he endured for our
sins both in body and soul; his blessed body being bruised and crucified, his
precious blood shed (trickling and streaming down from him to all parts of the
ground) and his righteous soul powered out unto death, Isa. 53. 5. and 10. 12.
Heb. 9. 14. That Christ himself of his own accord offered his body to be
broken, and his blood to be shed upon the Cross: And that as the Bread
nourishes not, if it remain whole and unbroken; so there is no life for us in
Christ, but in as much as he died.

What is the fourth?

To give and distribute the Bread and Wine to the Receiver.

What does that signify?

That God gives Christ, and Christ himself to us, That Christ Jesus with all
his merits is offered to all sorts of Receivers, and that God has given him to
the faithful Receivers to feed their souls unto eternal life, John 3. 14,
15. and 6. 50, 51.

What be the Sacramental Actions of the Receivers?

They be two: The Sacramental actions of the Receivers.
First, to take the bread and wine offered by the Minister.

What does that signify?

The receiving of Christ into our souls with all his benefits by faith. That
they and only they have benefit by Christ crucified, which thus apply Christ to
themselves by a true and lively faith, John 1. 12.

What is the second?

To eat the bread and drink the wine, receiving them into the body, and
digesting them, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

What does that signify?

Our uniting to Christ, and enjoying of him, that we must with delight apply
Christ and his merits to all the necessities of our souls, spiritually feeding
upon him, and groaning by him. For the eating of the bread to strengthen our
nature, betokens the inward strengthening of our souls by grace, through the
merit of the breaking of Christ's body for us; and the drinking of the wine to
cherish our bodies, betokens that the blood of Christ shed upon the Cross, and
(as it were) drunk by faith, cherishes our souls: And as God does bless
these outward elements to preserve and strengthen the body of the receiver: so
Christ apprehended and received by faith does nourish him, and preserve both
body and soul unto eternal life, John 6. 50, 51. 1 Cor. 10. 3. and 11. 16, 17.

Is Christ's body and blood, together with the outward elements received of all
Communicants?

No; for howsoever they be offered by God to all, Matthew. 26. 26. yet are they
received by such alone as have the hand of faith to lay hold on Christ; and
these with the bread and wine do spiritually receive Christ with all his
saving graces: As for the wicked, and those that come without faith; they
receive only the outward elements, 1 Cor. 11. 27. and withal judgment and
condemnation to themselves, verse 29.

So much for the matter and form: Show now the special ends and uses for
which the Lords Supper was ordained.

1. To call to mind and renew the memory and virtue of Christ's death, The ends
and uses of the Lords Supper.
1 Cor. 11. 24.

2. To increase our faith, begotten by the Word preached, and to confirm unto
us our nourishment, only thereby by the means of Christ's death.

3. To increase our love.

4. To increase our joy in the holy Ghost, our peace of conscience our hope of
eternal life, and all other graces of God in us.

5. To stir us up with greater boldness to profess Christ, then heretofore
we had done.

6. To quicken our hearts to all holy duties.

7. To show our thankfulness to God for his mercy bestowed upon us in Christ.

8. To make a difference betwixt our selves and the enemies of Christ.

9. To knit us more near in good will one to another.

10. To preserve the public Ministry of the Word and Prayer in Christian
assemblies.

Who are to be partakers in this Sacrament? Who are to receive the Lords Supper.


All baptized who are of years and sound judgment to discern the Lords body,
ought to repair to this Sacrament. But those only come worthily who
professing the true faith, have duly examined and prepared themselves, Esa.
66. 23. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28. whereby all not of age and sound judgment are shut
from his Sacrament; which are not always from the other of Baptism.

May none be admitted by the Church to the Supper of the Lord, but such as have
these things in them which God requires at their hands?

Yes; those who having knowledge do make profession of Religion, and are found
guilty of no great error, or crime unrepented of.

What if any thrust themselves to the Lords Table, who are ignorant or guilty
of such crimes?

They are to be kept back by the discipline of the Church.

What is to be performed by every Christian, that he may worthily partake of
the Lords Supper?

There must be a careful preparation before the action, Of preparation to the
Lords Table.
great heed in the whole action, and a joyful and thankful cloze and shutting
of it: All which must be performed as well by the Minister as the people. For
there is great difference betwixt our Savior Christ, the first deliverer of
this Sacrament, and all other Ministers, he having no battle of the Spirit and
flesh in him, but being always prepared unto every good work, had no need of
these things; but other Ministers have as much need thereof as the people.

How are we to prepare our selves to this Sacrament.

By due search and trial of our own souls, whether we can find in our selves
the things which God does require in worthy Communicants.

How may we perform that?

By fitting our minds, and framing our hearts thereunto, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16,
and 11. 28

How may we sit our minds?

By examining our wisdom and knowledge, both of Gods will in general, and of
the nature and use of this holy Sacrament in particular, whether we can give a
reason of the representation of Christ in bread and wine, and bring the
resemblance and difference of the proportion of the bread and wine with the
body and blood of Christ, and of the eating and drinking of the elements with
the partaking of the spiritual things, Romans 4. 11. 1 Cor. 10. 3. and 4. 16, 17.

How may our hearts be framed for the feeling of the virtue and power of this
Sacrament?

1. By weighing with our selves what need we have of it, and what benefit we
may reap by it.

2. By examining of our faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 15. and repentance, Heb.
10. 22. James 4. 8. attended with true love of God, Zach. 12. 10. and of our
brethren, 1 Cor. 16. 14.

3. By servent invocation, praying for a blessing upon this Ordinance of God,
Matthew. 26, 26.

How may we find what need we have of this Sacrament?

Partly by our wretched estate by nature, and partly by our weak estate by
grace.

What may we find by our estate by nature?

That being prone to all evil, we had need of this Sacrament to nourish and
preserve the life of grace new begun, which otherwise by our own corruption
might dye or decay in us, 1 Cor. 10. 16.

What need have we of this Sacrament for relief of our weak estate by grace?

That being weak in understanding and feeble in memory, we may by the signs of
Bread and Wine have our understanding bettered, and memory confirmed in the
death of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 26.

What further need may we find of it?

That being frail in faith, and cold in love, we may by the same creatures, as
by seals and pledges have our faith further strengthened, and our love more
enflamed to God and Gods children.

What benefit then may we reap by the Lords Supper?

We see already that the benefit is great: this Sacrament being as a glass for
the mind, a monument for the memory, a support of faith, a provocation to love,
a quickening to obedience, and a sign and seal of all the mercies of God in
Christ Jesus.

How must the heart be prepared to find the power of this Sacrament for supply
of these wants and obteining of these benefits?

The heart must be purged by repentance and purified by faith, 1 Cor. 10. 14
16. 21. Acts 15. 9.

How may the heart be purified by faith?

If I have not only knowledge what Christ has done for his chosen, but a full
assurance that whatsoever he has done, he has done it for me as well as for
any other, 1 Cor. 2. 2. John 17. 3. Gal. 2. 20.

What gather you hence?

That they only are to present themselves at the Lords Table, who after their
baptism are able to make a profession of the true faith, and can find that
they truly believe in Christ; seeing ignorant and unbelieving persons do rather
eat and drink their own judgment, than reap any benefit by this Sacrament, 1
Cor. 11. 29, 30, 31.

How may thy heart be purged by repentance?

If from my heart I do repent of my particular sins past, and judge my self
for them, bewailing and forsaking them, and frame the rest of my life according
to Gods will, 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31. Gal. 6. 16.

What learn you hence?

That it is dangerous for such as remain in their old sins, or after the
Sacrament return unto them; once to offer themselves to the Lords Table,
forasmuch as by this means they procure the wrath of God against them, and
those that belong unto them, although not in condemnation in the world to come
(which the faithful notwithstanding their unworthy receiving cannot come unto)
yet to fearful plagues and judgments in this world.

It is not meet that we be free from all malice in our hearts when we come to
the Lords Supper?

Yes it is: for this Sacrament is a seal both of our conjunction with Christ,
and of our society one with another, 1 Cor. 10. 17. and we must know that true
repentance purges out malice, amongst other sins; and a sound faith works by
love toward God and out Brethren, Mat. 5. 22, 23. James 1. 19, 20, 21. 1 Pet.
2. 1. Gal. 5. 6.

So much for examination and preparation required before the action.

What is to be done by the communicant in the present action?

1. They are to use reverent attention, the better to apply the whole action,
harkning to the doctrine of the Sacrament delivered by the Minister, joining
with him in his prayers, making use of all the sacramental actions, and so
commemorating the Lords death, for the comfort and refreshing of their own
souls, 1 Cor. 11. 17. 26.

2. According as it is commanded, all must take the Bread and Wine into their
hands, contrary to the superstition of diverse, which will have it thrust either
into their mouths, or else take it with their gloves, as if the hand of a
Christian, which God has both made and sanctified, were not as fit as the skin
of a Beast, which the Artificer has tanned and sewed.

3. They must moreover, according to the Commandment of Christ, eat and drink
the Bread and Wine, not laying or hanging it up, or worshipping it, as the
papists do.

4. Lastly, they must use thanksgiving, offering up themselves both souls and
bodies as a sacrifice of thanks, Romans 12. 1. in which regard this Sacrament is
called the Eucharist.

What is to be done after the action?

1. We must by and by use joyful thanksgiving, What duties are to be performed
after the action.
with prayer and meditation, being so comforted in heart in the favor of God
toward us, that we be ready with a feeling joy to sing a Psalm unto the Lord,
Matthew. 26. 30.

2. We must continually endeavor to find an increase of our faith in Christ,
love to God and all his Saints, power to subdue sin, and practice obedience,
with all other sanctifying and saving graces, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 11, 21.
Col. 2 6, 7. 2 Pet. 3. 18. For a true believer shall feel in himself after the
receiving of the Sacrament an increase of faith and sanctification, a further
deading of the old man, and so a greater measure of dying unto sin; a further
strength of the new man, and so a greater care to live in newness of life, and
to walk the more strongly and steadily in the ways of God all the days of his
life, this being a Sacrament not of our incorporation, as Baptism, but of our
growth; which albeit one cannot always discern immediately after the action,
yet between that and the next Communion it may be easily espied in our service
toward God and men.

What if a man after the receiving of the Sacrament never find any such thing
in himself?

He may well suspect himself whether he did ever repent or not, and therefore
is to use means to come to sound faith and repentance: For the Lord is not
usually wanting to his ordinances, if men prepare their hearts to meet him in
them. If we receive no good, no refreshment at this spiritual feast, if God
send us away empty, either it is because we have no right unto his mercies,
being not in Christ, and so not accepted; or because some secret unmortified
lust remains in us, like Achans wedge of gold: so some beloved sin (either
not seen, or not sufficiently sorrowed for, and resolved against) lies glowing
in the heart, which causes God to frown upon our services; and like a dead fly
causes the ointment to stink: and therefore in this case, a man should descend
into himself, and make a more strict search into his conscience, that he may
again come before the Lord with more humilty, and better preparedness, and
God will reveal himself in due time to every one who unfainedly seeks after
him in his ordinances.

So much of the Sacraments: What are the Censures?

They are the judgments of the Church for ratification of the threats of the
Gospel against the abusers of the Word and Sacraments. Of the Censures of the
Church.


What do these Censures profit the Church of God?

Very much; for by them the godly having strayed from the course of sincerity,
are through obedience brought home again: But the wicked are hardened by them
through disobedience; whereof it is, that the wicked are properly said to be
punished, the godly only chastened and corrected.

But it seems that corrections rather belong to Magistrates then to Ministers?

The Magistrates by the Laws of the Commonwealth punish some by death, others
by other torments, and some by purse, which belongs not to the Minister, who
has to do only with the soul: And these spiritual censures are of as
necessary use in the Church, both to help the godly, and to restrain and root
out the wicked out of the Church, as those penal Laws of the Magistrate in
the Commonwealth. They therefore who upon this pretense, that God forces no
man to come unto him, suppose the censures to be unprofitable, are like unto
children that will have no rod in the house.

Whereby does the necessity of Censures appear?

Easily; for since in the Church of God there be of all sorts, as in a net cast
into the sea, which catches good and bad: It is impossible (without
correction) to keep good order in the Church, especially to restrain the
wicked hypocrites from offending, and thereby slandering their profession.

If then there were no hypocrites, there were no use of Censures?

Not so; but the serve most of all for them that make no conscience of their
calling: For the best man that is, having some sparks of his natural
corruption remaining unregenerate, may fall and offend; and therefore must be
chastened by the Church: But this is the difference, the godly falling by
infirmity, by correction do amend, but the wicked offending purposely, by
punishment are hardened.

What is to be gathered of this?

That since censures are as needful in the Church; as the rod in the house, or
the Magistrates sword in the Commonwealth for offenders, (yea and of so much
more use as these are for the body, and this life, and the other for the soul
and life to come) they that set themselves against them care not what disorder
there be in the Church, but seek to exempt themselves from punishment, that
they might do what they list, and make the Gospel a covert for all their
wickedness, who are like to them in the second Psalm, that would not bear
the yoke of Government.

So much for the use and necessity of Censures: What is the doctrine of them
especially delivered?

In the 18 chapter of Saint Matthew; from the 15 verse to the 20. where both
their institution and ratification is laid down: For first our Savior
declares the degrees of the censures ordained for such as are called brethren,
(which are generally corrections according to the greatness of the offenses)
and then treats of their power and authority.

What is to be observed in the degrees of the censures?

That the censures be according to the offenses; Of the degrees of Censures.
as if the offense be private the censure thereof must be private, wherein the
censurer is to deal circumspectly; 1. That he know the offense. 2. That he
admonish the offender secretly. 3. That he do it in love, convincing his
offense so to be, by the Word of God.

What further duty is required of us in this case?

1. That we run not to others to slander the offenders, which Moses
forbids, Levit. 19. 16.

2. Not to keep the injury in mind, of purpose afterward to revenge it.

3. Not to deal roughly with one under pretense of seeking the glory of God.

4. Not to despise the offender, but by all means to seek his amendment.

Who are to be admonished openly in the Church?

Those that sin openly.

What if they will not amend by admonition^*

Then they are by suspension to be barred for a time from some exercises of
Religion: and if by that they will not amend, then they are by excommunication
to be cut off from the Church, and delivered unto Satan, as shall be declared.

How are the Censures ratified, and the authority of the Church confirmed by
our Savior Christ?

That appears by his words unto his Disciples, Matthew. 18. 18. Whatsoever you
bind on earth, (meaning according to the rule) shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever you loose in earth shall be loosed in heaven: which is as much as if
a Prince giving authority to one of small reputation, should bid him execute
justice, he would bear him out.

How is this further proved?

It is further confirmed in the verse following by a reason of comparison: If
two or three shall agree upon any thing, and shall ask it in my name, it shall
be granted: If Christ will ratify the deed of two or three done in his name,
how much more then that which the whole Church shall do accordingly?

Why is it said, And shall ask it in my name?

To declare that by prayer unto God in the name of our Savior Christ all the
Censures of the Church, but especially Excommunication, should be undertaken,
as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5. 4. When you are gathered together in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, (that is, calling upon his name) deliver such an one
unto Satan.

What need is there of this ratifying of the Churches authority in exercising
the Censures?

Because some do contemn the Censures of the Church, as proceeding from men
only, as if thereby they were no whit debarred from the favor of God; whereas
nevertheless whom the Church separateth from the outward seals, them also
Christ depriveth of the inward graces, banishing them from his kingdom, whom
the Church has given over to Satan.

What gather you of this?

That men should not slightly shake off, but with reverence esteem the
censures of the Church, as the voice of God himself; and although they be
never so high and stout, yet are they to subject themselves to the judgment of
God in the Church, unless they will set themselves against the Lord himself.

We have heard of the general doctrine of censures: What are the kinds of
them? Of the kinds of Censures.


They are either of sovereign medicine, Matthew. 18. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 4. 5. or of
fearful revenge, 1 Cor. 16. 22. Iam. 1. 14. 2 Timothy 4. 14. the former properly
are corrections, the latter punishments.

What are the medicinal censures?

They are such as serve to bring men to repentance, the principal end of the,
next the glory of God, being the salvation of his soul that is censured.

What things are required of them that do execute these censures against any
man?

Six: 1. Wisdom. 2. Freedom from the sin reproved. 3. Love. 4. Sorrow. 5.
Patience, and 6. prayer for the party.

Of what sorts are the medicinal Censures?

They are either in word, or in deed.

What are they in word?

The chidings and rebukes of the Church for sin which we call Admonitions.

How many sorts of admonitions are there?

Two: Private admonition.
the first is private betwixt Brother and Brother, Levit. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 15,
16. the other public by the Minister assisted by the congregation, when the
private will not prevail Mat. 18. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 20.

What are we to observe in the private admonitions?

That we should watch one another diligently, witnessing thereby our mutual
love which God requires of us; as if any man seeing another (whose journey he
knows) wander out of the way, if he should not admonish him he might justly
be accounted unnatural; much more we, knowing all men think to journey toward
heaven, if we see any go the wrong ways (as by Robberies, Adulteries, Usury,
Swearing, or Drunkenness) and do not admonish them, are even guilty of their
wandering, especially since the other belongs to the body, but this both to
body and soul.

But is it not sufficient for men to watch themselves, seeing every man
stands or falls to God?

Such was the wicked answer of Cain, and they that use it are like unto him:
but if God commanded in the law to help our enemies Ox or Ass having need of
help, we are more bound by the law of charity to help himself; and unless we
reprove him, we are partakers of his sin, (as has bin said) which we ought not
to be, because we have enough of our own.

What are the degrees of private admonitions?

They be two; The degrees of private admonition.
the former is most private done by one, the other is private also, but more
public then the first, and it is done by two or three at the most, whereof he
that first admonishes must be one, Mat. 18. 15, 16.

Why has our Savior Christ limited us with these degrees?

By all means to win the offender, if it be possible; if not, that his
condemnation may appear to be most just, after so many warnings.

How is the first degree of private admonition expressed?

If thy brother offend against thee, or in thy knowledge only, tell him
between thee and him, Matthew. 18. 15.

Are we bound to reprove all men of what profession soever?

No; but him that is of the same profession of Christianity that we be of, whom
the Scripture terms a brother (thereby shutting forth Jews, Turks,
Heretics, and Atheists) except we have some particular bond, as of a master to
his servant, or father to his child, or magistrate to his subject

What learn you thereby?

1. That we observe this in our admonitions, that he be a brother whom we
admonish, and not such a one as is a scorner.

2. That we are not to make light of, or contemn the admonitions of others, but
to accept of them, and account of them as a precious balm.

How must we reprove our brothers fault?

First, How we must reprove.
we must be sure that it is a fault we reprove him for, and then we must be
able to convince him thereof out of the Word of God, so that he shall not be
able to gainsay us, unless he do it contemptuously; it being better for us
not to reprove him, then not to be able to convince him by the Word, of that we
have reproved him in. Lastly, we ought to do it with all love and mildness,
regarding the circumstances of persons, time, and place, not inconsiderately,
nor of hatred, or to reproach him, or as one that is glad of somewhat to hurt
his good name.

What is meant by Tell him between thee and him? Matthew. 18. 15.

That the good name and report of another man should be so regarded by us, that
if his fault be private we are not to spread it abroad, as some that think they
be burdened, unless they tell it to others, which is not the rule of Charity.

Why is this added, If he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother?

As a notable means to encourage us in this duty: For if the bestowing of a
Cup of cold water shall not be unrewarded; how much more the gaining of a soul
from Satan?

What if our brother hear us not, and so we do not gain him?

Notwithstanding we lose not our labor, but our reward is laid up with God,
Esa. 49. 4. For that which is done for Gods cause, though it be never so evilly
taken or used, shall certainly be remembered of God, who will recompense it
plentifully, and lay it up among our good deeds. Also this shall serve against
him that is reproved in judgment, for refusing such a profitable means.

What is the second degree of private Admonitions?

It is more public then the former. The second degree of private admonition.
If thy brother hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, Matthew. 18. 16.
For although he hear not the first admonition, yet love will not give him
over, but as the case requires, and the nature and condition of the offender
may be discerned to be easy or hard to repent; the admonisher is to take with
him one, or if need be two at the most to assist him.

The first admonition not availing, may we take whom we will to the second?

That choice is to be made which is likeliest to take effect, and therefore we
may not take his enemy, or one that is not able to convince; but we must choose
one or two such, whom either he reverenceth, or at least favors, or
otherwise may do most good with him, either by graciousnesse of speech, or
ability of personage, or some other gift: in a word, such as be fittest both
for gifts and authority to recover him, or whom the Pastor may be one, as he
also may be the first.

May the first admonisher substitute another in his place the second time?

No, for our Savior Christ does not leave it free so to do, but will have him
that did first admonish to be one, both for the better confirming of the
former dealing with the latter, as also for keeping the fault of the offender
in as much silence and secrecy as may be.

What is gathered hereby?

That great love and care of our Savior Christ toward him, as also what
diligence we must use, and what care for our brother.

What may not one alone deal with him the second time?

Because that by the testimony of two or three he might be brought to reverence
now, that which he would not at the first admonition: And further, that way may
be made to the public judgment of the Church, yea to the others, way before
the Church, which under two testimonies at least cannot proceed further against
him; for in the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth is confirmed,
Matthew. 18. 16.

Thus far of the private admonitions: What is the public?

That which is done by the whole Church, Public admonitions.
or the Minister assisted by the Congregation, 1 Timothy 5. 20. for if the second
warning serve not, our Savior would have the offender presented to the Church,
as to the highest Court, Matthew. 18. 17. not of greatest personages, but of the
most learned, and beautified with inward graces, whose presence he cannot choose
but reverence: As in the book of Numbers, a wife suspected of adultery was
brought unto the Priest in the house of God, that the reverence of the place
and person might strike a fear in her heart, to cause her to confess the
truth, Number. 5. 15, 16 wherein appears a further step and degree of Gods
singular love and affection.

But the bringing of him to open shame seems rather hurtful then profitable?

Not to the godly, to whom it is prepared as a sovereign medicine for his
disease: For as a wealthy man being sick assembleth a whole College of
Physicians to consult of his disease, and the best remedy thereof, so the whole
Church in the like case, having Vrim and Thummim, that is, treasures of
knowledge, should consult upon the recovery of the offender, who therefore
hearing their admonition, is to be received notwithstanding his former
obstinacy: but the hearts of the wicked by the warning are the more hardened, to
their everlasting perdition.

Hitherto of the corrections which are in word, what are they in deed?

Suspension, Number. 12. 14. Exodus 33. 6, 7. and Examination, Matthew. 18. 17. 1
Cor. 5.

What is Suspension?

A certain separation of him that will not amend by admonitions from some holy
things in the Church: Of suspension.
as 1. the use of Sacraments: 2. some offices in the Church.

What is Excommunication?

The casting of the stubborn sinner out of the Church, Of Excommunication.
and delivering him unto Satan, who being thus disfranchised of all the
liberties, and deprived of all the benefits, and common society of the Church,
is separated, as it were, from that protection and mercy which may be looked
for at the hands of God.

What is the end of this casting out?

It is twofold:

First, in regard of Gods glory.

Secondly, in regard of men.

How in regard of God?

Because that his holy Name and Religion should not be evil spoken of, by
suffering wicked and unclean persons, (as blasphemers, adulterers, etc.) in
the Church, which should not be like unto a stie, but clean from all show of
filthiness: for if in houses of good report, a proud person, detracter, or
liar, (much less a drunkard, or filthy person) is not suffered, much less
ought such a one to be in the Church, which is the house of the living God,
lest the Gospel come to reproach through such: in that godless persons would
thereby take occasion to open their mouths against the truth.

How in regard of men?

That likewise is twofold, either respecting the good of the person
excommunicated, or of the rest of the Church?

What is the regard that concerns the Church?

That they be not infected with his naughtiness, and that they may keep
themselves from the like offense; for that if he remain in the Church, and be
not punished,

First, either men would be provoked to commit the like sins: for the Apostle
comparing a sinful man to leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 6. teaches that a little leaven
will sour the whole batch; so one wicked man will infect the whole Church. Or,

Secondly, the weak would take occasion thereby of falling away from the truth;
and others yet without, would be holden from coming unto it.

What is the regard that concerns him that is cast out?

That he being shamed, may be brought to repent, and turn unto the Lord, as
the Apostle says of the incestuous person, who should be cut off for the
destruction of the flesh; that is, the natural corruption, and for saving of
the spirit, that is, the man regenerate (1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20.)

If the severity of this sentence be such as has been declared: how then
tends it to Reformation?

They that are thus censured are only delivered to Satan conditionally, if they
repent not: so it is a means either to bring them to Christ, or send them to
the devil: as a hand almost cut off, and hanging but by the skin, is in danger
to be lost, unless some skillful Surgeon bind it up.

What is to be done to him if he repent?

He is to be received of the Church, whom as they loose in earth, our Savior
Christ loses in heaven; yet he is not by and by to be admitted to all
privileges of the Church, but to be suspended for a time till the fruits of
repentance may better appear: for if some in the law for a certain pollution in
a lawful duty of burying the dead, were suspended from the Passover, Numb. 9.
6. much more in the Gospel for such obstinacy.

How many sorts of suspensions then are there?

Two: one going before excommunication, and the other following the same
toward them that are penitent, both which were shadowed in the Leviticall law
in the case of Leprosy. For first, in the 13. of Levit. we find that upon
suspicion of Leprosy a man was shut up for a time, not only from the worship
of God, but also from all society of men: and how much more may it be lawful
under the Gospel, to execute the censure of suspension after two admonitions
upon a known offense; when it is set down in the 14 of Levit. That a man
cleansed from his leprosy was brought home unto the camp, and placed in his
tent, where he stayed for certain days, it being not lawful for him to come
into the Tabernacle?

So much of the medicinal censures: what is the last censure of fearful
revenge?

The curse unto death called by S. Paul Anathama Marenatha, Anathema Maranatha.
1 Cor. 16. 22. that is, accursed until the Lord come, or everlastingly; which
is thought to have been executed upon Hymeneus and Alexander by Paul (1 Timothy 1.
20.) and afterward upon Julian by the Church then.

Against whom is this censure to proceed?

This everlasting curse, which is the most fearful thunderclap of Gods
judgment, is to be pronounced only against such as are desperately wicked that
have nothing profited by the former censures, and show their incorrigiblenesse
by their obstinate and malicious resisting all means graciously used to
reclaim them: giving tokens even of that unpardonable sin against the Holy
Ghost. Which fearful sin by how much the more difficult it is to be
discerned and known, by so much the more care is this heavy doom to be used
by the Church. Yet doubtless God does sometimes give clear tokens thereof in
bl^sphemous Apostates, such as Julian and others, who maliciously oppose,
deride and persecute that truth of God which they have been enlightened in: And
where God does set such marks upon them, the Church of God may pronounce them
to be such, and carry it self toward them accordingly.

What are the outward enemies that oppose against the Church of Christ? Of the
enemies of the Church.


Some do under the show of friendship, and some with profession of enmity.

Who are the open enemies?

Heathens, Jews, Turks, and all that make profession of profaneness by
sitting down in the seat of scorners.

What enemies are they that make show of friendship?

Such are al those, Of the general Apostasy.
that bearing the name of Christians do obstinately deny the faith whereby we
are joined unto Christ, which are called Heretics; or that break the bond of
charity, whereby we are tied in communion one to another, which are termed
Schismatics, or else add tyranny to schism and heresy, as that great
Antichrist, head of the general apostasy, which the Scriptures forewarned by
name.

Where are we forewarned of the Apostasy?

Where the Apostle foretells that there shall be a general apostasy or
falling away from the truth of the Gospel before the latter day. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 23.


Is it meant that the whole Church shall fall away from Christ?

No: it were impossible that a perfect head should be without a body.

Why is it then called general?

Because the Gospel having been universally preached throughout the world;
from it, both whole Nations did fall, and the most part also even of those
Nations that kept the profession of it, howbeit still there remained a Church,
though there were no settled estate thereof.

Is it likely the Lord would bar so many Nations that lived under Antichrist,
and that so long, from the means of salvation?

Why not, and that most justly; for if the whole world of the Gentiles were
rejected, when the Church was only in Jury for some 1500 years; and seeing of
the Jews ten Tribes were rejected, and the remainder, but a few, were of the
Church: with great reason might the Lord reject those Nations and people for so
many ages, seeing they rejected Gods grace in falling away from the Gospel,
which the Lord most graciously revealed unto them, rather then to their Fathers
before them.

Is this apostasy necessarily laid upon the Sea of Rome?

Yes verily, as by the description may evidently appear.

What are the parts of this Apostasy?

The head and the body: for as Christ is the head of the Church which is his
body; so Antichrist is the head of the Romish Church which is his body.

Who is that Antichrist?

He is one who under the color of being for Christ, Of Antichrist, and who he
is.
and under title of his Vicegerent, exalts himself above and against Christ,
opposing himself against all his offices and ordinances both in Church and
Commonwealth, bearing authority in the Church of God, ruling over that City
with seven Hills, which did bear rule over Nations, and put our Lord to death; a
Man of sin, a Harlot, a Mother of spiritual fornications to the Kings and
people of the Nations, a child of perdition, a destroyer establishing himself
by lying miracles and false wonders: all which marks together, do agree with
none but the Pope of Rome.

How does the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. describe this Antichristian head unto us?

First he describes what he is toward others, and then what he is in himself.

What is he toward others?

That is declared by two special titles, the Man of sin, and Son of
perdition; declaring hereby not so much his own sin and perdition, which is
exceeding great, as of those that receive his mark, whom he causes to sin,
and consequently to fall into perdition: as Jeroboam who is often branded with
the mark of causing Israel to sin: and he is so much more detestable then he,
by how much both his idolatry is more, and has drawn more Kingdoms after him
then Jeroboam did Tribes.

In what respect is he called the man of sin?

In that he causes man to sin; and this the Pope does in a high degree,
justifying sin, not by oversight, but by Laws advisedly made, not only
commanding some sins, which we are by our corrupt nature prone unto, as
spiritual fornication, but also (to the great profanation of the holy name and
profession of Christ) permitting and teaching for lawful such as even our
corrupt nature (not wholly subverted through erroneous custom of sin)
abhors: as incestuous marriages, and breaking of faith and league,
equivocating, and the like, which profane men (by the very light of nature) do
detest.

In what sense is he called the child of perdition?

Not as the unthrift mentioned in the Gospel, Luke 15. 32*
neither as Judas, who is passively called the Son of perdition; John 17. 12.
but actively, as it is other where expounded, where he is called the
destroyer, Rev. 9. 11. because he destroys many: And that the Pope is such an
one, some of his own Secretaries make it good, confessing that many who were
well disposed persons before their entry into that Sea, became cursed and
cruel beasts when once they were settled in the same, as if there were some
pestilent poison in that seat infecting those that sit therein.

What learn you of this?

That the calling of the Pope is unlawful; for every office or calling which
the Lord does not bless, or wherein none occupying the place grows in piety,
is to be esteemed for an unlawful calling: for in a lawful calling some (at
the least) are found in all ages profitable to the Church or Commonwealth.

What is the use of all this Doctrine?

That whosoever are partakers of the sins of Rome, are also under the same
curse; and therefore such as have lived in Popery should examine our selves if
we have truly repented us of it, first, by the change of our understanding; as
whether we have grown in the knowledge of the truth: And secondly, by the change
of our affections, as whether we hate Popery, and love the truth unfainedly,
and so let every one judge himself, that he be not judged, and that with
harder judgment, Romans 2. 4. according as God has been the longer patient
toward us.

What further?

That there can be no sound agreement betwixt Popery and the profession of the
Gospel, no more then betwixt light and darkness, falsehood and truth, God and
Beliall, and therefore no reconciliation can be devised betwixt them: for if
the members of Antichrist shall be destroyed, we cannot in any sort communicate
with them in their errors, unless we will bear them company in their
destruction also.

Does every error destroy the soul?

No verily: 2 Pet. 2^
for as every wound kills not a man, so every error depriveth not a man of
salvation; but as the vital parts being wounded or infected, bring death, so
those errors that destroy the fundamental points and heads of faith bring
everlasting destruction, in which kind is Popery, which sundry ways
overthrows the principles and grounds of our holy faith, and therefore is
termed an apostasy, or departing from the faith.

Is it then impossible for a Pope to be saved?

No; it is not impossible, his sin being not necessarily against the holy
Ghost, to which only repentance is denied; for some (in likelhood) have
entered into, and continued in that Sea ignorantly, and therefore may possibly
find place to repentance. But if any be saved, it is a secret hidden with God:
for concerning any thing that appears by the end of any Pope, since he was
lift up in the Emperors chair, and discovered to be the man of sin, there is
no grounded hope given to persuade that any one of them is saved.

So much of Antichrist what he is toward others: what is he in himself?

That is set down in two points: first, in that (contrary to right, and by
mere usurpation) he seateth himself in the Temple of God, as if he were
Christ's Vicar, being indeed his enemy, both which the word Antichrist notes.

Secondly, in that he is here expressly named an adversary, and one that is
contrary to Christ.

Wherein is the Pope adversary unto Christ?

Every way, in life, and in office.

How in life?

In that Christ being most pure and holy, yea holiness it self, the Popes
many of them are, and have been most filthy and abominable in blaspheming,
conjuring, murdering, covetousness, whoring, and that incestuously and
Sodomitically, and yet will they in their ordinary Titles be called holy; yea
holiness it self, which is proper only to Christ.

How in Office?

First, in his Kingdom: Christ's Kingdom is without all outward show, or
pomp: But the Popes Kingdom consists wholly in Pomp, and Shows, as
imitating his Predecessors the Emperors of Rome in his proud, stately, and
lordly offices, princely train, and outrageous expenses in every sort.

Secondly, in his Priesthood, in raising up another Sacrifice then Christ,
another Priesthood then his, other Mediators then him.

Thirdly, in his Prophetical office, in that he teaches clean contrary to
him; Christ taught nothing but what he received of his Father: The Pope
sets out his own Canons and Decrees of counsels, and in them he teaches
such Doctrine as overthrows the maine foundation of that which Christ taught.

What is the second effect?

That he is exceedingly lifted up against all that is called God.

How does this agree to the Pope?

More fitly then to any other person; for Christ being very God abaseth
himself unto the assuming of the nature of man; the Pope a vile man advances
himself to the Throne of God: Christ being above all secular power, paid
tribute, and was taxed and suffered himself to be crowned with a crown of
Thorns, and bear his own Cross; but the Pope being under all secular power,
exalts himself above all secular powers, exacteth Tribute of Kings, sets
his foot on the neck of Emperors, carries a tripple Crown of gold, and is
borne upon men's shoulders.

But he calls himself the servant of servants.

Though he do, yet (by the confession of his own Canonists) he does it but
dissemblingly and in hypocrisy, which is double iniquity; for they say that he
does in humility only say so, not that he is indeed so as he says.

What are the effects of this his pride?

They are two: First, he sits in the Church as God, for he binds the
consciences of men by his decrees, which no Princes Law can do; for though men
observe not such Laws, yet if they break them not of contempt, they are
discharged, as if they did bear the penalty prescribed in them.

By this it seems that the Church of Rome is yet the Church of God, although
corrupt, seeing it is said that he sits in the Temple of God.

No verily; but it is so said, first, because it bears the name of the
Church, for the Scriptures give the name to a thing according to that it has
been, as when Christ says, The abomination of desolation shall stand in the
holy place; he means not that the Temple was then holy, which at that time,
(being no figure nor shadow of Christ and his Church) was profaned, but that it
had been holy; so we confess that there had been a true Church in Rome, which
is now no Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Satan.

Secondly, he is said to sit in the Temple of God, because he exercises his
tyrannical rule in the Christian world, and is most busy in those parts where
Christ had his Church, and the Gospel is professed, laboring in all places,
either by himself or his wicked instruments, to overthrow or corrupt, poison
or hinder the free course of the Gospel; so that in this regard he may be said
to sit in the Temple of God, that is, to reign and tyrannize in the Church of
God, though the City where he is be Sodom, and the Church whereof he is head,
the Synagogue of Satan.

What is the other effect of his pride?

He boasts himself that he is God, as the Popes flatterers in the Canon Law
call him, Our Lord God the Pope: Neither does his pride stay there, but also he
challenges to himself things proper to God, as the title of Holiness, also
power to forgive sins, and to carry infinite souls to hell without check or
controlment, and to make of nothing something; yea, to make the Scriptures to
be no Scriptures, and no Scripture to be Scripture, at his pleasure, yea to
make of the creature the Creator.

It should seem to be an impossible thing that men should be carried away from
the faith of the Gospel by one so monstrous and directly opposite to Christ.

It might seem so indeed, if at once and at a sudden he had showed himself in
such foul colors, and therefore by certain decrees of iniquity he raised
himself to his height of wickedness, and did not at the first show himself
in such a monstrous shape and likeness.

How does that appear?

By the Apostle, who in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. unto 13. shows of two courses the
Devil held to bring this to pass; one secret and covert, before this man of
sin was revealed: the other when he was revealed and set up in his Seat.

What were the ways of Antichrists coming before he was revealed?

Those several errors which were spread, partly in the Apostles time, and
partly after their time, thereby to make a way for his coming; and in this
respect this mystery of iniquity was begun to be wrought (as it were) under
ground and secretly in the Apostles time.

How was this mystery of iniquity wrought in the Apostles time?

By many ambitious spirits, (as it were) petty Antichrists, which were desirous
to be Lords over the Church, and wicked Heretics, which then sowed many
errors and heresies, as justification by works, worshipping of Angels, and
which put Religion in meats, and condemned marriage, which were beginnings and
grounds of Popery and Antichristianisme, 3 John 9. Acts 5. 1. Gal. 1. 6, 7. and
2. 6. Col. 2. 18, 21. 1 Timothy 4. 3.

What gather you of this?

That those whom God has freed from the bondage of Popery, should strive to
free themselves from all the remanents thereof, lest if they cleave still to
any of them, God in judgment bring the whole upon them again.

How shall Antichrists Kingdom be continued and advanced after that he is
revealed?

By the power of Satan, in lying miracles and false wonders.

What difference is there betwixt Christ's miracles and theirs?

Very great every way: The differences between Christ's miracles and the Popes.
for Christ's miracles were true, whereas these are false and lying, and by
legerdemaine; Christ's miracles were from God, but theirs, where there is any
strange thing, and above the common reach of men, from the Devil; Christ's
miracles were for the most part profitable to the health of man, but theirs
altogether unprofitable, and for a vain show; Christ's miracles were to confirm
the truth, but theirs to confirm falsehood.

What gather you of this?

That seeing the Popes Kingdom glories so much in wonders, it is most like
that he is Antichrist, seeing the false Christ's and the false Prophets shall
do great wonders to deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect, and that
some of the false Prophets prophesies shall come to pass, we should not
therefore believe the doctrine of Popery for their wonders sake, seeing the
Lord thereby tries our faith, who has given to Satan great knowledge and
power to work strange things, to bring those to damnation who are appointed
unto it. Moreover, whatsoever Miracles are not profitable to some good, neither
tend to confirm a truth, they are false and lying; so that as the Lord left an
evident difference between his Miracles and the enchantments of the Egyptians,
so has he left an evident difference between the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles, and those of the Romish Synagogue, Matthew. 24. 24. Deuteronomy. 13. 12. Exodus
7. 12.

Are not miracles as necessary now, as they were in the time of the Apostles?

No verily; for the Doctrine of the Gospel being then new unto the world, had
need to have been confirmed with miracles from heaven; but it being once
confirmed, there is no more need of miracles; and there we keeping the same
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, must content our selves with the
confirmation which has already been given.

What arises out of this?

That the Doctrine of Popery is a new Doctrine, which has need to to be
confirmed with new miracles; and so it is not the doctrine of Christ, neither
is established by his miracles.

What force shall the Miracles of Antichrist have?

Mavelous great, to bring many men to damnation, God in the just revenge of
the contempt of the truth, sending a strong delusion among them.

Hither to we have heard Antichrist described by his effects and properties:
The seat of Antichrist.
now tell me here where is the place of his special residence?

That is the City of Rome.

How does that appear?

First, because he that let at the time when Paul wrote was the Emperor of
Rome, who did then sit there, and must be dis-seated, (as the learned Papists
themselves grant ere the Pope could enter upon it. Secondly, Rev. 17. 18. John
called the City where he must sit, the Lady of the world; which at that time
agreed only to Rome, being the Mother City of the world. Thirdly, it was that
City which was seated upon seven hills, Rev. 17. 9. which by all ancient
Records belongs properly and only to Rome. As for the occasion of the Popes
placing there, it came by the means of translating of the Seat of the Empire
from Rome to Constantinople, from whence ensued also the parting of the Empire
into two parts, by which division it being weakened, and after also sundred in
affection, as well as in place, was the easier to be entered upon, and obtained
by the Pope.

What do you further gather of that the Apostle says, that he that lets
shall let?

That the Antichrist is not one particular man, as the Papists do fancy; for
then by the like phrase he that lets must be one particular man, where it
cannot be that one man should live so many hundred years; as from Paul's time
to the time of the translation of the Empire from Rome, much less until
within two years and a half of the latter day, as they imagine the time of
Antichrist: and therefore as by him that lets is understood a succession of
men, and not one only man; so in Dan. 7. 3. 17. the four beasts, and the
four Kings, do not signify four particular men, but four governments, in
every one whereof there were sundry men that ruled: so that the argument of the
Papists who upon the words [the man of sinne] would prove that the Antichrist
the Apostle speaks of, is one singular man, is but vain, and has no
consequence in it.

But how can Antichrist be already come, seeing the Empire yet stands?

The name of the Empire only remains, the thing is gone; for he has neither
the chief City, nor the Tribune, nor the Commandment of the people; and
therefore he can be no let to the Antichrists coming, especially the Pope
having gotten such an upper hand over him, as to cause him to wait at his gate
barefoot, and to hold his stirrup.

What shall be the end of this Antichrist?

God shall confound him with the breath of his mouth, that is, with the
preaching of his Word: which serves for another argument to prove the Pope to
be Antichrist: for whereas he had subdued Kingdoms and Empires under his feet,
he has been of late mightily suppressed by the Word preached, and not by
outward force, as other Potentates use to be.

What learn you of this?

The mavelous power of Gods Word to suppress whatsoever rises against it:
for if the mightiest cannot stand before it, much less the smallest: and
therefore it is expressed by a mighty wind, Acts 2. 23. which carries all
before it; and by fire, which consumes all, and pierces all: And it declares
a mavelous easy victory against the enemies, when it is said, that with the
breath of his mouth he shall consume his enemies, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

What else shall be the overthrow of Antichrist?

The glorious appearance of the Son of God in the latter day.

What gather you of this?

That before the last day he shall not be utterly consumed, whereof
notwithstanding it follows not that the head shall remain till then; for the
Beast and the false Prophet shall be taken and cast into the fire before the
latter day; but some shall retain a liking of him, and his errors, and
superstitions even till the last day.

Hitherto of the head of this general Apostasy: what are the members of it?

They are first described by their end, even a number of people that shall
perish, which accords with that name and property of the head, the Destroyer
or Son of perdition, being truly verified in them in regard of the fearful
end he shall bring them to.

What is the use of this?

That as no poison can take away the life of an elect: so small occasions carry
away such as are appointed to destruction.

How otherwise are these members of Antichrist described?

By this, that they never loved the truth, although they understood and
professed it.

How should a man love the truth?

For the truths sake, not for vain glory, filthy delight, or commodidities.

How appears it that men love the Word of God?

When they walk accordingly, and keep faith in a good Conscience, which some
losing by their wicked life, lost also their Faith, that is, their Religion, 1 Timothy 1. 19.

How is it to be understood that God gives men up to strong delusions?

Because God is a just Judge, which by them either punishes or corrects
former sins, and especially the contempt of the Gospel; in which regard even
amongst us now, some are cast into the sink of Popery, some into the Family of
love; some become Arians, some Anabaptists, at which are (as it were) diverse
Gaoles and Dungeons, whereinto he throws those that are cold and careless
Professors of the Gospel.

What learn you by this?

That they that imagine God favorable unto them notwithstanding their sins,
because their life, or goods, or honors are spared, are foully deceived; for
when the Lord cease to reprove any, or to strive with them, Romans 1. 24, 26.
then does he give them up into vanity of their own minds to do their wicked
wills, which is the greatest judgment, and very usual with God to do.

What is our duty in such cases?

To pray unto the Lord to keep us from all errors; but if for our trial and
further hardening of others it please him to send errors amongst us, that it
would please him to preserve us in that danger, that we taste not of that bait
whereby Satan seeks to catch us.

What other cause is there of sending these errors?

That those may be damned which believe not the truth: for as God has
appointed them to damnation, so betwixt his counsel in rejecting them and the
final effect of it, there must be sin to bring the effect justly upon them.

What reason is annexed for their just damnation?

Because they rest in unrighteousness, having their ears itching after
errors, which they drink in, as the earth drinks up water. So that albeit
they be powerfully sent of God in his judgment, yet are they also greedily
desired and affected of them.

Having spoken at large of the providence of God disposing of man in this
world; it follows to speak of his providence concerning mankind in the world
to come.

How does God then deal with men after this life? Of the last judgment.


He brings them all to judgment.

What is meant here by judgment?

The pronouncing or executing of the irrevocable sentence of absolution or
condemnation.

How is that done?

Partly on every man in particular at the hour of his death, Heb. 9. 27. but
fully and generally upon all men at the second coming of Christ, Acts 17. 31.
The death of every one severally goes immediately before the particular
judgment: the general resurrection of all goes before the final judgment
which shall be at the last day.

Must all men then die?

Yea all both good and bad, Psalm. 49. 10. Eccl. 2. 16. save that unto some,
namely such as shall be found alive at Christ's coming, a change shall be in
stead of death, as shall be showed.

Death being the punishment of sin, Why the righteous dye.
how comes it to pass that the righteous dye, to whom all sins are
forgiven?

Death indeed came on all mankind by reason of sin, Romans 5. 12. but yet it
is not in all things the same to the godly and to the wicked: for howsoever
unto both it be the enemy of nature, as the end of natural life, 1 Cor. 15.
26. Psalm. 90. 3.

Yet 1. unto the godly it is a token of Gods love, unto the wicked of his
anger, Psalm. 37. 37, 38. Job 18. 13, 14.

2. Unto the godly it is a rest from labor and misery, Apoc. 14. 13. the last
enemy being now destroyed, 1 Cor. 15. 26. unto the wicked it is the height of
all worldly evils, Luke 12. 20.

3. Unto the godly it is the utter abolishing of sin and perfection of
mortification, Romans 6. 7. unto the wicked it is the conquest of sin and
accomplishment of their spiritual captivity.

4. Unto the godly it is so far from being a separation from Christ, that even
the body severed from the soul and rotting in the grave is yet united to
Christ; and the soul freed from the body is with him in Paradise, Luke 23. 43.
Phil. 2. 16. unto the wicked it is an utter cutting off from the favorable
presence and fruition of God.

5. Unto the godly it is the beginning of heavenly glory; unto the wicked it is
the entrance into hellish and endless torments, Luke 16. 22, 23.

How are men judged at the hour of death? Of particular judgment at the hour
of death.


1. God at that instant pronounces, and the conscience apprehends the
sentence of blessing or cursing, Heb. 9. 27.

2. The soul of every man accordingly is (by the power of God and the
ministry of Angels) immediately conveyed into that state of happiness or
misery wherein it shall remain till the resurrection, and from thenceforth
both body and soul for ever, Luke 16. 22, 23, 26. Eccl. 11. 3.

What gather you of this?

That the doctrine of Purgatory and Prayer for the dead is vain, seeing it
appears by the Word of God that the souls of those that die in Gods favor
are presently received into joy Isay 57. 2. Ioh. 5. 24. Luke 23. 43. Apoc. 14.
13. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. and the souls of those that dye in their sins cast into
endless torments; no means being left after death to procure remission of
sins, Isay 22. 14. John 8. 24. Rom 6. 10.

What is the general and final judgment? The general judg^ment.


The great day of assize for the whole world, Eccl. 12. 14.
wherein all men's lives that ever have been, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
are, or shall be, being duly examined, every one shall receive according to
his works. In which judgment we are to consider,

1. The preparation to it.

2. The acting of it.

3. The execution of the sentence.

Wherein does the preparation to the last judgment consist?

In five things. The preparation to the last judgment.


1. In the foretokening of the time thereof, which though it be so sealed up in
the treasury of Gods counsel, Acts 1. 7.
that neither men nor Angels, nor yet our Savior himself as man in the days
of his flesh had express notice thereof, Matthew. 13 32.
(that from the uncertainty and suddenness of it we might be taught to be
always in readiness for it) yet it has pleased God to acquaint us with some
signs whereby we may discern Christ's approaching, Mat. 24. 13. 33.
as men in the Spring time may discern Summer approaching by the shooting
forth of the Figtree.

What are the signs foretokening the last judgment? The signs of the last
judgment.


They are certain notable changes in the world and Church, some further off,
Matthew. 24.
some nearer unto the coming of Christ; as

1. The publishing and receiving the Gospel throughout the world.

2. The Apostasy of most part of professors not loving the truth. 1 Timothy 4. 1.


3. The revealing of Antichrist that Man of sin and Child of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
who under the title of Christ's Vicegerent opposes himself to Christ in all
his offices and ordinances both in Church and Commonwealth.

4. Common corruptions in manners joined with security, as in the days of Noah
and Lot.

5. Wars and troubles in the world and Church.

6. False Christ's, attended with false Prophets, and armed with false miracles.

7. The calling of the Jews unto the faith of the Gospel. 2 Pet. 3. 7.


8. And lastly, Matthew. 24. 30.
signs in Heaven, Earth, and all the Elements. As the darkning of the Sun,
and Moon, etc. Yea, firing of the whole frame of Heaven, and Earth, with the
sign of the Son of man, whereby his coming shall then be clearly
apprehended by all men.

What is the second thing in the preparation?

The coming of Jesus Christ the Judge of the world, who in his humane visible
body (but yet with unspeakable glory) shall suddenly break forth like Lightning
through the Heavens, The second thing in the preparation.
riding on the clouds environed with a flame of fire, attended with all the
host of the elect Angels; and especially with the voice and shout of an
Archangel and the Trumpet of God, and so shall sit down in the royal throne
of judgment.

What is the third thing? The third thing.


The summoning and presenting of all both dead and living men, together with
Devils, before the glorious throne of Christ the judge.

How shall all men both dead and living be summoned?

By the voice of Christ appeared by the ministry of Angels, and namely by the
shout and Trumpet of the Archangel, whereto the Lord joining his divine power
(as unto the word preached for the work of the first resurrection) shall in a
moment both raise the dead with their own bodies and every part thereof though
never so dispersed, John 5. 28.
and change the living, Matthew. 24. 31.
so that it shall be with them as if they had been a long time dead and were
now raised to life again. 1 Cor. 15. 52.


Shall there be no difference between the resurrection of the elect and
reprobate?

Yes; for howsoever they shall both rise by the same mighty voice and power of
Christ in the same bodies wherein they lived upon earth, and those so altered
in quality, as then they shall be able to abide for ever in that estate
whereunto they shall be judged: yet

1. The elect shall be raised as members of the body of Christ by virtue
derived from his resurrection: the reprobate, as Malefastors, shall be brought
forth of the prison of the grave by virtue of the judiciary power of Christ,
and of the curse of the law.

2. The elect shall come forth to everlasting life, which is called the
resurrection of life: the reprobate to shame and perpetual contempt, called
the resurrection of condemnation.

3. The bodies of the elect shall be spiritual, that is, glorious, powerful,
nimble, impatible: but the bodies of the reprobate shall be full of
uncomelinesse and horror, Phil 3. 21.
agreeable to the guiltiness and terror of their consciences, and liable to
extreme torment.

How shall all men be presented before the throne of Christ?

The elect being gathered by the Angels, shall with great joy be caught up into
the air to meet the Lord, Luke 21. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.

The reprobate together with the Devil and his Angels, shall with extreme
horror and confusion be drawn into his presence, Rev. 6. 15.

What is the fourth thing?

The separation of the Elect from the Reprobate: The fourth thing.
For Christ, the great Shepherd, shall then place the Elect, as his Sheep that
have heard his voice and followed him, on his right hand: and the Reprobates,
with the Devils, as straying Goats, on the left hand, Matthew. 25. 33.

What is the fifth and last thing?

The opening of the book of record, The fifth thing.
by which the dead shall be judged Rev. 20. 12. viz.

1. The several books of men's consciences, which then by the glorious
illumination of Christ, the Sun of righteousness, shining in his full
strength, shall be so enlightened, that men shall perfectly remember what ever
good or evil they did in the time of their life, the secrets of all hearts
being then revealed.

2. The book of life, that is, the eternal decree of God to save his Elect by
Christ, which decree shall then at length be made known to all.

Thus far of the preparation to judgment, what are we to consider in the
second place?

The act of judgment, The act of judgment, and how performed.
wherein the Elect shall first be acquitted, that they may after as assistants
join with Christ in the judgment of the reprobate men and Angels.

How shall the act of judgment be performed?

1. By examination: Romans 2. 12.
2. By pronouncing sentence. The examination shall be according to the Law of
God, which has been revealed unto men, whether it be the Law of nature only,
which is the remainder of the moral Law written in the hearts of our first
parents, and conveyed by the power of God unto all men, to leave them without
excuse; or that written Word of God, vouchsafed unto the Church in the
Scriptures, first of the old, and after also of the new Testament, as the rule
of faith and life.

2. By the evidence of every man's conscience, bringing all his works, whether
good or evil, Matthew 12. 27, 41, 42.
to light, bearing witness with him or against him, together with the
testimony of such, who either by doctrine, company, or example, have approved
or condemned him.

Shall there be no difference in the examination of the Elect and the Reprobate?

Yes: Ezekiel. 18. 22.
for, 1. The Elect shall not have their sins, for which Christ satisfied,
Rev. 14. 17.
but only their good works remembered.

2. Being in Christ, they and their works shall not undergo the strict trial
of the Law simply in it self, but as the obedience thereof does prove them to
be true partakers of the grace of the Gospel.

Shall there be any such reasoning at the last judgment, as seems Matthew. 7.
and 25?

No: but the consciences of men being then enlightened by Christ, shall clear
all those doubts, and reject those objections and excuses, which they seem now
to apprehend.

How shall the sentence be pronounced?

By the Judge himself, our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to the evidence
and verdict of conscience touching works, shall adjudge the Elect unto the
blessing of the kingdom of God his Father: and the Reprobates, with the Devil
and his Angels, unto the curse of everlasting fire.

Shall men then be judged to salvation or damnation for their works sake?

1. The wicked shall be condemned for the merit of their works, Romans 6. 23.
because being perfectly evil, they deserve the wages of damnation.

2. The godly shall be pronounced just, because their works, though imperfect,
James 2. 18.
do prove their faith (whereby they lay hold on Christ and his meritorious
righteousness) to be a true faith, Gal. 5. 6.
as working by love in all parts of obedience.

Hitherto of the act of judgment: What are we to consider in the third and
last place?

The execution of this judgment, The execution of the last judgment.
Christ by his almighty power and ministry of his Angels, casting the Devils
and the reprobate men into hell, Matthew. 25. 46.
and bringing Gods Elect into the possession of his glorious kingdom: Psalm.
58. 10.
wherein the Reprobates shall first be dispatched, that the righteous may
rejoice to see the vengeance, and as it were wash their feet in the blood of
the wicked.

What shall be the estate of the Reprobates in hell?

They shall remain for ever in unspeakable torment of body, The estate of the
Reprobates in hell.
and anguish of mind, being cast out from the favorable presence of God, and
glorious fellowship of Christ and his Saints, 2 Thessalonians 2. 9.
(whose happiness they shall see and envy) into that horrible Dungeon figured
in Scripture by utter darkness, blackness of darkness, weeping and gnashing
of teeth, the Worm that never dies, the fire that never goes out, etc.

What shall be the estate of the Elect in heaven?

They shall be unspeakeably and everlastingly blessed and glorious in body and
soul, The estate of the Elect in heaven.
being freed from all imperfections and infirmities; 1 Cor. 2. 9.
yea from such Graces as imply imperfection, 1 Cor. 13 10.
as Faith, Hope, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Repentance, etc. endued with perfect Wisdom and Holiness, Psalm. 16. 11.
possessed with all the pleasures that are at the right hand of God, Rev. 3. 21.
seated as Princes in Thrones of Majesty, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
crowned with Crowns of Glory, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
possessing the new Heaven and Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, Psalm.
17. 15.
beholding and being filled with the fruition of the glorious presence of God,
1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
and of the Lamb, Heb. 12. 22.
Jesus Christ, in the company of innumerable Angels, and holy Saints, as the
Scripture phrases are.

What shall follow this?

Christ shall deliver up that dispensatory Kingdom (which he received for the
subduing of his enemies, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28.
and accomplishing the salvation of his Church) unto God the Father, and God
shall be all in all for all eternity. Amen.

What use may we make of this Doctrine, concerning this general end, and
final judgment?

First, it serves to confute, not only heathen Philosophers; who, as in other
things, The use of this doctrine concerning the last judgment.
so in this, concerning the worlds continuance, became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness, Romans 1. being
destitute of the Word of God to guide them; Rev. 17.
but also to confute many profane Atheists, in the Church of God, who do not
believe in their hearts those Articles of the Resurrection and of the general
judgment: it is much indeed that there should be Atheists in the Church of
God, and none in hell, that any should deny, or doubt of that which the devils
fear and tremble at. But sure the Apostle Peter's prophecy is fulfilled, 2
Pet. 3. 3. there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the
fathers dyed, all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation: and
(as they would persuade themselves) so they shall for ever: And answerable
their lives are to such conceits, Eccl. 11. 9. But if neither the light of
reason (it being impossible that the truth and goodness and justice of God
should take effect, if there were not after this life a doom and recompense, 2
These. 1. 6.) Nor secondly, the light of Conscience, which doubtless with
Felix, Acts 24. 25. makes them tremble in the midst of their obstinate
gainsaying; Nor thirdly, the light of Scripture can convince and persuade men
of this truth, then we must leave them to be confuted and taught by woeful
experience, even by the feeling of those flames, which they will not believe to
be any other then fancies; and by seeing the Lord Jesus come in the Clouds,
when all nations shall weep before him; Acts 17.
and these Atheists especially, lament their obstinate infidelity with ever
dropping tears, and ever enduring misery.

And this Doctrine may be terror to all graceless and wicked livers, to
consider that the wrath of God shall be revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, 2 These. 1. 6. when all the sweetness
of their sinful pleasures shall be turned into gall, and bitterness for ever,
Wis. 5. 6, 7, 8.

How may the consideration of this Doctrine, touching the end of the world, and
the day of Judgment be useful to the godly?

First, it should teach us, not to seek for happiness in this world, or se our
affections on things below; for this world passes away, and the things thereof.

Secondly, here is a fountain of Christian comfort, and a ground of Christian
patience in all troubles, that there shall be an end, and a Saints hope shall
not be cut off. If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But here is the comfort and patience of the Saints,
they wait for another world, and they know it is a just thing with God, to give
them rest after their labors, 2 These. 1. 9. and a Crown after their Combat,
2 Timothy 4. 8. and after their long pilgrimage, an everlasting habitation, 2 Cor.
5. 1, Be patient, (says the Apole) and settle your hearts, for the coming of
the Lord draws near, 2 Pet. 2. 9. when they that have sown in tears shall
reap in joy, James 5. 7. Heb. 10. 36.

Thirdly, from this Doctrine, excellent arguments may be drawn to press
Christians to a holy life, 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then all these things must be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation, and
godliness? And verse 14. Wherefore seeing ye look for such things, give
diligence that you may be found of him in peace: We should always live in
expectation of the Lord Jesus in the Clouds with oil in our Lamps, Luke 12. 43.
prepared for his coming: Blessed is that servant whom his Master when he
comes shall find so doing, Matthew. 25. 21.
he shall say unto him, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy
Masters joy.

FINIS.
The Table.
ALL men desire eternal life and happiness. 3 Religion the means to obtain
it. No salvation but by true Religion. The diverse kinds of false Religion.
What Christian Religion is. Of Catechizing. 4 What Catechizing is. Where to be
used, and by whom. The necessity of it. True happiness consists in God. How
we come to enjoy God. Means to know God. By His divine works. His holy word.
5 Of the divine works of God. The uses of knowing God by his works. Of Gods
holy Word, the Scriptures. 6 How the Scriptures were delivered. By Revelations.
By Oracles. By visions. 7 What the Scripture is. That the Scriptures are the
Word of God. 8 Reasons to prove God to be the Author of the holy Scriptures. 1.
Efficient; isntrumental. 2. The simplicity and sincerity of the Writers. 3.
The quality and condition of the penmen of the holy Scriptures. 9 4. The holy
matters of holy Scriptures. 5. The doctrine of Scriptures are above humane
capacity. 6. The concord of the several Writers one with another. 7. The
Prophesies fulfilled in their due times. 8. The Majesty and authority of the
Scriptures. 10 9. The motives used in them to persuade, not reason, but
commands. 10. The end and scope of the Scripture, which is Gods glory. 11.
Their admirable power. 12. Their antiquity. 13. The hatred of the devil and
wicked men against them. 14. The preservation of the Scriptures. 15. The power
to humble a man, and raise him up again. 16. The consonant testimony of all
men at all times. 11 17. The known miracles done by the Writers. 18. The
testimony of the Spirit in the hearts of men. What are the books of holy
Scripture. 12 In what language the old Testament were first written, with
vowels and pricks. That the Scriptures of the old Testament were first written
without pricks or vowels. 13 The Book of Moses. The Book of the Prophets. The
Historical Books. The Doctrinall Books. The Poetical books. The Prosaicall
books. 14 The Apocryphal Books. The erroors of the Apocryphal books. 15 Of
the books of the New Testament. 16 The properties of the holy scriptures. 17 1.
Holy. 2. Highest in authority. 18 3. Sufficient in themselves. That the
Scriptures are a perfect Rule for doctrine, life, and salvation. Objections
against the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures answered. 20 Of the perspicuity
of the holy Scripture. 21 The Papists objections against the perspicuity of the
Scriptures answered. 22 Why God has left some places of Scripture obscure. 23
Of the translations of holy Scriptures. An objection grounded on various
readings answered. 24 Why the Scriptures must be expounded by the Scriptures.
The use of the holy Scriptures. 25 Who must read the Scriptures. That all must
read the Scriptures proved. The Papists objections against reading the
Scriptures answered. 26 That there is a God. 27 Of the nature of God. 29 Of
Gods essence. 30 The Name of God. Of the Properties or Attributes of God. 32 A
description of God. God is a spirit. 33 The perfection of God. The felicity of
God. Of the simpleness, or singleness of God. 35 Gods infiniteness. 36 Gods
immensity or greatness. 37 Gods eternity. 38 The life of God. 39 Of the
knowledge or wisdom of God. Foreknowledge or counsel of God. The counsel
of God. Gods absolute wisdom and knowledge. The uses. 45 Of the omnipotence or
almighty power of God. Of Gods absolute power. 47 Of Gods actual power. Gods
power infinite. The uses. 50 Of Gods will. Whether God does will evil. 56 The
holiness of Gods will. 61 Of Gods goodness. The use of Gods goodness. 62 The
graciousnesse of God. 63 Of the love of God. 64 Uses of Gods love. 67 Of the
mercy of God. The uses of Gods mercy. Of the justice of God. 70 The uses of
Gods justice. 72 That there is but one God. 73 Of the unity of the Godhead. Of
the Trinity. 75 What a Person in the Trinity is. 78 Of the Father, the first
person of the Trinity. 79 Of the other persons of the Trinity in general. Of
the second person in the Trinity. 80 Of the third person in the Trinity. 83 How
to know that we have the Spirit. 86 Things commune to the three persons. 87 In
what they all agree. 1. Coessentiall. 2. Coequall. 3. Coeternall. Things proper
to each of the persons. Of the kingdom of God. 88 The parts of Gods Kingdom.
Of Gods decree. Of Predestination. 91 Parts of Predestination. Election.
Reprobation.
Election. Of Reprobation. Execution of Gods decree. 93 Creation. Providence.
Creation in general. Uses of the creation. Creation of the particular
creatures. The Heavens. The earth. Of the invisible Creatures, the third
Heaven. and Angels.
Of Angels. Of the creation of visible things. 98 Of the Chaos, or rude mass.
Of the parts of the rude Mass. Heaven. Earth.
Of the frame of the world. Of the Elements. The four Elements. Of the mixed or
compound bodies. The several works of the six days. 100 The 1. day, heaven,
earth, and the light. The 2. day the firmament. The third day grass, corn,
trees. Of the water and earth. The 4. day, of the Creation of lights. 101 The
5. day, of the creation of fishes, birds The 6. day, of the creation of man and
woman. 102 Of the parts of man, and 1. Of his body. 2. Of the soul of man. 103
Of the immortality of the soul. Of the seat of the soul. What is the Image of
God in man. 104 Of the woman's creation 106 The end of the creation. Of Gods
providence. 107 Definition of Gods providence. 108 The uses of the Doctrine of
Gods providence. 115 Of Gods special providence over Angels. Good Angels. 116
Of the Evil Angels 120 Uses of the Doctrine concerning evil Angels. 122 Of
Gods particular providence over man. Of Gods providence toward mankind. 123 Of
the Covenant between God and man. First Covenant of works. 124 The state of man
in the time of his innocence. 126 Of man in the state of corruption, and of his
fall. 127 That the breaches of all the Commandments concurred in Adam and Eves
sin. 134 The effects of the fall. 136 Sin, guiltiness, punishment. Of our
first Parents nakedness. 137 Of their hiding themselves. Of sin. Why all
Adams posterity are partakers of his sin and misery. 142 What sin is. 143
Imputed sin. 144 Inherent sin. Original sin. The propagation of
original sin. 145 The mind corrupted. The corruption of the memory. The
corruption of the will. 147 The corruption of affections. The corruption of the
conscience. Of the corruption of the body. Actual sin. Of the sin against
the Holy Ghost. 151 The diverse differences of actual sin. 152 Guilt of
sin. 153 Punishment of sin. Of Gods covenants of man. 157 Of the covenant
of grace. 158 The differences between the covenant of works, and the covenant
of grace. 159 Wherein they agree. Of Jesus the Mediator of this covenant 160
The foundation of it. Of the person of Christ. Of the natures of Christ,
Divine. Humane.
Of the divine nature of Christ, Why it was necessary that Christ should be
God. 161 Of the humane nature of Christ. 162 Why it was necessary that Christ
should be man. 164 Of the union of the two natures of Christ. 165 Of Christ's
Office and Mediatorship. 166 That here is but one Mediator. Of his names,
Jesus, Christ. 167 Of Christ's Priesthood. 168 The Popish Priesthood
overthrown. 169 Of Christ's satisfaction. 170 Of Christ's sufferings. 171 Of
Christ's sufferings in his soul 172 Of Christ's sufferings in his body. Uses of
Christ's passion. 174 Of Christ's burial. His descending into hell. Christ's
righteousness in fulfilling the Law. Christ's original righteousness. 175
Christ's actual holiness. Of the intercession of Christ. 176 Of the
Prophetical office of Christ. 177 Of the Kingly office of Christ. 179 Of
Christ's humiliation. 183 Of Christ's exaltation. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
Of Christ's ascension. 184 Of the third degree of Christ's exaltation, his
sitting at the right hand of God. 185 The state of the godly in Christ. 186 Of
the Church of Christ. 187 The Catholic Church. The property and office of the
head of the Church. The Church triumphant. 188 Of the Church militant.
Prerogatives of the members of the Catholic Church. 190 What Sanctification
is. What Redemption is. Of our union and communion with Christ. 192 Communion
of Saints. The benefit of our Communion with Christ. 193 Justification.
Glorification. Of Justification. What Justification is. Uses arising from the
Doctrine of Justification. 195. Of Faith. 196 The various acception of Faith.
The diverse kinds of Faith. 197 Historical faith. Temporary faith. Miraculous
faith. Justifying faith. The Popish implicit faith. 198 That the whole soul
is the seat of faith. What reconciliation is. 200 What adoption is. 201 The
benefits of adoption. Sanctification. 202 The differences between
justification, and sanctification. The differences between the Law and the
Gospel. 203 The Moral Law the rule of sanctification. Ceremonial Law. 204
Judicial Law. The Moral Law. The end and use of the Law. 205 1. Knowledge of
the Law required. Rules to be observed for the Interpretation of the Law. 1.
Rule, the Law is spiritual. 2. Rule, the Law is perfect. 206 3. Rule, in every
commandment there is a Metaphor or Synecdoche. 1. Branch of the third rule. 2.
Branch. 3. Branch. Why the Commandments are propounded in the second person.
207 Good company required. Why the Commandments are propounded negatively. 208
The division of the Decalogue The sum of the 1. table. The sum of the 2.
table. 209 The division of the 1. table. 211 The Preface of the Commandments.
212 How the reason of the 1. Commandment belongs to us 213 The fifth
Commandment. The scope and meaning of this Commandment. 214 What is forbidden
and required in this first Commandment. The several branches of the first
Commandment. What it is to have a God 125 Of the knowledge of God. Opposites
to the knowledge of God. Ignorance of God. Affiance in God. 216 Patience. Hope.
Love of God. Thankfulness. 217 Fear of God. Reverence. 218 Humility. Pride.
Sorrow. Joy. Unity in Religion. 219 What it is to have other Gods. Sinful
confidence. 220 Inordinate love. Sinful fear. Sinful joy and sorrow. The
third branch of this Commandment. True Religion. How we must come to the true
Religion. Helps inabling us to obey this Commandment. 221 Means of the
knowledge of God. Hindrances. Means of ignorance here forbidden. What is
enjoined in the three following Commandments. The second Commandment. 222 The
scope and meaning of the second Commandment. What is here forbidden. What is
meant by making of Images. The special branches of the second Commandment.
223 Of Prayer. 224 Of Fasts. Of Vows. 225 The manner of Gods worship. Of
Preparation. Of the disposition in the action. What is required after the
action. 226 Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. Of bodily gestures. Of the abuse of
Gods Ordinances. Defects respecting the inward Worship. 227 Defects in outward
Worship. 228 Helps in performing Gods pure worship The second maine branch of
the second Commandment. 229 What is forbidden concerning Images. 230 That it
is unlawful to make the Image of God. 231 That it is unlawful to make the
Image of Christ. What is meant by worshipping Images. 232 Of countenancing
Idolatry. 233 Reasons to back this Commandment, taken from Gods Titles.
Jealous God Reasons drawn from the works of God. 234 The first reason. The
second reason. 235 The third Commandment. 236 The sum of the third
Commandment. What is meant by the Name of God. What is meant by the word In
vain. 237 What is forbidden in the third Commandment. What is required in the
third Commandment. The particular duties required in the third Commandment.
The duties repugnant. 238 The right use of Oaths. What persons may lawfully
take an Oath. 239 The special abuses of an oath. How Gods Name is taken in
vain in regard of his properties. How in respect of his Works. 240 How in
respect of his Word. Of the helps and hindrances. 241 The reason annexed to
the third Commandment. The fourth Commandment. The meaning of the fourth
Commandment. 242 What need there is of one day in seven to serve God. That the
Sabbath day is not ceremonial. Of the change of the seventh day to the first,
and the reason thereof. 243 The time of the Sabbath, and when it begins. 244
What is meant by the word Remember. 245 Of the preparation of the Sabbath. The
parts of the fourth Commandment. 246 What works ought to be declined. What
rest required in the fourth Commandment. 247 The special breaches opposite to
an holy rest. To whom this Commandment is chiefly directed. 289 The second
part of this Commandment, which is the sanctifying of the rest. The exercises
and duties required on the Sabbath. Prayer with the Congregation. 250 Hearing
the Word. Receiving the Sacraments. Private duties of the Sabbath. Of the
evening preparation 251 The first duties of the morning. Of the public duties
of the Sabbath. 252 What is to be done after the public Ministry. Sins to be
condemned in respect of the second part of this Commandment 253 Helps and
hindrances to the keeping of this Commandment. The reasons enforcing
obedience to this Commandment. 1 Reason. 2 Reason. 3 Reason. 4 Reason. 254 The
second Table. The sum of the second Table. The generals to be observed in
this Table. The division of the second Table. 255 The first Commandment. 256
The meaning and scope of the fifth Commandment. The duties of equals. What are
Superiors. Who are Inferiors. 257 What it is to honor. Duties of Superiors.
The diverse sorts of Superiors. 258 The duties of aged Persons. Duties of the
younger unto them. Superiors in knowledge. Superiors in authority. Duties of
inferiors to those that are in authority. Duties of Superiors in authority.
259 Kinds of Superiors in authority. 260 Superiors in the family, and their
duties. Inferiors in the Family, and their duties. Duties of husbands and
wives. Duties of the husband. The duties of the wife. 261 Duties of Parents.
Sins of Parents. 262 Duties of Children toward their parents. Duties of
Masters toward their Servants. 263 Duties of Servants toward their Masters.
264 Public Superiors, and their duties. The sorts of public Superiors.
Superiors in the Church, and their duties. 265 The Peoples duty to their
Minister. Superiors in the commonwealth. The Magistrates duty in civil
affairs. 266 The duties of Subjects toward their Magistrates. Of the helps
and means enabling us to keep this fifth Commandment. 267 Hindrances to
these duties here commanded. Of the reason annexed to the fifth Commandment.
Of the promise of long life, and how performed. 268 The sixth Commandment. The
sum and meaning of it. The negative part. The affirmative part. The duties
respecting our own persons. 269 Duties respecting our souls. The contrary
vices forbidden. Duties respecting our bodies. The contrary sins forbidden.
Duties respecting the time of our departure. 270 Duties respecting our
neighbor while he lives. Inward duties respecting our affections Duties
respecting the preservation of peace. 271 Evil passions opposite to these
duties. Outward duties respecting the souls of our neighbors. The contrary
vices to the former duties. Duties respecting the whole person of our
neighbor. 272 Duties required in words. The opposite vices. The use. 273
Duties required in our deeds. The contrary vices to the former duties. How we
do indirectly endanger our neighbors life. 274 How we do directly take away
our neighbors life. Chance-medley, and how proved to be a sin. Of
manslaughter. 275 Of Duels. Of wilful murder. Reasons persuading to the
detestation of this sin. Duties to be performed to our neighbor after his
death. Duties respecting beasts. Of punishments due to the breakers of this
Commandment. 276 Means furthering us in the obedience of this Commandment.
Hindrances to the obedience of this Commandment. The seventh Commandment.
277 The meaning and scope of the seventh Commandment. Of inward impurity, and
the branches of it. Abuse of apparel. 278 Of the abuse of meat and drink.
Wanton gestures. 279 Chastity in the eyes, etc. Wanton speeches. Chastity in
the tongue and ears. Stage Plays. 280 Breach of the seventh Commandment in
respect of action. Of Stews, and the unlawfulness of them. 281 Of Rape Of
Incest. Of Fornication. 282 Of Adultery. Of Polygamy. What is required in the
entrance into Marriage. The contrary abuses. 283 What is required in the holy
use of Marriage. Unlawful separation. The punishments of the breach of this
Commandment. 284 Helps and means of keeping this Commandment. Hindrances of
obedience. 285 The eighth Commandment. The end of the eighth Commandment. The
occasion of this Commandment. 286 Of Theft. The parts of this eight
Commandment. General duties commanded. 287 Opposite vices. Special duties
here required. Arguments dissuading from the love of money and earthly things.
288 Self-contentednesse. Motives persuading to self-contentednesse. Lawful
measuring of our appetite. 289 Affected poverty. 290 Covetousness. Ambition.
291 Carking care. Carelessness. Solicitous and distracting care. What required
to just getting. 292 Lawful Calling, and labor in it. Extraordinary getting.
293 What is opposite to a lawful Calling. Unjust getting out of contract.
Theft. 294 Domestical Theft. Theft committed out of the family. Sacrilege.
Theft of persons. 295 Rapine. Oppression. Accessaries to theft. Acquisition by
lawful contract. 296 Acquisition by liberal altenation. Acquisition by
illiberall alienation. Merchandise. 297 Of selling. Vices and corruptions in
selling. Of buying, and what is required to it. 298 Of pawning, and what is
required unto it. 299 Of location and letting. 300 Of conduction and hiring. Of
usury. Of contracts between Magistrates and people. 301 Of contracts between
Ministers and people. Of Work-masters and hirelings, and their duties to one
another. Of things deposited and committed to trust. 302 The duties of
Executors. Of persons committed to trust. Of just possession of goods, and what
is required unto it. 303 Of restitution, and what is to be required in it. Of
the right use and fruition of goods. 304 Of parsimony and frugality. Of
tenacity and miserlinesse. 305 Profusion and prodigality. Of liberality. Of
lending. Of free giving. The ninth Commandment. 306 The scope or end. The
occasion of this Commandment. 307 The chief sin here forbidden. The
negative part. The affirmative part. The sum of the duties here required. 308
Of truth. Truth must be professed, and how. Opposite to truth. 309 1. Lying.
Reasons to dissuade from lying. Three sorts of Lies. Vices opposed to freedom
of speech. 310 Opposites to simplicity of speaking truth Means of preserving
truth. 311 Profitable speech. Courtesy and affability. 312 Seasonable silence.
Opposites to profitable speech. 1. Unprofitable, 2. Hurtful speech. 3. Rotten
speech. Fame and good name. 313 Of public testimonies. 314 Of rash judgment.
315 Of perverse judgment. The duties of the plaintiff, and the vices opposed
hereunto. The vices of the defendant. 316 The duties of Lawyers, and the
opposite vices. The duty of witnesses. 317 False testimony in the public
ministry of the Word. Flattery. 318 Evil speaking. Whispering. Obtrectation.
Conserving our own good name. 319 The means of getting a good name. 320 A true
testimony of our selves. 321 The opposites to the profession of truth
concerning our selves. Arrogance and boasting. Confession of sin. 322 The
tenth Commandment. The end of this Commandment. 323 The occassion of this
Commandment. Two sorts of concupiscence. Lawful concupiscence. 324 Unlawful
concupiscence, and the kinds thereof. The growth of sin. The parts of this
Commandment. 325 And first, the negative part. Original concupiscence. That
original concupiscence is sin. Actual concupiscence. 326 Evil thoughts.
Evil thoughts injected by Satan. 327 Evil thoughts arising from natural
corruption. The special kinds of concupiscence here forbidden. 328 What is
meant by our neighbors house. Neighbors wife. 329 Neighbors servant. His Ox
and Ass. The affirmative part. The means inabling us to obey this
commandment. 330 The impossibility of keeping this Commandment. Hitherto of
the rule of our sanctification, the Moral. 331 The effect or exercise of
sanctification, in repentance and new obedience. Repentance what it is. When
repentance is to be exercised. 332 Of the spiritual warfare. 333 Of our
spiritual armor. 334 Of our first enemy Satan. 335 2. Enemy the world. 3.
Enemy our flesh. 336 New obedience. 337 Of good works in general, and of the
properties of them. 338 That there is no merit in good works. Wherein our good
works fail. 339 Why God rewards our works. 340 The ends of good works. Of
special good works required. 341 Of prayer what it is. 342 The necessity of
prayer. A more full description of prayer. What is required that prayer may be
holy. 343 That we must pray to God alone. 344 That we must pray only in the
mediation of Christ. For whom we must pray. The parts of Prayer. 346 Of
Petition. The means of obtaining the gift of prayer. 348 Motives to Prayer.
Hindrances of prayer. 349 The subject of our requests. Prayer for others. 350
Of thanksgiving. In what thanksgiving consists. 351 Why thanksgiving is
required. The properties of praise. The means of thanksgiving. Motives to
thanksgiving. Signs of thankfulness. 352 Of the Lords prayer. Of the preface.
353 Our Father. 354 Which art in heaven. 355 The parts of the Lords prayer. 356
Six petitions in the Lords prayer. The first Petition. 357 What is meant by
Name. What is meant by hallowed. 358 What we ask in the first Petition. What
graces we here pray for. 359 What things we here pray against. The second
Petition. 360 What is meant by Kingdom. What is meant by Coming. The
particulars here prayed for, 1. respecting the kingdom of grace. 362 2.
Respecting the kingdom of glory. 363 The third Petition. The sum of this
Petition. What meant by the word Thy. What will is here to be understood. 364
What we ask in this Petition concerning Gods revealed will. What meant by
this word Doing. 365 What meant by Earth and Heaven. The order of the three
last Petitions. The three last Petitions. 366 The fourth Petition. 367 What
meant by Bread. What meant by Give. Give us. This day. 368 Our daily. What we
beg in this Petition. The fifth Petition. 370 What is meant by Debts. What
we ask in this Petition. 372 The reason of this Petition. The sixth Petition.
374 The sum of the sixth Petition. Of the temptations, and the causes why we
must pray against them. 375 How God may be said to tempt us. 376 What is meant
by Deliver us from evil. 377 What is meant by Evil. What things we pray for
in this petition. 378 Conclusion of the Lords Prayer. What is meant by
Kingdom. 379 What is meant by Power. What is meant by Glory. What meant by
Thine. 380 What by For ever. What is meant by Amen. Whether it be lawful to
use any other form of Prayer. 381 What pulike Prayer is. What private Prayer
is. What ordinary prayer is. 382 What extraordinary Prayer is. Circumstances
of Prayer. Gesture in Prayer. Of the place of Prayer. Of the time of Prayer.
383 Of Fasting. What an holy Fast is. Of the time of Fasting. 384 Of the kinds
of Fasting. 385 Of a public Fast. Of a private Fast. Who are to fast. 386 Of
the parts of a Christian Fast. Of a holy Feast. 388 Of the time of Feasting.
389 In what an holy Feast consists. Of Vows. 390 Who are to vow. What is to
be vowed. 391 The duty of those that have vowed. Of Alms. 392 Who are to give
Alms. Whereof we must give Alms. How much must be given. 393 To whom Alms
must be given. What order must be observed in giving With what affection Alms
must be given. The fruits of Almsdeeds. 394 Of Vocation. External.
Internal. Means of Vocation. 395 Inward. Outward. Inward, the Spirit of God.
Of the Church visible. 396 The infallible marks of a true visible Church.
Whether the Church may err. 397 In what cases we may separate from a corrupt
Church. 398 Of the enemies of the Church. Of the Governors of the Church. 399
Things proper to the visible Church. The Word. Sacraments. Censures. Of the
Word. What things are common between godly and wicked hearers. 401 Things
proper to godly hearers. How justifying Faith differs from the faith of
worldlings. 402 Of the Sacraments. 403 The Sacraments of great use. What a
Sacrament is. The use of Sacraments. 406 The ends why Sacraments are instituted
The persons that are actors in the Sacraments, and their actions. 407 Of
preparation to the Sacraments. 408 Duties in the action of receiving. Duties
after receiving. Of the old Testament, and the Sacraments of it. 409 The new
administration of the Gospel. 410 The Sacraments of the new Testament. Of
Baptism, what it is. 411 Whether diving or dipping be essential to Baptism.
413 Sprinkling in Baptism warrantable. The inward part, or thing signified in
Baptism. The similitude between the sign and thing signified. The benefit of
Baptism to a common Christian. 415 To whom Baptism is effectual. How infants
may be capable of the grace of the Sacrament. 416 What benefit elect infants
have by Baptism for the present. 417 The lawfulness of infants Baptism. 418
Baptism not of absolute necessity to salvation. 419 Baptism to be highly
accounted of. 420 That many have a slight esteem of this ordinance. What the
means are to reform this slight esteem. 421 Of the Lords Supper. 422 What it
is. The differences between Baptism and the Lords Supper. 423 Why it is called
the Lords Supper. Of the matter of the Lords Supper. 424 That the bread and
wine are not changed into the body and blood of Christ Of the form of this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 426 The sacramental actions of the Minister. Of
the consecration of the bread and wine. The sacramental actions of the
receivers. 427 The ends and uses of the Lords Supper. 428 Who are to receive
the Lords Supper. Preparation to the Lords Table. Duties in the action of
receiving to be performed by the Communicant. Duties to be performed after the
action. 430 Of the censures of the Church. 431 Of the degrees of Censures. 432
Of the kinds of Censures. 433 Of private admonition. The degrees of private
admonition. 1. Most private. How we must reprove. 434 2. The second degree of
private admonition. Of public admonition. 435 Of Suspension. Of
Excommunication. Anathema Maranatha. Of the enemies of the Church. 437 Of the
general apostasy. Of Antichrist, and who he is. 438 What difference between
Christ's miracles and the Popes. 442 The seat of Antichrist. 443 Of the last
judgment. 445 Why the righteous dye. Of particular judgment at the hour of
death. 446 Of the general judgment. Of the preparation to the last judgment.
The signs of the last judgment. The second thing in the preparation. 447 The
third thing. The fourth thing. 448 The fifth thing. The act of judgment, and how
performed. The execution of the last judgment. 449 The state of the Reprobate
in hell. The state of the Elect in heaven. The use of this Doctrine concerning
the last judgment. 450
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 21. line 9. for says read truth. p. 31. l. 33. for distinction read
definition. p. 232. l. 31* read, you shall no more call for me in Baal. p. 245.
l. 13. for private good read private prayer. p. 254. l. 2, for preferring read
preserving. p. 255. l. 15. for revile read reveal. p. 262. l. 21. for toward
them read before them. p. 272. l. 37. for own read very. p. 277. l. 43. for
commended read commanded. p. 289 l. 3. for go, read and therefore. p. 293. l.
10. for retained read received. l. 11. for retain read receive. p. 301. l. 5.
read, the public are either. p. 314. l. 32. for thirst read Christ. p. 323. l.
11. leave out [other.] p. 364. l. 36. for proposes read purposes. p. 374. l.
13. for hands read hearts. p. 405. l. 34. for of read and. p. 417. l. 41. read,
now in the time. p. 420. l. 10. read, But where God denies. p. 421. l. 17.
leave out [but.] p. 423. l. 36. for, which we have alone, read, which we have
not. p. 427. l. 47. for groaning read growing p. 435. l. 45. for examination
read Excommunication.

IMMANUEL, OR, THE MYSTERY OF THE INCARNATION OF THE SON OF GOD: UNFOLDED By
JAMES USHER Archbishop of Armagh,

JOHN 1. 14. THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for RICH.
ROYSTON, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the Angel in Ivy-Lane.
MDCXLV.

THE MYSTERY OF THE Incarnation of the SON OF GOD.
THE holy Prophet in the Book of the Prove. 30. 3, 4.
Proverbs, poseth all such as have not learned wisdom, nor known the knowledge
of the holy, with this Question: Who has ascended up into heaven, or
descended? who has gathered the wind in his fists? who has bound the waters
in a garment? who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name,
and what is his SONS name, if thou can tell? To help us herein, the SON
Himself did tell us, when he was here upon earth, that Joh. 3. 13.
None has ascended up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, even the
Son of man which is in heaven. And that we might not be ignorant of his name,
the Prophet Isaiah did long before foretell, that Esa. 9. 6.
Unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given; whose name shall be
called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The
Prince of Peace.

Where, if it be demanded, how these things can stand together? that the Son
of man speaking upon earth, should yet at the same instant be in heaven? that
the Father of Eternity should be born in time? and that the Mighty God should
become a Child; which is the weakest state of Man himself? we must call to
mind, that the first letter of this great Name, is WONDERFUL. When he
appeared of old to Manoah, his name was Wonderful, and he did wonderously,
Judge. 13. 18, 19. But that, and all the wonders that ever were, must give place
to the great mystery of his Incarnation, and in respect thereof cease to be
wonderful: for of this work that may be verifyed, which is spoken of those
wonderful judgments, that God brought upon Egypt; when he would Exodus 9. 16.
show his power, and have his name declared throughout all the earth. Ibid.
chap. 10. 14. and 11. 6.
Before them were no such; neither after them shall be the like.

Neither the creation of all things out of nothing, which was the beginning of
the works of God (those six working days putting as it were an end, to that
long Sabbath that never had beginning; wherein the Father, Son, and holy Ghost
did infinitely Joh. 17. 5.
glorify themselves and Prove. 8. 30.
rejoice in the fruition one of another, without communicating the notice
thereof unto any creature) nor the Resurrection from the dead, and the
restoration of all things, the last works that shall go before that
everlasting Sabbath (which shall have a beginning, but never shall have end:)
neither that first, I say, nor these last, though most admirable pieces of
work, may be compared with this; wherein the Lord was pleased to show the
highest pitch (if any thing may be said to be highest in that which is
infinite and exempt from all measure and dimensions) of his Wisdom, Goodness,
Power and Glory.

The Heathen Chaldeans, to a question propounded by the King of Babel, make
answer; Dan. 2. 11.
that it was a rare thing which he required, and that none other could show
it, except the Gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh. But the rarity of this
lies in the contrary to that which they imagined to be so plain: that he
Romans 9. 5.
who is over all, God blessed for ever, should take our flesh and dwell, or
(...), Joh. 1. 14.
pitch his tabernacle with us. That as Exodus 40. 34, 35.
the glory of God filled the Tabernacle, (which was a Heb. 9. 9. 11.
figure of the humane nature of our Lord) with such a kind of fullness, that
Moses himself was not able to approach unto it; (therein coming short, Heb. 3.
3. 6.
as in all things, of the Lord of the house) and filled the Temple of Solomon
(a type likewise Joh. 2. 19, 21.
of the body of our Prince of Peace) in 2 Chro. 7. 1, 2
such sort that the Priests could not enter therein: so Coloss. 2. 9.
in him all the fullness of the Godhead should dwell bodily.

And therefore, if of that Temple, built with hands, Solomon could say with
admiration: 2 Chro. 6. 18.
But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? Behold, heaven and the
heaven of heavens can not contain thee; how much less this house, which I have
built? of the true Temple, that is not of this building, we may with greater
wonderment say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Without controversy, great is the mystery of Religion: God was manifested in
the flesh. Yea, was made of a Woman, and born of a Virgin: a thing so Esa. 7.
11, 14.
wonderful, that it was given for a sign unto unbeleevers seven hundred and
forty years before it was accomplished; even a sign of Gods own choosing,
among all the wonders in the depth, or in the height above. Therefore the Lord
himself shall give you a sign. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son,
and shall call his name Immanuel, Esa. 7. 14.

A notable wonder indeed, and great beyond all comparison. That the Son of God
should be Gal. 4. 4.
made of a Woman; even made of that Woman, which was Joh. 1. 3. Col. 1. 16.
made of by himself. That her womb then, and the Act. 1. 21.
heavens now, should contain him, whom 1 King. 8. 27.
the Heaven of Heavens can not contain. That he who had both Father and
Mother, whose pedigree is upon record even up unto Adam, who in the fullness of
time was brought forth in Bethlehem, and when he had finished his course was
cut off out of the land of the living at Jerusalem; should yet notwithstanding
be in truth, that which his shadow Melchisedec was only in the conceit of
the men of his time, Heb. 7. 3. with Esa. 53. 8. and Mica. 5. 2.
without Father, without Mother, without pedigree, having neither beginning of
days nor end of life. That his Father should be Joh. 14. 28.
greater then he; and yet he his Fathers Joh. 5. 18. Phil. 2. 6.
equal. That he Joh. 8. 58.
is, before Abraham was; and yet Abraham's birth preceded his, wel-nigh the
space of two thousand years. And finally, that he who was David's Son, should
yet be David's Lord: Matthew. 22. 42, 43, etc.
a case which plunged the greatest Rabbis among the Pharisees; who had not yet
learned this wisdom, nor known this knowledge of the holy.

The untying of this knot depends upon the right understanding of the
wonderful conjunction of the divine and humane Nature in the unity of the
Person of our Redeemer. For by reason of the strictness of this personal
union, whatsoever may be verifyed of either of those Natures, the same may be
truly spoken of the whole Person, from whethersoever of the Natures it be
denominated. For the clearer conceiving whereof, we may call to mind that
which the Apostle has taught us touching our Savior. Col. 2. 9.
In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that is to say, by
such a personal and real union, as does inseparably and everlastingly conjoyn
that infinite Godhead with his finite Manhood in the unity of the self-same
individual Person.

He in whom that fullness dwells, is the PERSON: that fullness which so does
dwell in him, is the NATVRE. Now there dwells in him not only the fullness
of the Godhead, but the fullness of the Manhood also. For we believe him to
be both perfect God, begotten of the substance of his Father before all
worlds; and perfect Man, made of the substance of his Mother in the fullness of
time. And therefore we must hold, that there are two distinct Natures in him:
and two so distinct, that they do not make one compounded nature; but still
remain uncompounded and unconfounded together. But He in whom the fullness of
the Manhood dwells is not one, and he in whom the fullness of the Godhead,
another: but he in whom the fullness of both those natures dwells, is one
and the same Immanuel, and consequently it must be believed as firmly, that
he is but one Person.

And here we must consider, that the divine Nature did not assume an humane
Person, but the divine Person did assume an humane Nature: and that of the
three divine Persons, it was neither the first nor the third that did assume
this Nature; but it was the middle Person, who was to be the middle one, that
must undertake this mediation betwixt God and us, which was otherwise also most
requisite, as well for the better preservation of the integrity of the blessed
Trinity in the Godhead, as for the higher advancement of Mankind by means of
that relation which the second Person the Mediator did bear unto his Father.
For if the fullness of the Godhead should have thus dwelt in any humane person,
there should then a fourth Person necessarily have been added unto the Godhead:
and if any of the three Persons, beside the second, had been born of a woman;
there should have been two Sons in the Trinity. Whereas now the Son of God and
the Son of the blessed Virgin, being but one Person, is consequently but one
Son; and so no alteration at all made in the relations of the Persons of the
Trinity.

Again, in respect of us, the Apostle shows, that for this very end Gal. 4.
4, 5, 7.
God sent his own SON made of a Woman; that WE might receive the adoption of
SONS: and thereupon makes this inference; Wherefore thou art no more a servant
but a SON, and if a SON, then an HEIR of God through Christ: intimating
thereby, that what relation Christ has unto God by Nature, we being found in
him have the same by Grace. By nature he is Joh. 1. 14. and 3. 16.
the only begotten Son of the Father: but this is the high grace he has
purchased for us; that Joh. 1. 12.
as many as received him, to them he gave power, or privilege, to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. For although he reserve to
himself the pre-eminence, which is due unto him in a Propter quod unum quodque
est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale.
peculiar manner, of being Romans 8. 29.
the first born among many brethren: yet in him, and for him, the rest likewise
by the grace of adoption are all of them accounted as first-bornes.

So God bids Moses to say unto Pharaoh: Exodus 4. 22, 23
Israel is my Son, even my first born. And I say unto thee; Let my son go,
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go; behold, I will slay
thy son, even thy first born. And the whole Israel of God, consisting of Jew
and Gentile, is in the same sort described by the Apostle to be Heb. 12. 23.
the general assembly and Church of the first born enrolled in heaven. For the
same reason that makes them to be Sons, to wit, their incorporation into
Christ, the self-same also makes them to be first-bornes: so as (however it
fall out by the grounds of our Common Law) by the rule of the Gospel this
consequence will still hold true; Romans 8. 17.
if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joynt-heires with Christ. And so
much for the SON, the Person assuming.

The Nature assumed, is the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. the seed of David,
Romans 1. 3. the seed of the Woman, Genesis 3. 15. the WORD, 1 John 5. 5.
the second person of the Trinity, being Joh. 1. 14.
made FLESH, that is to say, Gal. 4. 4.
Gods own Son being made of a Woman, and so becoming truly and really Luke 1.
42.
the fruit of her womb. Neither did he take the substance of our nature
only, but all the properties also and the qualities thereof: so as it might
be said of him, as it was of (...). Ja. 5. 17.
Elias and the (...). Act. 14. 15.
Apostles; that he was a man subject to like passions as we are. Yea he
subjected himself Heb. 5. 7.
in the days of his flesh to the same 2 Cor. 13. 4. Heb. 2. 17, 18. and 4. 15.
weakness which we find in our own frail nature, and was compassed with like
infirmities; and in a word, in all things was made like unto his brethren, sin
only excepted. Wherein yet we must consider, that as he took upon him, not
an humane Person, but an humane Nature: so it was not requisite he should take
upon him any Personal infirmities, such as are, madness, blindness,
lamenesse, and particular kinds of diseases, which are incident to some only
and not to all men in general; but those alone which do accompany the whole
Nature of mankind, such as are hungring, thirsting, weariness, grief, pain,
and mortality.

We are further here also to observe in this our Heb. 7. 3.
Melchisedec, that as he had no Mother in regard of one of his natures, so he
was to have no Father in regard of the other; but must be born of a pure and
immaculate Virgin, without the help of any man: according to that which is
written. Jer. 31. 22.
The Lord has created a new thing in the earth: A woman shall compass a man.
And this also was most requisite, as for other respects, so for the exemption
of the assumed nature from the imputation and pollution of Adams sin. For Romans
5. 12.
sin having by that one man entered into the world; every Father becomes an
Adam unto his child, and conveyeth the corruption of his nature unto all those
whom he does beget. Therefore our Savior assuming the substance of our
nature, but not by the ordinary way of natural generation, is thereby freed
from all the touch and taint of the corruption of our flesh; which by that
means only is propagated from the first man unto his posterity. Whereupon, he
being made of man but not by man, and so becoming the immediate fruit of the
womb, and not of the loins, must of necessity be acknowledged to be Luke 1. 35.
that HOLY THING, which so was born of so blessed a Mother. Who although she
were but the passive and material principle of which that precious flesh was
made, and the holy Ghost the agent and efficient; yet cannot the man Christ
Jesus thereby be made the Son of his Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 9.
own Spirit. Because Fathers do beget their children out of their own
substance: the holy Ghost did not so, but framed the flesh of him, from whom
himself proceeded, out of the creature of them both, Luke 1. 38. 48.
the handmaid of our Lord; whom from thence all generations shall call blessed.

That blessed womb of hers was the Bride-chamber, wherein the holy Ghost did
knit that indissoluble knot betwixt our humane nature and his Deity: the Son of
God assuming into the unity of his person that which before he was not; and yet
without change (for so must God still be) remaining that which he was,
whereby it came to pass, that Luke 1. 35.
this holy thing which was born of her, was indeed and in truth to be called
the SON of GOD. Which wonderful connection of two so infinitely differing
natures in the unity of one person, how it was there effected; is an
inquisition fitter for an Angelical intelligence, then for our shallow
capacity to look after: to which purpose also we may observe, that in the
fabric of the Ark of the Covenant, Exodus 37. 9.
the posture of the faces of the Cherubims toward the Mercy-seat (the type of
our Savior) was such, as would point unto us, that these are the things which
the Angels desire to (...), 1 Pet. 1. 12.
stoop and look into.

And therefore let that satisfaction, which the Angel gave unto the Mother
Virgin (whom it did more specially concern to move the question, Luke 1. 34.
How may this be?) content us, Ibid. ver. 35.
The power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. For as the former part of that
speech may inform us, that Ibid. ver. 37.
with God nothing is impossible: so the latter may put us in mind, that the
same God having overshadowed this mystery with his own veil, we should not
presume with the men of Bethshemesh to look into this Ark of his; 1 Samuel 6. 19.
lest for our curiosity we be smitten, as they were. Only this we may
safely say, and must firmly hold: that as the distinction of the Persons in
the holy Trinity, hinders not the unity of the Nature of the Godhead, although
every Person entirely holds his own incommunicable property; so neither does
the distinction of the two Natures in our Mediator any way cross the unity of
his Person, although each nature remains (...).
entire in it self, and retains the properties agreeing thereunto, without
any conversion, composition, commixtion, or confusion.

When Exodus 3. 2, 3. 5, 6. Act. 7. 31, 32.
Moses beheld the bush burning with fire, and yet no whit consumed, he wondered
at the sight, and said; I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why
the bush is not burnt. But when God thereupon called unto him out of the midst
of the bush, and said, Draw not nigh hither, and told him who he was; Moses
trembled, hid his face, and durst not behold God. Yet, although being thus
warned, we dare not draw so nigh; what does hinder but we may stand aloof off,
and wonder at this great sight? Heb. 12. 29.
Our God is a consuming fire; says the Apostle: and a question we find
propounded in the Prophet. Esa. 33. 14.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell
with the everlasting burnings? Moses was not like other Prophets, but Numb. 12.
6, 7, 8. Exo. 33. 11.
God spoke unto him face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend: and yet
for all that, when he besought the Lord that he would show him his glory; he
received this answer, Exodus 33. 18. 20.
Thou can not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live. Abraham
before him, though a special Esa. 41. 8. 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. Jam. 2. 23.
friend of God, and the Romans 4. 11. 16. Gal. 3. 7.
father of the faithful, the children of God; yet held it a great matter that
he should take upon him so much as to Genesis 18. 27.
speak unto God, being but dust and ashes. Yea, the very Angels themselves ( 2
Pet. 2. 11.
which are greater in power and might) are fain to Esa. 6. 2.
cover their faces, when they stand before him; as not being able to behold the
brightness of his glory.

With what astonishment then may we behold our dust and ashes assumed into the
undivided unity of Gods own Person; and admitted to dwell here, as an inmate,
under the same roof; and yet in the midst of those everlasting burnings, the
bush to remain unconsumed, and to continue fresh and green for evermore? Yea,
how should not we with Abraham rejoice to see this day, wherein not only our
nature in the Person of our Lord Jesus is found to dwell for ever in those
everlasting burnings; but, in and by him, our own persons also are brought so
nigh thereunto, that Levit. 26. 11, 12. Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27. Revel. 21. 3.
God does set his Sanctuary and Tabernacle among us, and dwell with us; and
(which is much more) makes us our selves to be the Heb. 3. 6.
house and the Ephesians. 2. 22.
habitation, wherein he is pleased to dwell by his Spirit, according to that of
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said; I will dwell in them
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
that most admirable prayer, which our Savior himself made unto his Father in
our behalf. Joh. 17. 20, 21, 22, 23.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word: that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that thou
have sent me. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one;
and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou
have loved me.

To compass this conjunction betwixt God and us, he that was to be our Mat. 1.
21. 23. See Anselms Cur Deus homo.
JESUS or Savior, must of necessity also be IMMANUEL; which being interpreted
is, God with us: and therefore in his Person to be Immanuel, that is, God
dwelling with our flesh; because he was by his Office to to be Immanuel, that
is, he who must make God to be at one with us. For this being his proper
office, to be 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Mediator between God and men, he must partake with both: and being before all
eternity consubstantiall with his Father, he must at the appointed time become
likewise consubstantiall with his children. Heb. 2. 14.
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood; he also
himself likewise took part of the same, says the Apostle. We read in the
Roman history, that the Sabines and the Romans joining battle together, upon
such an occasion as is mentioned in the last chapter of the book of Judges, of
the children of Benjamin, catching every man a wife of the daughters of Shiloh:
the women being daughters to the one side, and wives to the other, interposed
themselves and took up the quarrel: so that by the mediation of these, who had
a peculiar interest in either side, and by whose means this new alliance was
contracted betwixt the two adverse parties; they who before stood upon highest
terms of hostility, Sic pax facta, foedusque percussu^: secutaque res mira
dictu, ut relictis sedibus suis novam in Vrbem hosts demigrarent, and cum
generis suis avitas opes pro dote sociarent. L. Flor. histor. Romans li. 1. ca. 1.
did not only entertain peace, but also joined themselves together into one
body, and one state.

God and we were Romans 5. 10.
enemies; before we were reconciled to him by his Son. He that is to be Ephesians.
2. 14. 16.
our peace, and to reconcile us unto God, and to slay this enmity, must have an
interest in both the parties that are at variance, and have such a reference
unto either of them, that he may be able to send this comfortable message unto
the sons of men: John 20. 17.
Go to my brethren, and say unto them: I ascend unto my Father, and your
Father; and to my God, and your God. For, as long as Heb. 2. 11.
he is not ashamed to call us brethren; Heb. 11. 16.
God is not ashamed to be called our God. And his entering of our appearance, in
his own name and ours, after this manner; Heb. 2. 13.
Behold, I, and the children which God has given me; is a motive strong
enough to appease his Father, and to turn his favorable countenance toward us:
as on the other side, when we become unruly and prove rebellious children; no
reproof can be more forcible, nor inducement so prevalent (if there remain
any spark of grace in us) to make us cast down our weapons and yield, then
this. Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy
Father that has bought thee? and bought thee, 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19.
not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood
of his own Son?

How dangerous a matter it is to be at ods with God, old Eli shows by this
main argument. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him* but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall plead or entreat for him? and Job, before him. Job
9. 32, 33.
He is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together
in judgment: neither is there any Days-man or Vmpire betwixt us, that might lay
his hand upon us both. If this general should admit no manner of exception,
then were we in a woeful case, and had cause to weep much more then S. John did
in the Revelation; when Rev. 5. 3, 4.
none was found in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, that was able to
open the book which he saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne,
neither to look thereon. But as S. John was wished there, to refrain his
weeping; because Rev. 5. 5.
the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the root of David, had prevailed to open the
book, and to loose the seven seals thereof: so he himself elsewhere gives the
like comfort unto all of us in this particular. 1 John 2. 1, 2.
If any sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:
and he is a propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
sins of the whole world.

For as 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
there is one God, so is there one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus: who gave himself a ransom for all; and in discharge of this his
office of mediation, as the only fit umpire to take up this controversy, was
to lay his hand as well upon God the party so highly offended, as upon Man the
party so basely offending. In things concerning God, the Priesthood of our
Mediator is exercised: Heb. 5. 1. and 2. 17.
For every high Priest is taken from among men, and ordained for men in things
pertaining to God. The parts of his Priestly function are two; Satisfaction and
Intercession: the former whereof gives contentment to Gods justice; the latter
soliciteth his mercy, for the application of this benefit to the children of
God in particular. Whereby it comes to pass, that God in Romans 9. 15, 16.
showing mercy upon whom he will show mercy, is yet for his justice no loser:
being both Romans 3. 26.
just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

By virtue of his Intercession, our Mediator Heb. 9. 24.
appears in the presence of God for us, and Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25.
makes request for us. To this purpose, the Apostle notes in the IIIIth. to
the Hebrews, I. That we have a great high Priest, that is passed into the
heavens, Jesus the Son of God. (verse. 14.) II. That we have not an high Priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
things tempted as we are; yet without sin. (verse. 15.) Betwixt the having of
such, and the not having of such an Intercessor, betwixt the height of him in
regard of the one, and the lowliness in regard of his other nature, stands
the comfort of the poor sinner. He must be such a suitor as takes our case to
heart: and therefore Heb. 2. 17.
in all things it behoved him to be made likeunto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful high Priest. In which respect as it was needful
he should partake with our flesh and blood, that he might be tenderly affected
unto his brethren: so likewise for the obtaining of so great a suit, it behoved
he should be most dear to God the Father, and have so great an interest in
him, as he might always be sure to be Joh. 11. 42.
heard in his requests: who therefore could be no other, but he of whom the
Father testified from heaven; Mat. 3. 17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. It was fit our Intercessor
should be Man, like unto our selves; that we might Heb. 4. 16.
boldly come to him, and find grace to help in time of need: It was fit he
should be God, that he might boldly go to the Father, without any way
disparaging him; as being his Zach. 13. 7.
fellow, and Phil. 2. 6.
equal.

But such was Gods love to justice, and hatred to sin; that he would not have
his justice swallowed up with mercy, nor sin pardoned without the making of
fit reparation. And therefore our Mediator must not look to procure for us a
simple pardon without more ado; but must be a (...). Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2.
and 4. 10.
propitiation for our sins, and redeem us by fine and (...). Matthew. 20. 28.
(...). 1 Timothy 2. 6. Job 33. 24.
ransom: and so not only be the master of our requests, to entreat the Lord
for us; but also take upon him the part of an 1 John 2. 1.
Advocate, to plead full satisfaction made by himself, as our Heb. 7. 22.
surety, unto all the debt wherewith we any way stood chargeable. Now the
satisfaction which our surety bound himself to perform in our behalf, was of a
double debt: the principal, and the accessorie. The principal debt is
obedience to Gods most holy Law: which man was bound to pay as a perpetual
tribute to his Creator, although he had never sinned; but, being now by his own
default become bankrupt, is not able to discharge in the least measure. His
surety therefore being to satisfy in his stead, none will be found fit to
undertake such a payment, but he who is both God and Man.

Man it is fit he should be, because Man was the party that by the articles of
the first Covenant was tied to this obedience; and it was requisite that, Romans
5. 19.
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
man likewise many should be made righteous. Again, if our Mediator were only
God, he could have performed no obedience (the Godhead being free from all
manner of subjection:) and if he were a bare man, although he had been as
perfect as Adam in his integrity, or the Angels themselves; yet being left unto
himself amidst all the temptations of Satan and this wicked world, he should
be subject to fall, as they were: or if he should hold out, as 1 Timothy 5. 21.
the elect Angels did; that must have been ascribed to the grace and favor of
an other: whereas the giving of strict satisfaction to Gods justice was the
thing required in this behalf. But now being God, as well as Man, he by his own
Heb. 9. 14.
eternal Spirit preserved himself without spot: presenting a far more
satisfactory obedience unto God, then could have possibly been performed by
Adam in his integrity.

For, beside the infinite difference that was betwixt both their Persons, which
makes the actions of the one beyond all comparison to exceed the worth and
value of the other: we know that Adam was not able to make himself holy; but
what holiness he had, he received from him who created him according to his
own image: so that whatsoever obedience Adam had performed, God should have 1
Cor. 9. 7.
eaten but of the fruit of the vineyard which himself had planted; and 1
Chronic. 29. 14. 16. (...).
of his own would all that have been, which could be given unto him. But Christ
did himself sanctify that humane nature which he assumed; according to his own
saying, Joh. 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self: and so out of his own
peculiar store did he bring forth those precious treasures of holy obedience,
which for the satisfaction of our debt he was pleased to tender unto his
Father. Again, if Adam had Luke 17. 10.
done all things which were commanded him, he must for all that have said: I
am an unprofitable servant; I have done that which was my duty to do: whereas
in the voluntary obedience, which Christ subjected himself unto, the case stood
far otherwise.

True it is, that if we respect him in his humane nature, Joh. 14. 18.
his Father is greater then he; and he is his Fathers Esa. 53. 11. Mat. 12. 18.
servant: yet in that he said, and most truly said, that God was his Father,
Joh. 5. 18.
the Jews did rightly infer from thence, that he thereby made himself equal
with God; and Zach. 13. 7.
the Lord of Hosts himself has proclaimed him to be the man that is his
fellow. Being such a man therefore, and so highly born; by the privilege of
his birthright, he might have claimed an exemption from the ordinary service
whereunto all other men are tied: and by being Mat. 17. 25, 26.
the Kings Son, have freed himself from the payment of that tribute which was
to be exacted at the hands of Strangers. When Heb. 1. 6.
the Father brought this his first-begotten into the world, he said; Let all
the Angels of God worship him: and at the very instant wherein the Son advanced
our nature into the highest pitch of dignity, by admitting it into the unity
of his sacred Person, that nature so assumed was worthy to be crowned with all
glory and honor: and he in that nature might then have set himself down Heb.
12. 2.
at the right hand of the throne of God; tied to no other subjection then now
he is, or hereafter shall be; when after the end of this world he shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God the Father. For then also, in regard of his
assumed nature, he 1 Cor. 15. 27.
shall be subject unto him that put all other things under him.

Thus the Son of God, if he had minded only his own things, might at the very
first have attained unto the joy that was set before him: but Phil. 2. verse. 4,
5, 7, 8.
looking on the things of others, he chose rather to come by a tedious way and
wearisome journey unto it, not challenging the privilege of a Son, but taking
upon him the form of a mean servant. Whereupon in the days of his flesh, he
did not serve as an honorable Commander in the Lords host, but as an ordinary
soldier: he made himself of no reputation, for the time as it were (...). Phil.
2. 7.
emptying himself of his high state and dignity; he humbled himself, and
became obedient until his death; being content all his life long to be Gal. 4.
4.
made under the Law: yea, so far, that as he was sent Romans 8. 3.
in the likeness of sinful flesh, so he disdained not to subject himself unto
that Law, which properly did concern sinful flesh. And therefore howsoever
Circumcision was by right appliable only unto such as were Col. 2. 11. 13.
dead in their sins, and the uncircumcision of their flesh; yet he, in whom
there was no body of the sins of the flesh to be put off, submitted himself
notwithstanding thereunto: not only to testify his communion with the Fathers
of the old Testament; but also by this means to tender unto his Father a bond,
signed with his own blood, whereby he made himself in our behalf a debtor unto
the whole Law. For I testify (says Gal. 5. 3.
the Apostle) to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to the
whole Law.

In like manner Baptism appertained properly unto such as were defiled, and
had need to have their Act. 22. 16.
sins washed away: and therefore when all the land of Judea and they of
Jerusalem went out unto John, they Mat. 3. 6. Mark 1. 5.
were all baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins. Among
the rest came our Savior also: but the Baptist considering that he had need to
be baptized by Christ, and Christ no need at all to be baptized by him, refused
to give way unto that action; as altogether unbefitting the state of that
immaculate Lamb of God, who was to take away the sin of the World. Yet did
our Mediator submit himself to that ordinance of God also: not only to
testify his communion with the Christians of the new Testaments; but
especially (which is the reason yielded by himself) because Mat. 3. 15.
it became him thus to fulfill all righteousness. And so having fulfilled all
righteousness, whereunto the meanest man was tied, in the days of his
pilgrimage (which was more then he needed to have undergone, if he had
respected only himself:) the works which he performed were truly works of
supererogation, which might be put upon the account of them whose debt he
undertook to discharge; and being performed by the Person of the Son of God,
must in that respect not only be equivalent, but infinitely overvalue the
obedience of Adam and all his posterity, although they had remained in their
integrity, and continued until this hour, instantly serving God day and
night. And thus for our main and principal debt of Obedience, has our
Mediator given satisfaction unto the Justice of his Father; with Luke 6. 38.
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over.

But beside this, we were liable unto another debt; which we have incurred by
our default, and drawn upon our selves by way of forfeiture and nomine poenae.
For as Luke 17. 10. Romans 8. 12. Gal. 5. 3.
Obedience is a due debt, and Gods servants in regard thereof are truly
debtors: so likewise is sin a Matthew. 6. 12. compared with Luke 11. 4.
debt, and sinners (...). Luke 13. 4. Mat. 13. 16.
debtors, in regard of the penalty due for the default. And as the payment of
the debt which comes nomine poenae, discharges not the tenant afterward
from paying his yearly rent; which of it self would have been due, although no
default had been committed: so the due payment of the yearly rent, after the
default has been made, is no sufficient satisfaction for the penalty already
incurred. Therefore our surety, who stands chargeable with all our debts, as
he makes payment for the one by his Active, so must he make amends for the
other by his Passive obedience: he must first Luke 24. 26.
suffer, and then enter into his glory. Heb. 2. 10.
For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect
(that is, a perfect accomplisher of the work which he had undertaken) through
sufferings.

The Godhead is of that infinite perfection, that it cannot possibly be subject
to any passion. He therefore that had no other nature but the Godhead, could
not pay such a debt as this; the discharge whereof consisted in suffering and
dying. It was also fit, that Gods justice should have been satisfied in that
nature which had transgressed; and that the same nature should suffer the
punishment, that had committed the offense. Heb. 2. 14, 15.
Forasmuch then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same: that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them who through
fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. Such and so great
was the love of God the Father toward us, Romans 8. 12.
he spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: and so
transcendent was the love of the Son of God toward the sons of men, that he
desired not to be spared; but rather then they should lie under the power of
death, was of himself most willing to suffer death for them: which seeing in
that infinite nature, which by eternal generation he received from his
Father, he could not do, he resolved in the appointed time to take unto
himself a Mother, and out of her substance to have a body framed unto himself,
wherein he might Phil. 2. 8.
become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, for our redemption.
And therefore Heb. 10. 5. 7.
when he comes into the world, he says unto his Father, A body have thou
fitted me; Lo, I come to do thy will O God. By the which will (says the Ib.
ver. 9, 10.
Apostle) we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once for all.

Thus we see it was necessary for the satisfaction of this debt, that our
Mediator should be Man: but he that had no more in him then a Man, could never
be able to go through with so great a work. For if there should be found a Man
as righteous as Adam was at his first creation, who would be content to suffer
for the offense of others: his suffering possibly might serve for the
redemption of one soul; it could be no sufficient ransom for those Rev. 7. 9.
innumerable multitudes that were to be Rev. 5. 9.
redeemed to God out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.
Neither could any Man or Angel be able to hold out, if a punishment equivalent
to the endless sufferings of all the sinners in the world should at once be
laid upon him. Yea, the very powers of Christ himself, upon whom Esa. 11. 2.
the spirit of might did rest, were so shaken in this sharp encounter; that he,
who was the most accomplished pattern of all fortitude, stood Mark 14. 33. Luke
22. 44.
sore amazed, and Heb. 5. 7.
with strong crying and tears prayed that, Mark 14, 35. 36.
if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.

Heb. 10. 12.
This man therefore being to offer one sacrifice for sins for ever; to the
burning of that sacrifice he must not only bring the Cant. 8. 6.
coals of his love as strong as death, and as ardent as the fire which has a
most vehement flame, but he must add thereunto those Esa. 33. 14.
everlasting burnings also, even the flames of his most glorious Deity: and
therefore Heb. 9. 14.
through the eternal Spirit must he offer himself without spot unto God; that
hereby he might Ib. ver. 12.
obtain for us an eternal redemption. The blood whereby the Church is
purchased, must be Act. 20. 28.
Gods own blood: and to that end must 1 Cor. 2. 8.
the Lord of glory be crucified; Act. 3. 15.
the Prince and author of life be killed; he Esa. 53. 8.
whose eternal generation no man can declare, be cut off out of the land of
the living; and the man that is Gods own fellow be thus smitten; according to
that which God himself foretold by his Prophet. Zach. 13. 7. with Matthew. 26.
31.
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow,
says the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.
The people of Israel, we read, did so value the life of David their King, that
they counted him to be worth 2 Samuel 18. 3.
ten thousand of themselves: how shall we then value of Mat. 22. 43, 44.
David's Lord; 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev. 19. 16.
who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords?
It was indeed our nature that suffered; but he that suffered in that nature,
Romans 9. 5.
is over all, God blessed for ever: and for such a Person to have suffered but
one hour, was more then if all other persons had suffered ten thousand
millions of years.

But put case also, that the life of any other singular man might be equivalent
to all the lives of whole mankind: yet the laying down of that life would not
be sufficient to do the deed, unless he that had power to lay it down had
power likewise to take it up again. For, to be detained always in that prison
Matthew. 5. 26.
from whence there is no coming out before the payment of the uttermost
farthing; is to lie always under execution, and to quit the plea of that full
payment of the debt wherein our surety stood engaged for us. And therefore the
Apostle upon that ground does rightly conclude; that 1 Cor. 15. 17.
if Christ be not raised, our faith is vain, we are yet in our sins: and
consequently, that as he must be Romans 4. 25.
delivered to death for our offenses, so he must be raised again for our
justification.

Yea, our Savior himself, knowing full well what he was to undergo for our
sakes, told us beforehand, that the Comforter whom he would send unto us,
should Joh. 16. 10.
convince the world, that is, fully satisfy the consciences of the sons of
men, concerning that Dan. 9. 24.
everlasting righteousness, which was to be brought in by him, upon this very
ground: Because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more. For if he had
broken prison, and made an escape, the payment of the debt, which as our surety
he took upon himself, being not yet satisfied; he should have been seen here
again: Heaven would not have held him, more then Paradise did Adam, after he
had fallen into Gods debt and danger. But our Savior raising himself from the
dead, presenting himself in Heaven before him unto whom the debt was owing, and
maintaining his standing there, has hereby given good proof, that he is now a
free man, and has fully discharged that debt of ours for which he stood
committed. And this is the evidence we have to show of that righteousness,
whereby we stand justified in Gods sight: according to that of the Apostle.
Romans 8. 33, 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies: who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again; who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.

Now although an ordinary man may easily part with his life; yet does it not
lie in his power to resume it again at his own will and pleasure. But he that
must do the turn for us, must be able to say as our JESUS did, Joh. 10. 17, 18.
I lay down my life that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again: and in another place; Joh. 2. 19. 21.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up; says he unto the
Jews, speaking of the Temple of his body. An humane nature then he must have
had, which might be subject to dissolution: but being once dissolved, he could
not by his own strength (which was the thing here necessarily required) raise
it up again; unless he had Romans 1. 4.
declared himself to be the Son of God with power, by the resurrection from
the dead. The Manhood could suffer, but not overcome the sharpness of death:
the Godhead could suffer nothing, but overcome any thing. He therefore that was
both to suffer and to overcome death for us, must be partaker of both natures:
that 1 Pet. 3. 18.
being put to death in the flesh, he might be able also to quicken himself by
his own Spirit.

And now are we come to that part of Christ's mediation, which concerns the
conveyance of Ephesians. 1. 14.
the redemption of this purchased possession unto the sons of men. A dear
purchase indeed, which was to be redeemed with no less price then the blood of
the Son of God: but what should the purchase of a stranger have been to us? or
what should we have been the better for all this; if we could not derive our
descent from the purchaser, or raise some good title whereby we might estate
our selves in his purchase? Now this was the manner in former time in Israel,
concerning redemptions: that unto him who was the next of kin belonged the
right of being Ruth. 3. 12. and 4. ver. 1. 3, 4. 7.
Goel, or the Redeemer. And Job had before that left this glorious profession
of his faith unto the perpetual memory of all posterity. Job 19. 25, 26, 27.
I know that my Goel or Redeemer lives, and at the last shall arise upon the
dust (or, stand upon the earth.) And after this my skin is spent; yet in my
flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another for me. Whereby we may easily understand, that his and
our Redeemer was to be the invisible God; and yet in his assumed flesh made
visible even to the bodily eyes of those whom he redeemed. For if he had not
thus assumed our flesh; how should we have been of his blood, or claimed any
kindred to him? and unless the Godhead had by a personal union been
unseparably conjoined unto that flesh; how could he therein have been accounted
our next of kin?

For the better clearing of which last reason; we may call to mind that
sentence of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15. 47.
The first man is of the earth earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.
Where, notwithstanding there were many millions of men in the world betwixt
these two; yet we see our Redeemer reckoned the second man: and why? but
because these two were the only men who could be accounted the prime fountains
from whence all the rest of mankind did derive their existence and being. For
as all men in the world by mean descents do draw their first original from
the first man: so in respect of a more immediate influence of efficiency and
operation do they owe their being unto the second man, as he is the Lord from
heaven. This is Gods own language unto Jeremy, Jer. 1. 5.
Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and this is David's
acknowledgement, for his part; Psalm. 119. 73.
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me; Psalm. 139. 13.
thou have covered me in my mother womb: Psalm. 71. 6.
thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels: and Jobs, for his also. Job
10. 8. 11.
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me together round about: thou have
clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones and sinews: and
the Act. 17. 27, 28, 29.
Apostles, for us all: In him we live, and move, and have our being: who
infers also thereupon, both that we are the offspring or generation of God;
and that he is not far from every one of us. This being to be admitted for a
most certain truth (notwithstanding the opposition of all gainsayers) that See
Bradwardin. de causa Dei, l. 1. c. 3. and 4.
God does more immediately concur to the generation and all other motions of
the creature, then any natural agent does or can do. And therefore, if Romans
5. 17.
by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ. Considering that this second man is not only as universal
a principle of all our beeings, as was that first, and so may sustain the
common person of us all, as well as he; but is a far more immediate agent in
the production thereof: not, as the first, so many generations removed from us,
but more near unto us then our very next progenitors; and in that regard
justly to be accounted our next of kin, even before them also.

Yet is not this sufficient neither: but there is an other kind of generation
required, for which we must be beholding unto the second man, the Lord from
heaven; before we can have interest in this purchased Redemption. For as the
guilt of the first man's transgression is derived unto us by the means of
carnal generation: so must the benefit of the second man's obedience be
conveyed unto us by spiritual regeneration. And this must be laid down as a
most undoubted verity; that, Joh. 3. 3.
except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God; and that every
such must be Joh. 1. 13.
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God. Now, as our Mediator in respect of the Adoption of Sons, which he has
procured for us, Heb. 2. 11.
is not ashamed to call us Brethren: so in respect of this new birth, whereby
he begets us to a spiritual and everlasting life, he disdaineth not to own
us as his Children. Esa. 53. 10.
When thou shall make his seed an offering for sin, he shall see his seed:
says the Prophet Esaias. Psalm. 22. 30.
A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation:
says his Father David likewise of him. And he himself, of himself: Heb. 2. 13.
Behold I, and the children which God has given me. Whence the Apostle
deduceth this conclusion: Ibid. ver. 14.
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same. He himself, that is, he who was God
equal to the Father: for who else was able to make this 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 2.
10. Gal. 6. 15.
new creature, but the same Joh. 1. 13. Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 1 John 5. 1.
God that is the Creator of all things? (no less power being requisite to the
effecting of this, then was at the first to the producing of all things out of
nothing:) and these new (...). 1 Pet. 2. 2. with 1. 22.
babes being to be Joh. 3. verse. 5, 6, 8.
born of the Spirit; who could have power to send the Spirit, thus to beget
them, but the Father and the Son from whom he proceeded? the same blessed
Spirit, who framed the natural body of our Lord in the womb of the Virgin,
being to new mould and fashion every member of his mystical body unto his
similitude and likeness.

For the further opening of which mystery (which went beyond the apprehension
of Ibid. ver. 4. 9, 10.
Nicodemus, though a master of Israel) we are to consider; that in every
perfect generation, the creature produced receives two things from him that
does beget it: Life and Likeness. A curious limmer draws his own sons
pourtraicture to the life (as we say:) yet because there is no true life in it,
but a likeness only; he can not be said to be the begetter of his picture, as
he is of his Son. And some creatures there be that are bred out of mud or other
putrid matter: which although they have life, yet because they have no
correspondence in likeness unto the principle from whence they were derived,
are therefore accounted to have but an improper and equivocall generation.
Whereas in the right and proper course of generation (others being esteemed but
monstrous births that swarve from that rule) every creature begets his like:
-- nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.


Now touching our spiritual death and life, these sayings of the Apostle would
be thought upon. 1 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died
for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them and rose again. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.
God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ. Col. 2. 13.
And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he
quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. Gal. 2. 20.
I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. From all which we may easily
gather, that if by the obedience and sufferings of a bare man, though never so
perfect, the most sovereign medicine that could be thought upon should have
been prepared for the curing of our wounds: yet all would be to no purpose, we
being found dead, when the medicine did come to be applied.

Our Physician therefore must not only be able to restore us unto health, but
unto life it self: which none can do but the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; one
God, blessed for ever. To which purpose, these passages of our Savior also are
to be considered. Joh. 5. 26.
As the Father has life in himself: so has he given to the Son to have life
in himself. Joh. 6. 57.
As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats
me, even he shall live by me. Ibid. ver. 51.
I am the living bread, which came down from heaven; if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. The substance whereof is briefly
comprehended in this saying of the Apostle: 1 Cor. 15. 45.
The last Adam was made a quickening spirit. An Adam therefore and perfect Man
must he have been; that his flesh, given for us upon the Cross, might be made
the conduict to convey life unto the world: and a quickening spirit he could
not have been, unless he were God, able to make that flesh an effectual
instrument of life by the operation of his blessed Spirit. For, as himself has
declared, Joh. 6. 63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth; without it, the flesh would profit nothing.

As for the point of similitude and likeness: we read of Adam, after his fall,
that he Genesis 5. 3.
begat a son in his own likeness, after his image: and generally, as well
touching the carnal as the spiritual generation, our Savior has taught us
this lesson, Joh. 3. 6.
That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the
Spirit, is spirit. Whereupon the Apostle makes this comparison betwixt those
who are born of that first man, who is of the earth earthy, and of the second
man, who is the Lord from heaven. 1 Cor. 15. 48, 49.
As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such
are they also that are heavenly: and as we have borne the image of the earthy,
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. We shall indeed hereafter bear it
in full perfection: when Phil. 3. 21.
the Lord Jesus Christ shall change our base body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body; according to the working, whereby he is able even
to subdue all things unto himself. Yet in the mean time also, such a conformity
is required in us unto that heavenly man, that Ibid. ver. 20.
our conversation must be in heaven, whence we look for this Savior: and that
we must Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
put off, concerning the former conversation, that old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of our mind; and
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. For as in one particular point of domestical authority, 1 Cor. 11.
7.
the Man is said to be the image and glory of God, and the Woman the glory of
the Man: so in a more universal manner is Christ said to be 2 Cor. 4. 4.
the image of God, even Heb. 1. 3.
the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person; and we
Romans 8. 29.
to be conformed to his image, that he might be the firstborn among those many
brethren, who in that respect are accounted 2 Cor. 8. 23.
the glory of Christ.

We read in the holy story, that God Number. 11. 17. 25.
took of the spirit which was upon Moses, and gave it unto the seventy Elders;
that they might bear the burden of the people with him, and that he might not
bear it, as before he had done, himself alone. It may be, his burden being
thus lightened, the abilities that were left him for government were not
altogether so great, as the necessity of his former employment required them to
have been: and in that regard, what was given to his assistants, might
perhaps be said to be taken from him. But we are sure the case was otherwise
in him of whom now we speak: unto whom Joh. 3. 34.
God did not thus give the Spirit by measure. And therefore although so many
millions of believers do continually receive this Philip. 1. 19.
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; yet neither is that fountain any way
exhausted, nor the plenitude of that wellspring of grace any whit impaired or
diminished: it being Gods pleasure, Col. 1. 19.
That in him should all fullness dwell; and that Joh. 1. 16.
of his fullness all we should receive, grace for grace. That as in the
natural generation there is such a correspondence in all parts betwixt the
begetter and the Infant begotten; that there is no member to be seen in the
Father, but there is the like answerably to be found in the Child, although
in a far less proportion; so it falls out in this spiritual, that for
every grace which in a most eminent manner is found in Christ, a like grace
will appear in Gods Child, although in a far inferior degree; similitudes
and likenesses being defined by the Logicians to be comparisons made in
quality, and not in quantity.

We are yet further to take it into our consideration, that by thus enlivening
and fashioning us according to his own image, Christ's purpose was not to raise
a seed unto himself dispersedly and distractedly, but to Joh. 11. 52.
gather together in one, the Children of God that were scattered abroad; yea
and to Ephesians. 1. 10.
bring all unto one head by himself, both them which are in Heaven and them
which are on the Earth. That as in the Tabernacle, Exodus 26. 33.
the vail divided between the Holy place and the most Holy; but the curtains
which covered them both were so coupled together with the taches, that it might
still Ibid. ver. 6. and 11.
be one Tabernacle: so the Church Militant and Triumphant, typified thereby,
though distant as far the one from the other as Heaven is from Earth, yet is
made but one Tabernacle in Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 2. 21. 22.
In whom all the building fifty framed together grows unto an holy Temple in
the Lord, and in whom all of us are builded together for an habitation of God
through the Spirit.

The bond of this mystical union betwixt Christ and us (as Sermon to the
Commons house of Parliament, ann. 1620
elsewhere has more fully been declared) is on his part that Joh. 6. 63. 1
Cor. 6. 17. and 15. 45. Philip. 2. 1. Romans 8. 9. 1 John 3. 24. and 4. 13.
quickening Spirit, which being in him as the Head, is from thence diffused to
the spiritual animation of all his Members: and on our part Gal. 2. 20. and 5.
5. and 3. 11. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Faith, which is the prime act of life wrought in those who are capable of
understanding by that same Spirit. Both whereof must be acknowledged to be of
so high a nature, that none could possibly by such ligatures knit up so
admirable a body, but he that was God Almighty. And therefore although we did
suppose such a man might be found who should perform the Law for us, suffer
the death that was due to our offense and overcome it; yea, and whose obedience
and sufferings should be of such value, that it were sufficient for the
redemption of the whole world: yet could it not be efficient to make us live by
faith, unless that Man had been able to send Gods Spirit to apply the same
unto us.

Which as no bare Man or any other Creature whasoever can do; so for Faith we
are taught by S. Col. 2. 12. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
Paul, that it is the operation of God, and a work of his power, even of that
same power wherewith Christ himself was raised from the dead. Which is the
ground of that prayer of his, that the Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. etc.
eyes of our understanding being enlightened, we might know what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe; according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far
above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and every Name that is named not
only in this World, but also in that to come: and has put all things under
his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church, which is his
body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.

Yet was it fit also, that this Head should be of the same nature with the
Body which is knit unto it: and therefore that he should so be God, as that
he might partake of our Flesh likewise. Ephesians. 5. 30.
For we are members of his body, says the same Apostle; of his flesh, and of
his bones. And, Joh. 6. 53.
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, says our Savior himself, and
drink his blood; ye have no life in you. Ibid. ver. 56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. Declaring thereby, first, that by this mystical and supernatural union,
we are as truly conjoined with him, as the meat and drink we take is with
us; when by the ordinary work of Nature, it is converted into our own
substance. Secondly, that this conjunction is immediately made with his humane
nature. Thirdly, that the Rev. 5. 12. and 13. 8.
Lamb slain, that is, 1 Cor. 1. 23. and 2. 2.
Christ crucified, has by that death of his, made his flesh broken, and his
blood powered out for us upon the Cross, to be fit food for the spiritual
nourishment of our souls; and the very wellspring from whence, by the power
of his Godhead, all life and grace is derived unto us.

Upon this ground it is, that the Apostle tells us, that we Heb. 10. 19, 20.
have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus; by a new and
living way which he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to
say, his flesh. That as in the Tabernacle, there was no passing from the Holy
to the most Holy place, but by the veil: so now there is no passage to be
looked for from the Church Militant to the Church Triumphant, but by the flesh
of him, who has said of himself; Joh. 14. 6.
I am the way, the truth and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by
me. Jacob in his dream beheld Genesis 28. 12, 13.
a ladder set upon the Earth, the top whereof reached to Heaven, and the Angels
of God ascending and descending on it, the Lord himself standing above it. Of
which vision none can give a better interpretation then he, who was prefigured
therein, gave unto Nathaniel. Joh. 1. 51.
Hereafter you shall see Heaven opened, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man. Whence we may well collect, that the only
means whereby God standing above, and his Israel lying here below are
conjoined together, and the only ladder whereby Heaven may be scaled by us,
is the Son of man, the type of whose flesh, the veil, was therefore commanded
to be Exodus 26. 31. and 36. 35.
made with Cherubims; to show that we come Heb. 12. 22. 24.
to an innumerable company of Angels, when we come to Jesus, the Mediator of
the New Testament: who as the Head of the Church has power to Heb. 1. 14.
send forth all those ministering spirits, to minister for them who shall be
Heirs of salvation.

Lastly, we are to take into our consideration, that as in things concerning
God, the main execution of our Saviors Priesthood does consist; so in things
concerning man, he exercises both his Prophetical Office, whereby he
opens the will of his Father unto us, and his Kingly, whereby he rules and
protecteth us. It was indeed a part of Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Hagg. 2. 11. Mal. 2. 7.
the Priests office in the Old Testament, to instruct the people in the Law of
God, and yet were Esa. 28. 7. Jer. 6. 13. and 8. 10. and 14. 18. and 23 11. 33,
34. Lam. 2. 10.
they distinguished from Prophets: like as in the New Testament also, Ephesians. 4.
11.
Prophets as well as Apostles, are made a different degree from ordinary
Pastors and Teachers, who received not their doctrine by immediate inspiration
from Heaven; as those other 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Holy men of God did, who spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Whence S.
Paul puts the Hebrews in mind, that God who (...). Heb. 1. 1.
in sundry parts and in sundry manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by
the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son Christ Jesus:
whom therefore he styles Heb. 3. 1, 2.
the Apostle, as well as the High Priest of our profession; who was faithful
to him that appointed him, even as Moses was in all his house.

Now Moses, we know, had a singular pre-eminence above all the rest of the
Prophets: according to that ample testimony which God himself gives of him.
Number. 12. 6, 7, 8.
If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him
in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so,
who is faithful in all mine house: with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even
aparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold. And therefore we find, that our Mediator in the execution of his
Prophetical office is in a more peculiar manner likened unto Moses: which he
himself also did thus foretell. Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16, etc. Act. 3. 22, 23.
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken. According to all that
thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly,
saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God; neither let me
see this great fire any more, that I dye not. And the Lord said unto me, They
have well spoken, that which they have spoken. I will raise them up a Prophet
from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth,
and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come
to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak
in my Name, I will require it of him.

Our Prophet therefore must be a Man raised from among his Brethren the
Israelites, ( Romans 9. 5.
of whom, as concerning the flesh, he came) who was to perform unto us, that
which the Fathers requested of Moses: Exodus 20. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 25. 27.
Speak thou to us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we
die. And yet (that in this also we may see, how our Mediator had the
pre-eminence) Exodus 34. 30, 32, 33.
when Aaron, and all the children of Israel were to receive from the mouth of
Moses all that the Lord had spoken with him in Mount, Sinai, they were afraid
to come nigh him, by reason of the glory of his shining countenance: so that
he was fain to put a veil over his face, while he spoke unto them that which
he was commanded. But that which for a time was thus 2 Cor. 3. 7, 10 11, 13.
made glorious, had no glory in respect of the glory that excels; and both
the glory thereof, and the veil which covered it, are now abolished in Christ:
the veil of whose flesh does so overshadow Heb. 1. 3.
the brightness of his glory, that yet under it we may Joh. 1. 14.
behold his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father; yea; and 2
Cor. 3. 11.
we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord.

And this is daily effected by the power of the Ministry of the Gospel,
instituted by the authority, and seconded by the power, of this our great
Prophet: whose transcendent excellency beyond Moses, (unto whom, in the
execution of that function, he was otherwise likened) is thus set forth by the
Apostle. Heb. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6.
He is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as he who has
builded the house has more honor then the house. For every house is builded
by some one: but he that built all things is God. And Moses verily was
faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which
were to be spoken after: but Christ, as the Son, over his own house. 1 Timothy 3.
15.
This house of God is no other then the Church of the living God: whereof as
he is the only Lord, so is he also properly the only Builder. Christ
therefore being both the Lord and the Matthew. 16. 18.
Builder of his Church, must be God as well as Man: which is the cause, why
we find all the several mansions of this 2 Timothy 2. 20.
great house to carry the title indifferently of the 1 Cor. 11. 16.
Churches of God, and the Romans 16. 16.
Churches of Christ.

True it is, that there are other ministerial builders, whom Christ employeth
in that service: this being not the least of those gifts which he bestowed
upon men at his Triumphant Ascension into Heaven, that Ephe. 4. 11, 12.
he gave not only ordinary Pastors and Teachers, but Apostles likewise, and
Prophets, and Evangelists; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Which, what great power
it required, he himself does fully express in passing the grant of this high
Commission unto his Apostles. Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20.
All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the World.
Amen.

S. Paul professes of himself, that he 1 Cor. 15. 10,
labored more abundantly then all the rest of the Apostles: yet not I, says
he, but the grace of God which was with me. And therefore although 1 Cor. 3.
9, 10
according to that grace of God which was given unto him, he denies not but
that, as a wise Master Builder, he had laid the foundation; yet he
acknowledges that they upon whom he had wrought, were Gods building, as well
as Gods husbandry. For who, says Ibid. ver. 5, 6, 7
he, is Paul, and who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom you believed, even as
the Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollo watered: but God gave the
increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters: but God that gives the increase.

Two things therefore we find in our great Prophet, which do far exceed
the ability of any bare Man; and so do difference him from all the Luke 1. 70.
Holy Prophets, which have been since the World began. For first, we are
taught; that Mat. 11. 27.
no man knows the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him: and that Joh. 1. 18.
no man has seen God at any time; but the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, he bath declared him. Being in his bosom, he is become
conscious of his secrets, and so out of his own immediate knowledge, enabled to
discover the whole will of his Father unto us. Whereas alother Prophets and
Apostles receive their revelations at the second hand, and according to the
grace given unto them by the Spirit of Christ. Witness that place of S. Peter,
for the Prophets: 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11
Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you; searching what or what
manner of time THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST WHICH WAS IN THEM did signify, when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow. And for the Apostles, those heavenly words which our Savior himself
uttered unto them, whilst he was among them. Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15.
When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he
shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak; and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he
shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. All things that the Father has,
are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto
you.

Secondly, all other Prophets and Apostles can do no more (as has been said)
but plant and water; only God can give the increase: they may teach indeed and
baptize; but unless Christ were with them by the powerful presence of his
Spirit, they would not be able to save one soul by that Ministry of theirs.
We, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house: but, Psalm. 127. 1.
except the Lord do build this house, they labor in vain that build it. For
who is able to breathe the Spirit of life into those dead stones, but he, of
whom it is written; Joh. 5. 25.
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God; and they that hear it shall live. And again: Ephesians. 5. 24.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead; and Christ shall give thee
light. Who can awake us out of this dead sleep, and give light unto these
blind eyes of ours; but the Lord our God, unto whom we pray, that he would
Psalm. 13. 3.
lighten our eyes, lest we sleep the sleep of death?

And as a blind man is not able to conceive the distinction of colors,
although the skilfullest man alive should use all the art he had to teach him;
because he wants the sense whereby that object is discernible: so 1 Cor. 2.
14.
the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God (for they are
foolishness unto him;) neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Whereupon the Apostle concludes, concerning himself and all his
fellow laborers; that 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts; to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ: but we have this treasure in earthen vessels; that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. Our Mediator therefore
(who must Heb. 7. 25.
be able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him) may not want
the excellency of the power, whereby he may make us capable of this high
knowledge of the things of God, propounded unto us by the ministry of his
servants: and consequently, in this respect also, must be God as well as Man.

There remains the Kingdom of our Redeemer: described thus by the Prophet
Isaiah. Esa. 9. 7.
Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the
Throne of David, and upon his kingdom; to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever. And by Daniel: Dan.
7. 13, 14.
Behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to
the Ancient of days; and they brought him near before him. And there was given
him Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages
should serve him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not
pass away; and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And by the
Angel Gabriel, in his embassage to the blessed Virgin. Luke 1. 31, 32, 33.
Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call
his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest;
and the Lord God shall give him the Throne of his Father David. And he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no
end.

This is that new Jer. 30. 9. Hos. 3. 5. Ezekiel. 34. 23. and 37. 24.
David our King, whom God has raised up unto his Gal. 6. 16.
own Israel: who was in Truth, that which he was called; the Son of Man, and
the Son of the Highest. That in the one respect, Ephesians. 5. 30.
we may say unto him, as the Israelites of old did unto their David; 2 Samuel 5.
1.
Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh: and in the other, sing of him as David
himself did; Psalm. 110. 1. Mat. 22. 43, 44. Act. 2. 34, 35.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. So that the promise made unto our first Parents, that
Genesis 3. 15.
the seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, may well stand with
that other saying of S. Paul; that Romans 16. 20.
the God of peace shall bruise Satan under our feet. Seeing 1 John 3. 8.
for this very purpose the Son of God was manifested 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the flesh, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. And still that
foundation of God will remain unshaken: I Esa. 43. 11.
even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior. Hos. 13. 4.
Thou shall know no God but me: for there is no Savior beside me.

Two special branches there be of this Kingdom of our Lord and Savior: the
one of Grace, whereby that part of the Church is governed which is Militant
upon Earth; the other of Glory, belonging to that part which is Triumphant in
Heaven. Here upon earth, as by his Prophetical office he works upon our
Mind and Understanding, so by his Kingly, he rules our Will and Affections;
2 Cor. 10. 5.
casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. Where, as we must needs acknowledge, that Phil. 2. 13.
it is God which works in us both to will and to do, and that it is 2 Thessalonians.
5. 23.
he which sanctifyeth us wholly: so are we taught likewise to believe, that
Heb. 2. 11.
both he who sanctifyeth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, namely
of one and the self-same nature; that the sanctifyer might not be ashamed to
call those, who are sanctified by him, his brethren: that as their nature was
corrupted, and their blood tainted in the first Adam, so it might be restored
again in the second Adam; and that as from the one a corrupt, so from the other
a pure and undefiled nature might be transmitted unto the heirs of salvation.

The same Psalm. 84. 11.
God that gives grace, is he also that gives glory: yet so, that the streams
of both of them must run to us through the golden pipe of our Saviors
humanity. 1 Cor. 15. 21.
For since by man came death; it was fit that by man also should come the
resurrection of the dead. Even by that man, who has said: Joh. 6. 54.
Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life; and I will
raise him up at the last day. Who, then, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made mavelous in all
them that believe: and Philip. 3. 21.
shall change this base body of ours, that it may be fashioned like unto his
own glorious body; according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto himself. Unto him therefore that has thus Revel. 1. 5, 6.
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings
and Priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen.

PHILIP. 3. 8. I COUNT ALL THINGS BUT LOSS, FOR THE EXCELLENCY OF THE
KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST JESUS MY LORD.
FINIS.

