THE JUDGMENT OF Doctor RAINOLDES touching the Original of EPISCOPACY.

More largely confirmed out of Antiquity By JAMES Archbishop of ARMAGH.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for THOMAS DOVVNES, and are to be sold by William Lo
at the Turks head in Fleetstreet. 1641.

THE IVDGEMENT OF DOCTOR RAINOLDES touching the Original of Episcopacie.
WHEN Act. 14.23.
Elders were ordained by the Apostles in every Church, Tit. 1.5.
through every City, Act. 20.28.
to (...), that is, to do the duty of a Pastor to it.
feed the flock of Christ, whereof the Holy Ghost had made them overseers:
they to the intent they might the better do it by common counsel and consent,
did use to assemble themselves and meet together. In the which meetings, for
the more orderly handling and concluding of things pertaining to their charge;
they chose one amongst them to be the President of their company and Moderator
of their actions. As in the Church of Ephesus, though it had Act. 20.17.
sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it: yet amongst those sundry was there one
chief, whom our Savior calls Rev. 2.1.
the Angel of the Church, and writes that to him, which by him the rest
should know.

And this is he whom afterward in the Primitive Church the Fathers called
Bishop. For as the name of 1. Cor. 4.1.
Ministers, common to all them who serve Christ in Luke 12.42.
the stewardship of the mysteries of God, that is in preaching of the Gospel,
is now by the custom of our English speech restrained to Elders who are under
a Bishop: so the name of 1. Tim 3.2. Tit. 1.7. Act. 20.28.
Bishop common to all Elders and Pastors of the Church, was then by the usual
language of the Fathers appropriated to him who had the Presidentship over
Elders.

Thus are certain Elders reproved by Epist. 13. Presbyteris and Diaconis.
Cyprian; for receiving to the communion them who had fallen (in time of
persecution) before the Bishop had advised of it with them and others. And
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 1.6. c. 42.
Cornelius writes that the Catholic Church committed to his charge had six
and forty Elders, and ought to have but one Bishop. And both of them being
Bishops, the one of Rome, the other of Carthage, Cornelius Cypriano Ep. 46.
Cyprianus Presbyteris and Diaconis Ep. 6.
do witness of themselves that they dealt in matters of their Churches
government by the consent and counsel of the company of Elders, or the
Eldership, Cornelius Ep. 46. apud Cyprianum.
as they both (after S. 1. Tim. 4.14.
Paul) do call it.

THus far, that Reverend D. Rainold. Conference with Heart, chap. 8. divis 3.
Doctor: whose observation touching the Angel of the Church of Ephesus (in the
second of the Revelation) that he was the same with him whom afterward in the
Primitive Church the Fathers called Bishop, is clearly confirmed, both by the
succession of the first Bishops of that Church, and by the testimony of
Ignatius, who (within no greater compass of time then twelve years
afterward) distinguishes the singular and constant President thereof, from
the rest of the number of the Presbyters, by appropriating the name of Bishop
unto him.

As for the former: we find it openly declared in the general Council of
Chalcedon, by Leontius Bishop of Magnesia; that (...). Council Chalcedon. Act.
11.
from Timothy (and so from the days of the Apostles) there had been a
continued succession of seven and twenty Bishops; all of them ordained in
Ephesus* Of which number the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, mentioned in the
Revelation, must needs be one whether it were Timothy himself, as (...). in
Vit. Polycarp. cap 7.
some conceive; or one of his next Successors, as others rather do imagine.

For that Timothy had been sometime N^tandum est ex (...), Timotheum in
Ephesino Presbyterio(...) (...) (id est, antis^^^em) ut vocat Justinus. Pez.
Annotat. in 1. Tim. 5.19. Qui politicae causa reliquis fratribus in coetu
praeerat (qu^m Justinius (...) vocat) peculiariter dici Episcopus coepit. Id. in
Philip. 1.1.
the (...) (which is the appellation which Justin Martyr gives unto him, whom
other of the Fathers do peculiarly term a Bishop) or Antistes, or President
of the Ephesine Presbytery, is confessed by Beza himself: and that he was
ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians, we do not only read
in the subscription of the second Epistle to Timothy, and the Ecclesiastical
History of Eusebius. Hist. Lib 3. (...).
Eusebius, but also in two ancient Treatises concerning the Martyrdom of
Timothy; the one namelesse in the Library of (...). and post. (...). Phot.
B^bliothec. number. 254.
Photius, the other bearing the name of Polycrat. de Martyrio Timothei: inter
Vitas Sanctorum* edit. Lovanij anno 1485*
Polycrates, even of that Polycrates, who was not only himself Bishop of this
Church of Ephesus, but borne also within six or seven and thirty years after
S. John wrote the forenamed Epistle unto the Angel of that Church: as it
appears by the years he was of, when he wrote that Epistle unto Victor
Bishop of Rome, wherein he makes mention of (...). Polycrat. Epist. ad
Victorem: apud Eusebius lib. 5. Hist. (...).
seven kinsmen of his who had been Bishops; he himself being the eight.

I come now to the testimony of Ignatius: whom Theodoret in Dialogo 1. sive
(...).
Theodoret and Felix III. in Epist. ad Zenonem. Imp. recitat. in V. Synodo
Constantinopol. Act. 1. ( tomo 2. Concilior. page 220. edit. Binij, ann. 1606)
Felix Bishop of Rome, and Johan. Mal^la Antiochenus, Chronic. lib. 10. M.S.
John the Chronographer of Antioch report to have been ordained Bishop of
Antioch by S. Peter; and without all controversy did sit in that See, the very
same time wherein that Epistle unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus was
commanded to be written. In the Isle of Patmos had S. John his Revelation
manifested unto him, (...). Iren. advers. haeres. lib. 5. cap. 30. Eusebius. lib.
Hist. (...).
toward the end of the Empire of Domitian, as Irenaeus testifies; or the
foureteenth year of his government, as Eusebius. Chronic. Hieron. Catal.
scriptor. Ecclesiast. in Johanne.
Eusebius and Hierom specify it. From thence there are but twelve years
reckoned unto the tenth of Trajan: wherein Ignatius, in that last journey which
he made for the consummation of his glorious Martyrdom at Rome, wrote another
Epistle unto the selfsame Church of Ephesus. In which he makes mention of
their then Bishop Onesimus: as it appears both by Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. (...).
Eusebius citing this out of it, and by the Epistle it self yet extant.

In this Epistle to the Ephesians, Ignatius having acknowledged that their
(...). Ignat epist. ad E^h^s
numerous multitude was received by him in the person of their Bishop Onesimus,
and (...). Ibid.
blessed God for granting unto them such a Bishop as he was: does afterward
put them in mind of their (...). Ibid.
duty in concurring with him, as he shows their worthy Presbytery did, being
(...). Ibid.
so conjoined (as he says) with their Bishop, as the strings are with the
Harp; and toward the end exhorts them to (...). Ibid.
obey both the Bishop and the Presbytery, with an undevided mind.

In the same journey wrote Ignatius also an Epistle unto the Church of Smyrna;
another of those seven unto whom those letters are directed in S. John's
Revelation* wherein he also (...). Id. in epist. ad Smyrn.
saluteth their Bishop and Presbytery: exhorting all the people to (...). Ibid
follow their Bishop, as Christ Jesus did his Father, and the Presbytery, as
the Apostles; and telling them that (...), etc. Ibid.
no man ought either to administer the Sacraments, or do any thing
appertaining to the Church, without the consent of the Bishop. And that
Polycarpus was then Bishop, when S. John wrote unto the Angel of the Church in
Smyrna; who can better inform us then Irenaeus? who did not only know those
worthy men, (...). Iren. advers haeres lib 3. cap. 3. Eusebius. lib. 4 hist. (...).
who succeeded Polycarpus in his See; but also Iren. in epist ad Florinum:
(apud Eusebius. lib. 5. (...).) and ad Victorem (ibid. (...).)
was present, when he himself did discourse of his conversation with S. John,
and of those things which he heard from those who had seen our Lord Jesus.

Polycarpus (...). Iren lib 3. cap. 3. ut supra.
says he, was not only taught by the Apostles and conversed with many of
those that had seen Christ, but also was by the Apostles constituted in Asia
Bishop of the Church which is in Smyrna: whom we our selves also did see in our
younger age for he continued long, and being very aged, he most gloriously and
nobly suffering Martyrdom departed this life.

Now being ordained Bishop of Symrna by the Apostles; who had finished their
cours^ and departed out of this life before S. John (the last surviver of them)
did write his Revelation: who but he could there be meant by the Angel of the
Church in Smyrna? in which that he still held his Episcopal office unto the
time of his Martyrdom (which fell out LXXIIII years afterward) may
sufficiently appear by this testimony, which the brethren of the Church of
Smyrna, who were present at his suffering, gave unto him. (...). Smyrnens.
eccle. epist. encycl de martyrio Polycarpi Eusebius. lib 4. hist. (...).
He was the most admirable man in our times, an Apostolical and Prophetical
Doctor, and Bishop of the Catholic Church which is in Smyrna. Whereunto we may
add the like of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, who lived also in his time and in
his neighborhood, affirming (...). Polycrat. epist. ad Victorem: apud Eusebius.
lib. 5. hist. (...).
Polycarpus to have been both Bishop and Martyr in Smyrna. So says he in his
Synodicall Epistle, directed unto Victor Bishop of Rome, about 27 years after
the Martyrdom of Polycarpus; he himself being at that time 65 years of age.

About the very same time wherein Polycrates wrote this Epistle unto Victor,
did Tertullian publish his book of Prescriptions against Heretics: wherein he
avoucheth against them, that Sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum ab Johanne
conlocatum resert; sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit: proinde
(or perinde) utique (...) ^^ceterae exhibent quos, ab Apostolis in Episcopatum
constitutos. Apostolici seminis traduces habent. Tertullian de Praescript. cap.
32. Vid. and ejusd lib. 4. contra Marcion. cap. 5.
as the Church of Smyrna had Polycarpus placed there by John, and the Church of
Rome Clement ordained by Peter; so the rest of the Churches also did show, what
Bishops they had received by the appointment of the Apostles, to traduce the
Apostolical seed unto them. And so before him did Irenaeus urge against them
Successiones Episcoporum, quibus Apostolicam quae in unoquoque loco est
Ecclesiam tradiderunt. Iren. lib. 4. advers. haeres. cap. 63.
the successions of Bishops, unto whom the Apostles committed the charge of the
Church in every place. Omnes enim ij valde posteriores sunt, quam Episcopi,
quibus Apostoli tradiderunt Ecclesias. Id. lib. 5. cap. 20.
For all the Heretics (says he) are much later then those Bishops, unto whom
the Apostles committed the Churches. And, Habemus annumerare eos qui ab
Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesijs, and successores eorum usque ad
nos; qui nihil tale docuerunt neque cognoverunt quale ab his deliratur. Id.
lib. 3. cap 3.
we are able to number those who by the Apostles were ordained Bishops in the
Churches, and their Successors unto our days; who neither taught nor knew any
such thing as these men dream of.

For proof whereof, he brings in the succession of the Bishops of Rome, from
(...). Id. ibid. and apud Eu^eb lib 5. hist (...).
Linus (unto whom the blessed Apostles committed that Episcopacie) and
Anacletus (by others called Cletus) and Clement (who did both see the Apostles,
and conferred with them) unto (...). ands. ibid.
Eleutherius; who, when he wrote had the charge of that Bishopric in the
twelfth place after the Apostles; concerning whom, and the integrity which then
continued in each other succession from the Apostles days, Hegesippus, who at
the same time published his History of the Church, says thus. (...). Hegesip.
apud Eusebius. lib 4. hist. (...).
Soter succeeded Anicetus, and after him was Eleutherius. Now, in every
succession, and in every City, all things so stand, as the Law and the
Prophets, and our Lord do preach*

When this Cum Eleutherius vir sanctus Pontificatui Romanae Ecclesiae
praeesset, misit ad eum Lucius Britannorum Rex epistolam; obsecrans ut per ejus
mandatum Christianus efficeretur. Et mox effectu^ piae postulationis consecutus
est: susceptamque fidem Britanni usque in tempora Diocletiani Principis
inviolatam integramque quieta pace servabant. Bed. hist. ecclesiast. Anglor.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
Eleutherius (as our Bid relates) was Bishop of the Church of Rome, Lucius
King of the Britains sent an Epistle to him; desiring that by his means he
might be made Christian* who presently obtained the effect of his pious
request: and the Britains kept the faith then received sound and undefiled in
quiet peace, until the times of Dioclesian the Emperor. By whose bloody
persecution the faith and discipline of our British Churches was not yet so
quite extinguished; but that within ten years after (and eleven before the
first general Council of Nice) three of our Bishops were present and
subscribed unto the Council of Arles: Tom. 1. Concilior. Galiae, a Sirmondo
edit. page 9.
Eborius of York, Restitutus of London, and Adelfius of Colchester, called
there Colonia Londinensium* the first root of whose succession we must fetch
beyond Eleutherius, and as high as S. Peter himself: if it be true, that he
(...). Metaphrast. Commentar. de Petro and Paulo; ad diem 29 Iu^ij.
constituted Churches here, and ordained Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in
them; as Symeon Metaphrastes relates out of some part of (...). Ibid.
Eusebius (as it seems) that is not come unto our hands.

But, to return unto the Angels of the seven Churches, mentioned in the
Revelation of S. John: by what has been said, it is apparent, that seven
singular Bishops, who were the constant Presidents over those Churches, are
pointed at under that name. For other sure they could not be, if all of them
were cast into one mould, and were of the same quality with Polycarpus, the
then Angel of the Church in Smyrna: who without all question was such, if any
credit may be given herein unto those that saw him and were well acquainted
with him.

And as Tertullian in express terms affirms him to have been placed there
by S. John himself (in the testimony before alleged out of his Tertull.
Praescript. cap. 32. and, post eum, Hieronymus in Catal. script. Ecclesiast.
cap. 17. Polycarpus, Joannis Apostoli discipulus, ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus
ordinatus.
Prescriptions:) so does he elsewhere, from the order of the succeeding
Bishops, not obscurely intimate, that the rest of that number were to be
referred unto the same descent. Ha^emus and Joannis alumnas Ecclesias. Nam etsi
Apocalypsim ejus Marcion respuit; ordo tamen Episcoporum ad originem recensus,
in Joannem stabit auctorem. Sic and caeterarum generositas recognoscitur.
Tertullian. advers. Marcion. lib. 4. cap 5.
We have, says he, the Churches that were bred by John. For although Marcion
do reject his Revelation; yet the order of the Bishops reckoned up unto their
original, will stand for John to be their Founder. Neither does the ancient
Writer of the Martyrdom of Timothy (mentioned by Photius) mean any other by
those seven Bishops, whose assistance he says S. John did use, after his
return from Patmos, in the government of the Metropolis of the Ephesians,
that is, of the Churches of Asia most properly so called, which in his time
acknowledged the Bishop of Ephesus for their Primate. (...). Phot. Bibliothec
number 254.
Being revoked from his exile by the sentence of Nerva, he betook himself to
the Metropolis of Ephesus; and being assisted with the presence of the SEVEN
Bishops, he took upon him the government of the Metropolis of the Ephesians:
and continued, preaching the word of piety, until the Empire of Trajan.

That he remained with the Ephesians and the rest of the brethren of Asia,
until the days of Trajan; and that during the time of his abode with them, he
published his Gospel; is sufficiently witnessed by Irenae. advers heraes. lib.
2 cap. 39. item lib. 3. c 1. and 3.
Irenaeus. That upon his return from the Island, after the death of Domitian,
he applied himself to the government of the Churches of Asia, si confirmed
likewise both by Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. (...).
Eusebius, and by Hie^onym. in Catal. script ecclesiast. cap 9.
Hierom: who further adds, that Id ibid. and Praefat. in Evangel Matthaei*
at the earnest entreaty of the Bishops of Asia he wrote there his Gospel. And
that he himself also, being free from his banishment, did ordain Bishops in
diverse Churches, is clearly testified by Clement of Alexandria; who lived in
the next age after, and delivers it as a certain truth, which he had
received from those who went before him and could not be far from the time
wherein the thing it self was acted. (...). Clem. Alexandrin. in lib de divite
salvando (qui falso Origenis nomine habetur editus, ad calcem tomi 3.
Commentariorum Michaelis Ghislerij) Eusebius. hist. lib 3. (...).
When S. John (says he) Domitian the tyrant being dead, removed from the
Island of Patmos unto Ephesus, by the entreaty of some he went also unto the
neighboring nations; in some places constituting Bishops, in others founding
whole Churches*

And thus much may suffice for the deduction of Episcopacie from the
Apostolical times.

FINIS.

