TWENTY SERMONS PREACHED AT OXFORD, Before HIS MAJESTY, AND ELSEWHERE.

By the most Reverend JAMES USHER late Archbishop of ARMAGH.

Perused and Published by his Lordship's Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the King's Arms in St. Paul's Church
Yard. 1678.

PIETATE aeque ac DOCTRINA Praecellenti Viro HENRICO HENLEY, DE COLEWAY IN
Comitatu Dorcestrensi ARMIGERO. (...).
EXimium illud quod semper exhibuisti (vir pientissime) Religionis specimen
subsequentes hasce conciones sub nominis tui vexillo haud immerito evocavit.
Chara adeo Tibimet and cordi sunt Sacro-Sancta Dei eloquia, ut quod tenuitas
nostra and facultatula amanuensis in hac re praestiterit, nequaquam dubito quin
pro singulari tua and Pietate and humanitate boni consulere digneris. Authorem
quod attinet, Panygerin ille nullatenus nostram desiderat, quippe omnia quae
meditemur Elogia multis parasangis superavit. Excelsum adeo and Sanctimoniae
and doctrinae apicem attigit, ut elaborata illa and subsequens Praefatiuncula
non immerito ad coelos ipsum laudibus evexit, and encomiis sacris decoravit.
Nostrum est interea Te, Te inquam (vir Ornatissime) candidum librorum
aestimatorem appellare, qui singulari and pietate and peritia praeditus, de usu
illorum and emolumento, aequo calculo statuere didicisti. Sagaci igitur has
Tibi dicatas conciones dum introspicias oculo, facessant precor and impuri and
haeretici illi codices, qui indies in lucem gregatim prodeunt, e quorum
faetidis myrothecis vitiorum non remedium, sed irritamentum, non salubre
Alexipharmacon, sed exitiale toxicum quam plurimi hauserunt; Imo facessant
miselli isti Authors Daemonis impuri spiritu afflati, utpote qui Reipublicae
and Ecclesiae detrimento sat consuluerunt. Non decet liberorum panem canibus
objici, nedum canum offas sic liberis ingeri, ut Circaeo quasi fascinati poculo
in canes ipsos, in boves, in hircos, in lupos transformarentur. Interea
temporis, tametsi ego (vir colendissime) imperitiae and tenuitatis meae probe
conscius sim, minime tamen dubito, quin and Tibi and aliis eximie piis,
^ongesta hocce in codicillo apprime arrideant: spiritualibus enim fidelium
palatis, tam aptissime conceptus animi Doctor hic admodum Reverendus and vere
Ecclesiasticus accommodavit, tam dilucide tradidit, utque pater nutricius ita
premansum cibum in os, and in aures fidelium verba sua inseruit, ut merito
primas sui Ordinis tenuit, and sublimi sua emicuit sphaer a -- veluti inter
ignes Luna minores. Non equidem ignoro quae regerent prodeunti huic parum
propitii libello, lubricis scilicet Amanuensium memoriis plurima excidisse,
veluti ex pertuso dolio effluxa: nec sane inficias ire ausim. Nihilo tamen
secius -- Est quiddam prodire tenus, si non datur ultra. Nec adeo mediocrem
hunc nostrum existimamus conatum, ut judicium cujusvis (...) praecipitatum non
leviter rejicerimus. Parum forsan digna tam eruditi Concionatoris authoritate
and eloquentia aliquibus quaedam videantur, at illis qui divina sapiunt, valde
consona and gravitati and veritati Sacro-Sanctae Scripturae reperientur. Luce
clarius patet, quid in causa est, omnes omnium aetatum, omnium ordinum
homunciones, tantam pervasisse morum corruptelam, nimirum, quod nec vitia far
possumus nostra, nec remedia. Lavacrum Dei plane rejecimus, ideoque a
fedissimis vitiorum inquinamentis nondum repurgamur. Quae auribus nostris
excepimus, animisque caelitus impressa persensimus (quicquid homines, vel
Daemones contrasentiant, aut loquantur) non possumus non palam divulgare, ne
aut propriae stolidissime experientiae, aut Gratiae divinae petulantissime
refragari videamur. Ah! quoties and Religio and timor (illo concionante)
auditorum animos subierunt? Quot mentibus fracti, and alto moerore adeo
correpti and exanimati inter depingendos Salvatoris nostri cruciatus evaserunt,
ut nullas lacrymarum inducias admitterent, sed spiritus suspiriis, and dolori
pectora sua devoverunt, donec ille, ille inquam, qui vulnera divino auxilio
fecerat, quasi spiculis and aculeis coelitus transfixos animos, sanguinis
Christi applicatione tempestive allevasset? At! at! coelestis hic cecidit
Praeco, eodemque ictu ne corrue^ent etiam conciones illae quam mellifluae,
tantique plurimis auditorum Emolumenti, ab interitu and oblivione post tot
retro and elapsos annos quibus delituerunt, vindicantur. Et revera (absit
jactantiae crimen) audacter hoc omnibus editioni harum concionum parum
faventibus reponere audemus, non alia usquam extare exemplaria majori
Amanuensium diligentia and labor collecta; ideoq^e nescii, imo dubii, annon
post tantum silentium alia parum genuina and ascititia proserperent, Deo (uti
speramus) auspice in publicum hoc emisimus. Tuis interim (vir dignissime)
manibus hae chartulae dicatae posteris tradentur, nomenque tuum futuris
saeculis non injuria praedicabunt, and cum illae sileant -- Quod been feceris
mercedem tuleris. Deus opt. max. omnibus ingenii and gratiae dotibus magis
magisque indies cumulatum, pietatis and religionis orthodoxae, literarum and
literatorum Patronum te diutissime incolumem praestet, obnixe ex animo vovet.

Tibi (vir Ornatissime) omni observantia addictissimus, JOSEPHUS CRABB.

A PREFACE Concerning the AUTHOR, And these SERMONS.
THough I might be silent, concerning either the most famous Preacher of these
Sermons, or the Sermons themselves now published, yet such is the high esteem I
have of him, and the due respect I bear to them for his sake chiefly, that I
could not withstand the request of diverse who importuned some Lines from me
upon the occasion, both concerning the one and the other.

First, I commend unto the Reader a diligent perusal of the life and death of
the most Reverend and Learned Father of our Church, Dr. James Usher, late
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland; put forth by Reverend and
Learned Dr. Bernard: where you shall meet with many delightful passages
concerning, His Stock and Pedigree. His Great Parts, Gifts and Graces. His
Ingenuous Education. His Admirable Proficiency. His Timely Conversion. His Rare
Learning. His Indefaticable Industry. His Strict and holy Conversation. His
Pious Government of his Family. His Amicable correspondence with Foreign
Churches. His Prophetic Spirit. His Learned Writings. His Comfortable
Visitation. His Lord in special forgive my sins of commission, see Dr. Ber.
Life and death of the Arch-Bp. of Armagh, p. 110.
Dying Words, never to be buried. His Blessed Death. His Ever to be lamented
Loss. His Fit Parallel to Samuel among the Prophets, to Augustine amongst the
Fathers.
With many other things worthy Observation: and when he has poudered these
well, he will the less wonder that his name has filled the Christian world as
much as ever did Augustine or Athanasius of old, or Whitakers and Reynolds of
later times.

Secondly, I tender these spices gathered to the Embalming of this Rare Phoenix
out of his own ashes, holding my self engaged as much as any to cast my mite
into the treasury of his blessed memory, as having had my Been esse most from
him.

Dublin in Ireland, his native City and Country above forty years ago.



ordained (or to use the Apostle's word) put into the Ministry, and the same
day admitted his Chaplain in Ordinary, now two and thirty years ago: though
then able to do him little service, being called to a Sheffeild in Yorkshire.
Congregation in another nation: which call his Grace did then approve of.

(...).
Having given this account to the Reader, I shall only mention three things
Concerning him, and forbear many more that might be added.

First, To the testimonies concerning him from Spanhemius, Ger. Vossius,
Buchartus, Simplitius, Lud de dieu. Paulus Testardus, Blessensis, Arnoldus,
Bootius, Mr. Seldom, Dr. Prideaux, Bp. Davenant, Bertius, Mr. Cambden, Sir Rog.
Twisden, and the whole University of Oxford, beside the forced testimony of his
adversaries, Moranez, Beaumont, (Alias) Rookwood, Challoner, Henry Fitz.
Simonds, for all which I refer to the book aforesaid. Give me leave to add the
testimony of Dr. William Chapel, sometimes fellow of Christ's College in
Cambridge, and afterward Provost of Trinity College near Dublin: which from
such an acute man as he was, may amount to the like equivalent testimony from
the University of Cambridge. He gave me once three reasons why he thought
Doctor Usher (then James Mead. Anagram, I am the same. See Dr. Bernard, page
52.
Bishop of Mead) was in his esteem the greatest Scholar in the Christian world.

1. One was, because of his rare natural parts, the foundation of his other
Learning; having a quick Apprehension, a prompt Wit, a strong Memory, a clear
Understanding, a piercing Judgment, and a ready utterance: Seldom (said he)
shall you meet all these in an Eminent degree in the same person, but in him
they so concurred, that it is hard to say in which he most excelled.

2. Another was, because few men, though they had such parts, were either able
or willing to make so rich improvement of them, by choice Libraries, unwearied
studying in them, and searching out the Rarities of any other: few men's bodies
and brains (he believed) would bear it.

3. The third was, because he was so esteemed both in these Universities, and
in those beyond the Seas: and indeed whosoever conversed with him, found him
(if they pleased to try it) a skilful Linguist, a Subtle Disputant, a fluent
Orator, a profound Divine, a mighty Antiquary, an exact Chronologer, and indeed
a living and walking Library; The greatest professors have admired the
Concatenation of so much and such variety of Learning in one person.

1. Do but think; he that Learned to read of two of his Aunts that were both
blind.

Was converted from a state of Nature into grace at ten years old.

Was admitted the first Scholar into the College at Dublin; and that upon
design, by reason of his pregnancy and forwardness, at thirteen years of age.

Made an exact Chronology of good part of the Bible, and of some other Authors
he had read, at fifteen years old.

Encountered a Jesuit at 19 years old, and afterward was called by him (of
such as are not Catholics) the most Learned.

Was Master of Arts, answered the Philosophy Act, and chosen Catechist of the
College, when he went through a great part of the body of Divinity, in the
Chapel, by way of common place, at nineteen years old.

Commenced Batchelour of Divinity at twenty seven years old, and immediately
after was chosen Professor of Divinity in that University.



Do but think, I say, how mighty he was, when beside his promptness in School
Divinity, he had read over all the Fathers, and trusted his own eyes in the
search of them, by that he was thirty eight years of age, and was Master of all
other Learning also.

Secondly, If any yet be found, that would detract from so accomplished a
person, and indeed pillar of our Church in his Generation, by reason of the
distance at which they stand from Prelacy, or by reason of their Engagement in
the late civil and unhappy differences between The late King and Parliament;
claiming to themselves Liberty wherein soever they differ from others, both in
matters of Church and State, but allowing to others as little concerning
either: to such as these (if they be such as deserve satisfaction) give me
leave to say,

A Divine and Apostolical Bishop he was, and next to the Apostles, Evangelists,
and Prophets, as great a Pastor and Teacher, and trusted with as much of Gods
mind, as I believe any one since has been.

An Ecclesiastical Bishop he was also, and the most able Moderator in Church
assemblies: To him pertained the double honor for ruling well, and for
Laboring in word and Doctrine: Famous were two of his Predecessors in that See
Dr. Ber. Epist. to the Reader in his life and death, etc.
See of Armagh, in their Generations, the one for his Sanctity, the other for
his Learning, but both these Eminently met in him; John the Divine commends
the Angel or Bishop of Ephesus, etc. And Ireland will do no less for this Angel
or Bishop of Armagh.

But for Popish Bishops, none was further off then he: Witness his Learned
Writings against the Romish Synagogue, his Judgment within the bounds of a
moderated Episcopacy; and when the Reader has perused that See the Reduction
of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Government Received in the Ancient
Church: published by Doctor Bernard.
frame of Church Government drawn up under his own hand and now published, he
will see what a good Bishop Doctor Usher was.

The last thing which I shall propose to the Reader, is The Crown God set upon
the head of this Humble Saint, both in the Conversion and Edification of very
many. Indeed 2 Samuel 1.22.
his bow seldom turned back, nor his sword returned empty. God was mighty in
him, which way soever he bent himself, either in Conviction, Conversion, or
Consolation, wherein he had Isa. 50.4.
the Tongue of the Learned given unto him; Witness the many Souls who were, and
are his 2 Cor. 3.2.
Epistle known and read of all Men; Witness again the success God gave to
diverse of his Encounters with Adversaries to the true Religion: Some instances
whereof the Learned Doctor that writes his Life has given, to which many more
might be added. Witness also such as were his frequent hearers, how mightily
the hand of God was with him, so that Acts 11.21.
a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. If Dan. 12.3.
they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as stars for ever and ever,
then this famous Evangelist is a star of the greatest Magnitude, and will be
able in the strength of Christ to say after him, Heb. 2.13.
Behold I and the Children which God has given me.

And though the work of the Ministry is ours, the success Gods, yet who so
expects blessing from God upon his Labors, I cannot commend to such, a
pattern more exact to be imitated amongst the men of this Generation, then this
good Bishop, especially in these three things.

Tim. 4.12.
an example in word, in Conversation, in Love, in Spirit, in faith, and in
purity. Many there were who in that respect Reverenced him, though of the
Romish Synagogue, as Mark 6.20.
Herod did John the Baptist, knowing that he was a just and an holy man*

This blessed Preacher did Live all his Sermons and had learned of Jesus, who
Acts 1.1. (...).
began both to do and to teach. Nazianzens Epitaph on the life of Basil was
true in him, His words were Thunder, his Life Lightning.

Secondly in making Christ and the Apostles the pattern of his preaching, this
great Master in Israel was the most self-denying man in the pulpit, and the
most Reverend and Christ-advancing Preacher.

He preached Mat. 7.29.
with great Authority as did our Savior to the Conscience, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
his speech was not with enticing words of Man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the spirit, and of power: that their faith might not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God. How often have I seen my self, and heard from
others, whilst be thus prophesyed, some that believed not, coming to hear him 1
Cor. 14.24.25.
go away Convinced of all, Judged of all, and the secrets of their heart made
manifest, and so falling down on their face they have worshipped God, and
reported that God was in him of a truth. He was an Acts 18.24^
Apollos an Eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures: He was another Paul in
the preaching that did Collatis scripturae locis Probans, nempe sicuti solent
artifices aliquid Compacturi, singulas parts inter se comparare, ut inter se
alia aliis ad amussim quadrent. Bez. In Act. 9.22. Efficere condescensionem ut
sic dicam id est argumentis propositis efficere, ut aliquis tecum in eandem
sententiam descendat. Mr. Leigh. Critic. sacr. In verb. (...).
compare Scripture with Scripture, and so make demonstrative Proofs from the
spirit speaking in them. Some that affected a frothy way of preaching by strong
Lines (as they call them) after they heard him in Oxford decry that Corinthian
vanity, were much ashamed, and took up a more profitable way of preaching.
Those words of his in a Sermon at the Court before the King, are worthy to be
printed in Letters of Gold, And oh! That God would print them in the hearts of
all the Ministers in the World, Ser. before K. James, Wansted. June 20. 1629
page 34, 35.
Great Scholars (said he) possibly may think it stands not with their Credit
to stoop so low, etc. But let the Learned of us all try it when ever we
please, we shall find that to lay this groundwork right, that is, to apply our
selves to the Capacity of the Common Auditory, and to make an ignorant man to
understand these mysteries in some good measure, will put us to the trial of
our skill, and trouble us a great deal more, then if we were to discuss a
Controversy, or handle a subtle point of Learning in the Schools.

Thirdly, In condescending publicly and privately to the Capacity of the
meanest that heard or conversed with him, herein his wisdom was like unto
Solomon's styled the Preacher, Ecl. 12.10, 1^
because he was wise he did still teach the people knowledge, yea he gave good
heed, and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs, the Preacher sought to
find out (...)
acceptable words, and words of truth, and as our Savior, that was greater
then Solomon, he would let truths substantially proved into the understanding
with apt similitudes: and would John 16.5.
Encourage any to move their doubts unto him in private: So that
notwithstanding his greatness, good Christians might be very familiar with him,
visit them in their sickness supply their wants, beg their prayers, and
Countenance them in whatsoever Condition: all might see Psalm. 16.3.
his delight was in the Saints, and that he was (as that King Acts 13.22.
after Gods own heart) Psalm. 119.63.
a Companion of all them that feared God, in a word, he was a great proficient
in that Lesson of our Savior Math. 11, 29
Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart. This (I say) was the reason he
grew so high in favor with God and man: He honored God, and therefore God
honored him. A great and good drawnet he was, that fished for souls and
catched many: and let two sorts of Ministers gather from hence their respective
Instructions.

First, let all those that list not follow him in those paths of holiness,
painfulness, and Humility, take notice of Gods Justice in dealing with them as
they have done with him. Mal. 2.4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
His Covenant is with Levi of Life and Peace, and he gave them to him, for the
fear, wherewith he feared him, and was afraid before his name: The Law of truth
was in his mouth, and Iniquity was not found in his lips, he walked with God
in peace, and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity, for the priests
lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: But says the Lord, ye are departed out
of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the
Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts. Therefore have I also made you
contemptible and base before all the people, according as you have not kept my
ways, but have been partial in the Law. Had we all the means in the World to
make us great, if we either do not teach, or do not make our selves Examples of
what we teach, it is just with God that we should grow contemptible and vile,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Esaias 43.27.28.
Thy teachers have transgressed against me, therefore have I profaned the
rulers of my Sanctuary. The Lord gives this for a general Rule, as 1 Samuel 2.30.
those, that honor him, he will honor: so they, that despise him, shall be
despised.

Secondly, Let all holy painful and humble Ministers who make it their design
(as this fair Copy did before them) to advance God and fulfill the work of their
Ministry, trust to his faithfulness for vindicating their esteem. No sort of
men have greater promises for provision, protection from, and in trouble, and
for revenge of wrongs done unto them, then they have. What a dreadful and
prophetical prayer is that Moses made for Levi! Deuteronomy. 33.11.
smite through the Loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate
him, that they rise not again. What though a generation of men Call even the
best of such, Antichristian Liars? False Prophets? And what not, did they not
after this manner use Math. 5.12. and 10.25.
Christ and his Apostles before them? They speak evil of the things they know
not. None of Gods blessed truths, and holy Ordinances have been otherwise used
by them: their general outcry is upon all truths, Ordinances and ways of
Religion among us, as Antichristian: The Apostacy of the present age makes men
fall from all things in Religion, and with an impudent face to deny and deride
them all. But did God leave these Jewels amongst men to be trodden under feet
by such Swine; Shall they not dearly pay for it? Oh! That they would remember
what words came out of the mouth of him that is the very promptuary of all
sweetness, and how highly he is provoked, when such words are drawn from his
blessed lips, that drop honey: Let them take them to whom they appertain, viz.
Math. 21.44.
Whosoever shall fall upon this stone shall be broken: But on whomsoever it
shall fall it will grind him to pieces. If their own destruction will not take
them off from touching the Lords anointed, and from plucking the stars out of
his hand, let yet the Anguish and vexation that shall accompany their
destruction, either deter them, or, confound them: For he has said it, who
will make it good, that there shall be a Rev. 11.11.
Resurrection both unto Gods truths, and to such as bear Testimony thereunto:
Mean while, let this satisfy such as are faithful, whilst God and those that
truly fear God prize faithful Ministers, it matters not what the rest think of
them, As King David said in not much an unlike Case, 2 Samuel 6.22.
of those shall they be had in honor.

I have now done with the most famous Author of these Sermons, of whom I may
say as one very Learned sa^d of Mr. Calvin, Calvino (illustri viro, nec unquam
sine summi honoris praefatione nominando) non assentior. Bp. Andr^ws. De Usuris.
That famous Man, and never to be named without some Preface of Honor. Or as
another of a Learned and Godly Man, God has so provided, that they who lived
in Heaven whilst on Earth, shall live on Earth whilst in Heaven: That they
shall leave their Names for a blessing, when others leave them behind them for
a curse, or rather with the Apostle of Demetrius 3 John 12.
he has a good Report of all men and of the truth it self.

A word now concerning these Sermons of his, by occasion of the publishing
whereof I have thus enlarged. They are not so exact as his Immanuel, or the
Incarnation of the Son of God, so accurately couched that you cannot find a
word defective or redundant, because they wanted his own hand, for their
publication, but yet they are such wherein the Reader may discern much of the
Gracious and Heavenly Spirit of this unparalleld Bishop. They were preached ad
populum, in the University of Oxford, the general Subject of them is Conversion
or turning from Sin unto God, and so mightily did the Lord bless them, not only
to the Edification, and Consolation of very many, but also to the Conversion of
some, as we have good cause to Judge.

I will say no more, the Name of Doctor Usher by which he is more known to
some, and the Name of the most Reverend and Learned Father of our Church,
Doctor James Usher, late Arch Bishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland, by
which he is more known to others, not only in these our Kingdoms, but in
foreign parts; his great and good Name I say, every wrere as ointment poured
forth, prefixed before this Book (though with some allay) is enough to raise
high Expectation of whatsoever cemeth after these words: And is argument enough
to invite the Reader to look within, and read them over: And then he will find
the least siling of this Master Workmans Gold very precious. Good Wine (they
say) needs no bush, and if this Wine was so sweet at first running I presume
whosoever tastes it now, though he have, it, but at the second or third hand,
will find it has not altogether lost its strength, nor will he repent his
labor in reading these Sermons, if he be one that desires to profit his soul
more then to please his Palate. That out of this Phoenix, the Lord would raise
such successors, as may by Pen, Life, and Doctrine, do as this burning and
shining Light has done before them, is the prayer, but scarce the belief of
him that prays for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem, and therein hops
to have his share in the concurrent prayers of every Godly Reader,

Stanley Gower.
Dorchester, October the third, 1659
A TABLE Directing to the TEXTS of SCRIPTURE, Handled in the Following SERMONS.
Sermon I. HEbrews 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain day; saying in David, to
day after so long a time, as it is said, to day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts

page 1 Sermon II. Heb. 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain day; saying in David,
to day after so little time, as it is said, to day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts.

p. 8 Sermon III. Gal. 6.3, 4. For if a man think himself to be something, when
he is nothing, he deceives himself: but let every man prove his own work, and
then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another,

p. 16 Sermon IV. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened who were dead in
trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of
this world, according to the Prince that rules in the Air; the spirit that
works in the Children of disobedience. Among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past; in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires
of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the Children of wrath, even as
others,

p. 24 Sermon V. Gal. 3.22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe,

p. 32 Sermon VI. Lament. 5.16. Woe unto us, that we have sinned,

p. 40 Sermon VII. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death,

p. 48 Sermon VIII. Rev. 21.8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whore-mongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters,
and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.

p. 55 Sermon IX. Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Let this mind be in you, which also was
in Jesus Christ who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion of a
man, he humbled himself unto the death, even the death of the Cross.

p. 65 Sermon X. Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself and became Obedient unto the Death, even the Death of the Cross.

p. 92 Sermon XI. John 1.12. But to as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the Sons of God even to them that believe on his Name.

p. 82 Sermon XII. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the
words of truth, the Gospel of your Salvation; in whom also after you believed,
you were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.

p. 90 Sermon XIII. 1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

p. 99 Sermon XIV. Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of
Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need,

p. 108 Sermon XV. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

p. 117 Sermon XVI. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,

p. 127 Sermon XVII. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

p. 136 Sermon XVIII. Romans 5.1.2. Therefore being justified by faith, we have
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by
faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God,

p. 145 Sermon XIX. Romans 8.15, 16. For ye have not received the spirit of
Bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry Abba Father. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the Children of God.

p. 157 Sermon XX. Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears witness with our
spirit, that we are the Children of God,

p. 167
Speedy Conversion The only Means to prevent IMMINENT DESTRUCTION.
HEBREWS 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain Day, saying in David, to day after so
long a time, as it is said, to day if you will hear his Voice harden not your
hearts.


I Have entered on these Words in the other University on a day of Public
Humiliation, as being suitable to the occasion, the chief matter of them being
the Doctrine of the Conversion of a sinner.

For as much as God's Judgments are abroad upon the Earth, and hang over our
heads, the only means to prevent and remove both temporal and eternal, is our
speedy conversion and return unto God, Else he will whet his sword, bend his
bow, and make it ready to our destruction, Psalm. 7.12. God did bear a deadly
hatred against sin in the time of the Psalmist, and so he does still, for his
nature cannot be changed, If we return not, we are but dead men. The eternal
weight of God's wrath will be our portion, both here, and in the world to come,
if we repent not.

In the Words there are three observable Points, though not expressly named, yet
if we weigh the Context, sufficiently implied.

1. Continuance in sin brings certain death, Observation.
it hinders us from entering into God's rest, and out of it there is nothing but
death: Or,

For sin God's Judgments are on particular Nations, and Persons.

2. If particular Nations, or Persons turn away from their evil courses,
Observation.
no hurt shall come near them, or if temporal calamities surprise them, they
shall be made beneficial unto them.

God takes no delight in the death of a sinner, nor that he should despair of
his mercy: but would have us turn out of the broad way, which leads to
destruction.

3. It behooves every one speedily to set about the work of conversion.
Observation.
Esteem not this therefore a vain word. I bring you those things, whereon your
life depends. Obeying it, you are made for ever, neglecting it, you are undone
for ever. Unless you embrace this Message, God will bend his bow, and make
ready his arrow against you, or rather the arrows which he has drawn to the
head, he will let fly upon you. Know therefore 1. That continuance in sin
brings certain death, There will be no way of escaping, but by repentance, by
coming in speedily unto God.

The words of this Text are taken from Psalm. 95. Harden not your hearts, as in
the Provocation, and as in the Temptation in the Wilderness. If when God calls
us, either to the doing of this, or leaving that undone, yet we are not moved,
but continue in our evil ways. What Is the reason of it? It Is because we harden
our hearts against him. The Word of God; which is the power of God to
salvation, and a two-edged sword to sever between the joints and the Marrow,
The strength of the Almighty encounters with our hard hearts, and yet they
remain like the stony and rockie ground: whereon though the Word be plentifully
sown, yet it fastens no root there, and though for a season it spring, yet
suddenly it fades and comes to nothing. We may, happily have a little motion by
the Word yet there is a rock in our souls, a stone in our hearts, and though we
may sometimes seem to receive it with some affection, and be made as it were
Sermon-sick, yet it holds but a while, it betters us not: Why? because it is not
received as an ingrafted word. Therefore says St. James, Receive with meekness
the ingrafted word, James 1.21. Let the word be ingrafted in thee; one sprig of
it is able to make thee grow up to everlasting life. Be not content with the
hearing of it, but pray God it may be firmly rooted in your hearts; this will
cause a softning. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts
against Almighty God. If you do, expect him also to come against you in
indignation. Hearken what he says by his Prophet. I will search Jerusalem with
candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that say in their
heart the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil, Zeph. 1.12. Mark, I
will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish those that are settled on their
lees. When a man is thus settled and resolved to go on in his sins, to put the
matter to the hazard come what will come, there is a kind of Atheism in the
soul. For what does he but in a manner reply, when God tells him by his
Minister that he is preparing the instruments of death against him, do you
think us such fools to believe it? What does this but provoke God to swear that
we shall never enter into his rest. What Is the reason of this? It Is because men
are not shifted, they have no change, they are settled on their lees. Moab has
been at ease from his youth, he has been settled, and has not been emptied
from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone into captivity, Jer. 48.11.
Consider we whether our security comes not from the same cause: We have not
been emptied from vessel to vessel, we have always been at rest. Why have we so
little conversion? There are two things hinder it: the hardening of a man's heart
against the Word: and our settling our selves on our lees. When we have no
change in our condition, we are secure, we never see an evil day. That makes us
say, with the Sensualists in the Prophet, To morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant, Isa. 56.12. And this is that, which slays the foolish
person. Woe to them that are at ease. It were better for thee to be emptied from
vessel to vessel, to go into captivity. For as long as a man continues thus in
an unregenerate condition, he can look for nothing but troubles; certain
Judgments must necessarily follow, and as sure as God is in Heaven, so sure may
they expect misery on Earth: and they shall receive the eternal weight of God's
wrath, treasured up against the day of wrath: Therefore there is a necessity of
our conversion, if we will keep off either temporal, or eternal wrath. Our
Savior makes it the case of all impenitent sinners, to be liable to wrath: One
Judgment befell the Galileans, another those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell:
But what says our Savior, Suppose you that these were greater sinners above
all the men of Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except you repent you shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13.3. All, every Mother's Son here present, if you turn
not from your sinful courses, God will meet with you one time or other, if you
harden your hearts against him, be sure. Who ever hardened his heart against God
and prospered? Job 9.4. As long as a man is in this condition, his state is
woeful. As many as are in the state of unregeneracy, are under the power of
Satan, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Mark the Apostles words, In meekness instruct those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth. And that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will. The state then of
the hardened and settled on their lees, is as of a bird in a cage, taken alive,
at the will of the Fowler. So it is here, as long as we continue obstinate, and
hardened, we are taken alive at Satan's will, we are at his disposing. While we
are at liberty, we are waylaid by his nets and traps, and taken, we are at his
pleasure: As long as we are hardened in heart, we are in the Devil's cage: true
repentance is that, whereby alone we purchase our freedom, whereby we recover
our selves; and therefore in Romans 2.5. Hardness of heart and impenitency
signify the same thing. After thy hardened and impenitent heart thou treasurest
up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Mark then: what is a hard
heart? It Is an impenitent heart. Do thou harden thy heart? Then know that for
the present thou art a dead man. If notwithstanding all God's threats out of
his word, thou art not a jot moved, thou art dead whilst alive, as the woman
that lived in pleasure. And if thou continuest so, thou treasurest up wrath
against the day of wrath, and the just revelation of God's Judgments. God's
word is the especial means to recover thee. A man that is in a swoon, they rub
him to recover him, because there is life in him; but if dead, strong water, or
any thing else cannot restore him. Examine thy self then, does the working of
the Word rub, and gall thee? It Is a sign there is life in thee; but if it make
no impression, it moves thee not, it is a sign of a dead heart. Consider then
the danger of this condition for a man to resolve on his evil courses, never
purposing to alter matters. It exceedingly hastens God's Judgments.

But leaving this, I proceed to the second Point, which is to direct us how to
work our escape. Though God threatens us, yet if we have but the grace to look
about us, and remember our selves: If God do but cause us to consider we have
to deal with a merciful Father, and make us meet him by humiliation, then
though our sins were as scarlet, yet submitting our selves to our Judge, living
as obedient Subjects the storm shall pass from us: So that this is the Second
Point.

2. Notwithstanding God threatens us, yet if he gives us but grace to repent,
and bethink our selves, let our sins be never so great, we may be sure of mercy.

O that we could see with what a gracious God, we have to deall Can thou but
humble thy self? All these things shall speak peace unto thee. As an impenitent
sinner is under the power of Satan, and liable to all misery: So contrariwise
who ever returns and seeks the Lord, is sure to be under his wings, and free
from all evil. Think thou that God makes use of threatenings for thy hurt? No,
he deals not with us as an angry Judge, but as a compassionate Father; men will
take an enemy always at an advantage, when they may do him most hurt. God's
terrors overtake us, he threatens us, that he will do this and this, that we
may prevent it. He knows that unless his terrors awake us, we will rest secure.
Before he smites us, he tells us. He will whet his sword: He has bent hi^ bow,
and made it ready: He has prepared his instruments of death, Psalm 7.12, 13.
He could shoot thee presently, and instantly run the through, but he threatens
thee, that so he may not strike thee. Non te vult percutere qui tibi clamat,
Observa, He that says: Look to your self, has no intention to strike thee.
See what the Prophet Amos denounces from the Lord, Cap. 11, 12. I have given
you cleanness of teeth, I have withheld rain, v. 6, 7, 8. I have smitten you
with blasting and mildew, v. 9. I have sent amongst you the Pestilence, v. 10.
yet have you not returned unto me. Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel,
and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, v. 12.
What Judgments have befallen us, have befallen us for our own use, if so be we
will be warned by them. The reason why God says, he will overthrow us, is not
because he means to do it, but that we may prevent him by repentance. Look into
Jer. 3 1. and see what wonderful passages are to this purpose: There Is a Law
case. If a man put away his Wife, and she go from him, shall he return unto her
again? Shall not that Land be greatly polluted? But thou have played the Harlot
with many Lovers. And in the 20. v. As a Wife treacherously departs from her
Husband, so have you dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel. And yet
see God's unspeakable mercy. Return again unto me. And 23. v. Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will heal your backsliding: turn to me, and I Will
not cause mine anger to fall upon you. Only acknowledge thine iniquity that
thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God, v. 13. See God supporteth us
the worst and vilest of all, and yet as it were entreats us to return. See then
^he Conclusion of the second Point; how, if God give us but grace to repent,
let our former evils be what they will, the danger is past, the terror I mean
of eternal destruction; so that you may say, and not in Agag's delusion, the
bitterness of death, the second death is past, 1 Samuel 15.32.

But I leave this and come to the Third, for which I chiefly chose this Text.
You have seen how dangerous a thing hardness of heart is, how it brings certain
death: and that if we have the heart to repent, we are safe. As to make it
appear in an instance. It Is not the falling into water, but the lying under it
that drowns a man. Art thou fallen into sin? only lift up thy head: if thou can
be but thus happy, the promise of salvation belongs to thee. The main thing
then is this.

3. It behooves us to set about the work of conversion and repentance presently.

God is angry with us, and we know not whether God will execute his Judgments
on us this day or no, therefore go about it presently. God will remove all our
adulteries, and put away all our sins, if we will come to him within a day. Now
what madness is it to neglect it? After a certain time (says the Apostle)
according to that in the Psalmist. Psalm 95. God has limited a certain day:
Thou have provoked the Holy Ghost, and now he limits thee a day, Heb. 3.7.
Wherefore (says the Holy Ghost) to day if you will hear his voice. Now is it
safe think you to pass this day? A hard heart is a provoking heart, and as long
as it continues hard, it continues provoking God, and despising the Holy Ghost.
To day therefore hear his voice, that is, this present day. But which is that
day? It Is this very time, wherein you stand before God, and in which you hear
me. If you embrace the opportunity, happy are you; if not, you shall give as
dear an account, as for any thing you ever heard in your life. There is no
dallying with God, take his proffer, take him at his word, in a matter of
salvation. He calls to thee to day, peradventure he will speak no more,
therefore Heb. 4.7. we shall find it is a limited day. Exhort one another to
day; whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. While it is called to day, that is, stay not
till to morrow, but embrace the present opportunity. This day God holds out the
golden Scepter, and my life for yours, if you accept it you shall be saved. If
you take it not to day, your heart will be more hardened to morrow; and so it
may be you will never touch it; your hearts will be like stones, and you will be
incapable of yielding. God is angry with us, Psalm. 7.11. Why? He is our
adversary, because we bear arms against him, and will try the mastery with him.
We oppose him in hostile manner as long as we continue sinful against him.
What Is the best counsel in this case? Agree with thine adversary quickly while
thou art in the way with him. It Is wisdom to do that soon, which must of
necessity be done. If it be not, we perish for ever. Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry, and thou perish from the right way, Psalm. 2. ult.

Obj. But what needs such haste, I may do it hereafter, Obj.
when I come to my journeys end?

Sol. There needs haste. The day is limited. A thousand to one, Sol.
if God be angry, but we perish from the way. I have heard thee in an accepted
time, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee, behold now is the day
of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. It Is a day of salvation, and would not we be glad to
know this time? Behold this is the accepted time. Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call on him, while he is near. This is the accepted time, this is the
day of salvation, Esa. 49.8. Embrace this time, for now he may be found; this
instant is the time, the (...), the present now. God at this time stirs the
Waters, if now thou will step in and close with God, casting down thy weapons,
then this will be the day of thy salvation; this is called, as Gods day, so our
day: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known in this thy day, the things
that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hidden from thine eyes, Luke
19.42. Mark, If thou had known in this thy day: So that if we pass by in this
acceptable time those things which belong to our peace, they will be hidden
from our eyes. Therefore should the enemies of Jerusalem lay her even with the
ground, because she had neglected this opportunity, the day of Gods visitation.
Will thou be so hard-hearted, as to put from thee Gods grace? If thou find
now that Satan hides this from thee, and persuades thee to do it to morrow, and
to take a day of thine own, neglecting Gods day, Know and remember that he is a
liar from the beginning.

Give me leave to press this to you, for nothing more brings destruction, then
this putting from us the proffers of Gods grace; unless we return to the
Almighty, humbling our selves there will be bitterness in the end. There Is the
matter, whether God must wait on us, or we on him? This is the day of
Salvation, says God, and we must take time to think of it, whether it be
seasonable or no. Alas

1. By this means we incur the highest presumption: And this is no light thing
inconsiderately to be passed over. Shall God offer you such a proffer, and you
be so presumptuous, as to think such a one more seasonable? It Is high
presumption for thee to make thy self wiser then God, to neglect that he
perscribes, and that with a promise too, as if thou had God at command. If
thou resolve to take to morrow, it is requisite that thou have. 1. Space to
repent, and

2 Grace to do it. Now neither of these are in thine own hands, if they were,
thou had ground for a farther delay. If thou had power to say, I will live
so long, or could by thine own might prolong thy life, it were something,
but it is otherwise. In refusing Gods proffer, thou refusest him, that has thy
life in his hand. What high presumption is this? See it in Jesabel, Rev. 2.21.
I gave her space to repent, but she repented not. As if God should have said,
it is I gave it here, I gave her time to live, I might have cut her off in the
midst of her Whoredoms. Observe here by the way the reason why God gives us
this space; it is to repent. What presumption must that be, when we will go
quite contrary to God? And because we have space, therefore we will not repent.
Why does not God smite thee from heaven, when thou thus audaciously set thy
self against him? Why does he not strike thee with a thunderbolt? Sure he gives
the this space not to spend idly, but to another end; not to follow our lusts,
neglecting Gods call, but that thou may remember thy self, and return with
all thy heart. Remember those words of the Prophet, My times are in thy hand.
Psalm. 31.15. He said not, my times are in mine own hands; for he knew it was
grand presumption. Why then should any challenge that to himself, which belongs
to God, as if he were the Lord of his own life, supposing Gods call
unseasonable, and that he may think on it better hereafter? May not a young man
die soon? Now an old man cannot live long. Many strong and lusty men are
brought to the Grave as well as the weak and feeble. And why should we suffer
Satan to abuse us thus? Thy space then is preserved in Gods hand, and therefore
thou may not be Lord and Master of it. But admit God grant thee space, yet
thou may not have the grace to do it. What was Jezabels case, Rev. 2.21.
Though God gave her space, yet she repented not. What can thou tell, what may
then become of thee? perchance thou may live long, yet may thou never find
as much as thy thoughts on repentance, much less the grace to do it: Thou may
not have a desire that way, much less perform it. Repentance is not a thing at
our own command. In meekness (says the Apostle) instruct them that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowl^dgment
of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. If God will give it them. It Is a thing then (it
should seem) in Gods hand, it is his proper gift. Mark, the Apostle would have
Gods Ministers to be humble and meek; but how many are of other spirits? If
another opinion be contrary to theirs, they are in a heat presently, as if a
man were master of himself and of his own heart, to believe what he would. No,
no, Repentance is a grace out of our reach, it is not in a man's own power. Be
meek therefore in instructing. What needs passion? That helps not the matter.
The opening of the eyes of the blind is in Gods hands; thank him for what thou
see, and know that it is his gift, Acts 5.31. The Apostle speaking of our
Savior Christ, says, Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince
and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. The
grace of repentance then is no Herb growing in our own Garden, it is a gift of
Gods bestowing. And to this purpose is Acts 11.18. When they heard these
things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, then has God also to
the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. As God grants life, so repentance
unto life. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, says the Lord, Thou
have chastised me, and I am chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke,
turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. And to the same purpose, Lam.
5.21. Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. As if Zion should
have said, we are no more able to turn our selves then a dead man. After that
(says Ephraim) I was turned, I repented, and after I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea even confounded. See then what an high
presumption it is for a man to presume he has this grace of God at command:
But as it is high presumption, so

2. It Is the highest contempt and despising of the grace of God. Romans 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering?
Thus is it here. God gives thee space: Thou have it, but imployest it not in
what God gave it thee for. Thou deferrest the main business; and the Apostle
accounts it no better then despising the proffers of Gods grace and goodness.
Do thou think God will take this at thy hands? Will thou despise him, and
think he will not despise thee? With the froward he will show himself froward. God
will come on a sudden, if thou make not use of thine opportunity, and take
all away from thee. The threatening is plainly laid down, Rev. 3.3. If thou
shall not watch, I will come on thee. It Is spoken to us all, and therefore
concerns us all: Whosoever has an ear to hear let him hear. They are God's
words, I have spoken to you this day, and you shall be accountable for them:
let not the Devil steal this from you, hold it fast, this is your day: If thou
shall not watch, I Will come on thee suddenly as a Thief. It Is the heaviest
Judgment can come on unconverted persons, irregenerate souls, not to awake till
God comes on them, never to bestir themselves till hell rouse them up. Thus
will it be with us, unless we awake by repentance, God will come stealing on us
as a thief by sudden death, and speedily cut us off.

To pray against sudden death, and not to fit thy self for it, is to add
contempt to thy presumption and rebellion. The wise man tells us, That man
knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the
birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil
time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. Mark, when it falls
suddenly, at unawares, here is the wisdom then to provide that thou may not be
taken suddenly. If the good Man of the house knew at what time the Thief would
come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to have been
broken up, Matthew. 24.43. And therefore Christ counsels us to watch, since we
know not the day nor hour when the Son of man comes, Here Is the difference
then between wisdom and folly. Hereby may we know whether we are wise men or
fools, if we foresee this day, and provide for it, it is an argument of wisdom,
if we watch, so as that when it falls, it may not fall on a sudden on us. If
we are negligent of this day, and suffer our hearts to be dead as Nabal's like
a stone, 1 Samuel 25.37. He had a great time of repentance, ten days, yet
repented not, for his heart was dead, and like a stone; and this may be the
case, if thou despisest the day of thy salvation, God's day, and thine own day
too, thou may be a Nabal, no more moved than a Pillar in the Church, as I
have found some by sad experience.

But you may reply, I suppose God will not take me at an advantage, I trust I
shall have life and space, and not Nabal's condition; I hope I shall have my
wits about me to be able to cry, Lord have mercy upon me.

But suppose God gave thee a tender heart, and thou art sensible of thy danger,
that so thou call and cry earnestly to God for mercy, yet this is a miserable
condition. Thou shall find it will not be enough to cry, Lord be merciful to
me. If thou neglectest him here, he will cry quittance with thee on thy death
bed: Nor do I speak this of my self; No: Look what Wisdom says, Because I have
called and you refused, I have stretched out mine hand, and no man regarded,
but set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof, I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.
As if he had said, you refused me on my day I called and cried unto you, but
you set at naught my words, and rejected my counsel, and were wiser than I,
therefore will I laugh at your destruction: when you are in misery I will mock
and deride, in stead of succouring. A terrible thing will it be, when in stead
of hearing outcries to answer them, he shall deride us, and laugh at our folly
and madness, And in the 28 verse, Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. See what folly
then it is to let slip this time. This is the acceptable day, Esaias 55.6. Seek
the Lord while he may be found, call on him while he is near. When a man
refuses God's day, God will not hear his prayer, all his sighs and sobs, his
groans and cries, shall not prevail, Esaias 66. I will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer;
when I spoke, they did not hear. When men will needs be choosers of what God
would not have, God will have his choice too, and it shall be that which will
be displeasing to them. I will choose their delusions, and will bring their
fears upon them.

HEBREWS 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, to day after so
long a time, as it is said, to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts.


THe last day I entered on the opening of this place, and showed; How the Lord
had proposed a limited time for our conversion unto him, in which we should
hear and obey his voice.

We showed farther how it was Satan's policy to make men seem wiser than God,
that when God proposes a certain time, and limits us a day, wherein he will be
found, we will not have his, but our own. True, say we, God calls on us, and
it is fit and convenient to hearken unto him; but yet I Will stay for a more
seasonable opportunity. There is nothing provokes God so much against us, as
when we will thus scorn that acceptable time he has proposed: Nor can there be
a greater hinderance to repentance, then to stop our ears at his counsels, and
to suffer him to call and cry unto us so long, and yet to abuse his patience by
a foolish neglect. It accuses us of Rebellion, and high presumption, on such
infirm grounds, to put from us the day of salvation. Folly it is in the highest
degree to trust on the future, when as in our own hands we have neither space,
nor grace for such a business. God is the Lord, and owner of them both, and
will not part with his Prerogative. Go to, you that say, to day or to morrow we
will return unto the Lord, You add to presumption both folly and Rebellion.
Jezebel had space to repent, yet she repented not, for she had not the grace,
that, without this, will not benefit.

Seeing then these are not in your power, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation: nor offer despite unto the Holy Ghost, by whom you are sealed to
the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.3, If we embrace not God's day, we despise the
riches of his goodness, long suffering, and patience. Romans 2.4. Despisest thou
the riches of God's grace, not knowing that the long-suffering of God leads
to repentance? There can be no higher presumption then this, to bid defiance to
the Spirit of God: Nor can there be greater contempt of mercy, then to set
light of the time of our repentance, and returning unto God, making that the
greatest argument of our delay, which God uses to draw us to him. God gives us
space, that we may repent, and we repent not, because he gives us space: He
gives us life, that with fear and trembling we may set about the business of
salvation, and we (through strong delusions) put from us the proffers of his
grace, as if they were unseasonably offered. What madness is it to frustrate
the Almighty of his ends and purposes? The Lord is not slack touching his
promise, 2 Pet. 3.9. It Is a great stop and hinderance to our progress in
goodness and the work of repentance, when we distrust God, and take him not at
his word. He sends abroad his Ambassadors, who proclaim, This is the accepted
time, this is the day of salvation, to day if you will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts; 2 Cor. 6.2. Psalm 95.7, 8. yet we put this day from us, and
say hereafter is a more acceptable time. I have this delight, this Pleasure to
take first in the World, I am not so weaned from it, as I would be. As if God
would take it well from our hands, that we should then return to him, when
there is no remedy. I Will first use all the pleasure the World affords me, and
then, Lord have mercy on me, will serve the turn. This is the very stifling of
the beginning and proceedings of Christianity. Let this be well and speedily
weighed, as we tender our good and comfort.

Obj. But may some say, what needs this have, may we not use leisure? Obj.
Soft and Fair, goes far.

Sol. True, Soft and Fair goes fairly in the way. In this case, Sol.
though thou go but softly, thou may come to thy journeys end; but the doubt
remains still, there is a question whether thou art in the way, or not. Happy
are we if we are, although we can but halt and limp on, in this way: although
this should be no ground for us to content our selves therewith. We must not
trifle in the ways of holiness. It Is that concerns our life, and must be
seriously thought on, and that speedily too. Mat. 5.25. Agree with thine
Adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him. God is thine Adversary,
unless thou agree with him speedily; his patience will break forth into his
fury. Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and thou perish from the right
way. Thou have no assurance of thy life, thou may be snapt off, whilst thou
think it time enough to repent and return. As long as we go out of the way
of repentance, we are in the way to Hell, and the farther a man goes in a wrong
way, the nearer is he to Hell, and the greater ado to return back: and in this
regard Soft and Fair may go far; but it is far out of the way, far in the way to
perdition and destruction. As long as we are out of the right way to Heaven and
happiness, we are in the path, that leads directly to the Chambers of death.

But let me in this particular rip up the heart of a natural man. What Is the
reason, that when God gives men a day, and cries out, This is the day of
salvation, this is the accepted time, what in the name of God, or the Devils
name rather (for he is the adversary, who maligns our Salvation) should cause
them, to put salvation from them? To defer and desire a longer time? Thus a
natural man reasons with himself, I cannot so soon be taken off from the
Profits, and pleasures of the World; I hope to have a time, when I shall with
more ease and a greater composedness of mind, bring my self to it: or if it be
not with so much ease, yet, I trust, in a sufficient manner, I shall do it:
Wherefore, for the present, I Will enjoy the Profits, and Delights of the State,
and Condition, where I am; I will solace my self with the pleasures of sin for
a season, I hope, true repentance will never be too late.

This is well weighed; but consider, whether these thoughts which poise down
our hearts, be not groundless; see, whether they will hold water at the last;
and whether in making such excuses, to great presumption, we add not the height
of folly. To pretend for our delay, the Profits and Pleasures of sin, and yet
hope for Heaven at the last, as well as the generation of the righteous; it is
but a mere fallacy, and delusion of Satan, to fill our hearts with such
Vanities: Can it be expected, that we should have our good in this World, and
in the World to come too? This is well, if it might be.

But let us try the matter, and begin with your first branch.

You are loath to part with your Profits, and Pleasures.

But consider, what a grand iniquity this is. Can you offer God a greater wrong
and indignity? Do you thus requite the Lord you foolish and unwise? Do thou
think this the way to make thy peace with God, whom thou have offended, as long
as thou may to be a Rebel against him? What a high dishonor is it to him,
that thou should give him thy feeble and doting old age; and the Devil thy
lively and vigorous youth, thy strength and spirits? Do thou think he will
drink the Dregs, and eat the Orts? Will he accept thee in the next World, when
thou thus scornest him in this? If you offer the Blind for sacrifice, is it not
an evil? If you offer ^he Lame and Sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy
governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord
of Hosts? Mal. 1.8. But mark how he goes on, v. 14. Cursed be the deceiver,
which has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a
corrupt thing. Mark, God accounts such service a corrupt thing, and the Person
that offers it a mere Cheat, a Deceiver. Never look for a blessing from God in
Heaven, when thou sacrificest to him such corrupt things. No, thou art Cursed
of God, as long as thou continuest in this Hypocrisy. We are to offer and
present our selves a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, Romans 12.1.
Now judge whether they offer God the living, who say, when my doting days come,
my lame days, thar I cannot go, my blind days, that I cannot see, I Will offer my
self a sacrifice to God, Will this be acceptable to him? Is not this Evil,
says the Lord, to offer me such a corrupt thing? Nay more, he is accursed that
offers such an offering, such a polluted sacrifice. God will not like with it;
when we serve our selves first with the best and choice? Do you thus requite
the Lord? Do you think he will accept it at your hands? Go offer such a gift to
thy Ruler, to thy Prince, will he accept it, or be pleased with it? No, a
Landlord will have the best, and the choice; and it must needs provoke God,
when we give him the refuse. I am King of Kings, says the Lord, my name is
dreadful, and I will look to be served after another manner. Let no man then
thus delude himself with vain hopes, but let him consider, how dishonorable a
thing it will be to God.

2. And how unprofitable to him, whoever thou art. Indeed, we cannot be
profitable unto Him Properly as he that is wise may be profitable to himself.
Job. 22.2. But he is so gracious a master, that he esteems our sincere and
seasonable service, to be his own gain, and our sloth and neglect to be his
detriment, he accounts our destruction to be his own loss. Now its the ready
way.

1. Its the ready way to thy Destruction. Heaven, and happiness, and eternal
life, are laid up for those that embrace the acceptable time; death, horror,
and eternal misery for those that refuse it; and will thou hazard Soul and Body
on this? Moses, on this ground, did rather choose to suffer affliction in this
World with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
Hebr. 11.25. When these things are past, what profit will you have of those
things, whereof then you will be ashamed? Nay, whereof (were thine eyes open)
thou would now be ashamed; and happy would thou be, if thou were (as the
converted Romans were) even now ashamed. Romans 6.21. Shame accompanies Sin so
constantly and unavoidably, that even repentance it self removes it not. The
Romans, now Christians, were ashamed, for what they had done, before they knew
Christ. When a man comes to see truly and thoroughly into himself, he will find
no profit of such things as these: Death will certainly follow us, not only
Temporal but Eternal; also if we Repent not the more speedily, that is all the
profit we shall find.

2. But suppose thou prevent everlasting death by repentance, yet what profit
is there of those things whereof we are now for the present ashamed? The best
can come is shame.

3. Thou art loath to part with the Pleasures of sin for a Season, and hereafter
thou think thou can amend all. But consider the particulars, and then
shall you see how you are befooled in your hearts and souls. Believe it for an
undoubted truth, there is nothing in the World, by which Satan more deludes a
man, then by this persuading him to neglect his day, and that he may repent
well enough hereafter. That you may expel this suggestion out of your Souls,
pray unto God that he would go along with his Word, and cause you to lay this
to heart, that by his Spirit your understanding may be enlightened to see the
truth. Though I make this as clear as the Sun, that it is a false supposition,
and mere folly, on which we build, in deferring our return to God, yet God from
Heaven must teach you, or you will be never the wiser. Know therefore that this
very day God reaches out the Golden Scepter to thee, and what folly were it no
neglect it, since thou know not whether he will ever proffer it thee again?
And assure thy self, that he is a Liar that tells thee, thou may as well
repent hereafter, as now: and this will appear, whether we consider, the order
of outward things in the World, or the nature of sin.

1. For external things, 1. Order of outward things.
every Age after a man comes into the World (if he embrace not the present
opportunity for repentance) is worse then other, and are each of them as so
many Clogs which come one after a another to hinder it. As for thy Childish
Age, that is mere Vanity, and thy riper Age will bring many Impediments and
Hindrances, that youth never thought of. Thou art then troubled about many
things, and perplexed, how to provide for maintenance; in the midst whereof
know, that thou have not a body of Brass, but a Corruptible and Fading body:
and yet such is the Folly of the heart of man, that the less Ground he has to
go, the fewer Days to spend, the more he often provides, and is the more
covetous. Consider that the wisest of men gave thee this counsel, Remember thy
Creator in the day of thy youth, before the evil days come, wherein thou shall
say, thou have no pleasure in them. Eccles. 12.1. Here we find it is a youthful
thing, and should be a young man's Practice: Not according to that devilish
saying, a young Saint and an old Devil: But Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth. The more sin thou committest, the more unapt thou art to Repent.
Custom in sinning makes thee a Lot; The elder thou growest, the more loath to
go out of Sodom. Besides,

2. Consider, what sin is in its nature. It is a weight, 2. The nature of sin.
Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us. Sin is then a weight, and so an Heavy thing; but add sin to sin, a
weight to a weight, and it becomes Heavier and Heavier. A man that is in the
state of impenitency, has this weight laid on him, and is subject to the
Devil, in a state of Rebellion against God. A man now in this estate is weighed
down, what will he be, six, seven, or ten years hence, going on in his
impenitency? How will he then shake that off, which now he cannot free himself
of? He must hereafter Buckle against it with a great deal of disadvantage, and
Wrestle with more difficulty. One says well, that if we consider of sin
aright, it is like the rising of water, over which a man being to pass, and
finding it Higher then it was wont to be, he stays a while, and then tryes
again, and finds it Higher then before: he stays yet longer, till it become
unpassable, so that he may not adventure without great disadvantage. Thus it is
with sin: Now peradventure the Waters of iniquity are Passable, if thou will,
thou may go over, but if thou delayest the adventure, the streams of sin will
run together into one Channel, and be more difficultly passed. Thou shall find
them like the Waters in Ezekiel. rising from the ankles to the Knees, from the
knees to the Loins, till they become Water, in this indeed unlike them, not to
Swim in, as they were, but to Sink in, like the Waters of the Red Sea returning
in their force in which Pharaoh, and his Host sank down as a Stone, nay as Lead
when the Wind of the Lord blew upon them. Exodus 15.5, 10.

Take another Metaphor from the Scripture: The Scripture compares sin to Cords,
Sin is compared to cords.
which are instruments of binding, and the mystery of the Gospel is expressed
by binding and loosing; Whose soever sins you shall bind on Earth, they are
bound in Heaven, but whose sins ye remit, they are remitted. Mat. 18.18. Joh.
10.23. Every sin thou committest is a bond, and binds thee hand and foot*
against the Judgment of the great-day. Therefore it is said, His own iniquity
shall take the wicked, and he shall be bound and holden with the cords of his
sins. 23. Prove. 5.22. Now consider what folly it is, when a man shall say,
though my sins are so many Cords difficult to be broken, yet I Will not trouble my
self about it in my younger days, but I Will stay till my old age, and then I hope
I shall be the better able to break these Bonds, and cast all these Cords from
me; when as every iniquity I commit is as a new cord, which binds me faster and
faster. Is not this Madness it self to think so, that in our younger Years
being scarce able to break one of them, in our Dotage we shall be able to break
ten thousand together? And certainly this is the disposition and nature of sin.

To defer repentance hardens the more
3. But add hereunto the Argument in the Text: To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your heart; But repent while it is called to day. Showing that if we
pass this Day, we shall be Harder and Harder. Wherefore, says the Apostle,
Exhort every one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. As if he had said, if thy
heart be Hard to day, it will be Harder to morrow. Custom in sin hardens the
heart, and takes away the sense of it. Wherefore says the Apostle, I speak
after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh, For as ye
have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto
iniquity, even so now yield your members servants to righteousness, unto
holiness, Rom 6.19. So that we see if a man once give himself up to sin, he
will not be satisfied therewith, but will give himself up to iniquity unto
iniquity. What Is the meaning of that? It Is as if he had said, if we give our
selves up to iniquity, we will not rest there, but we will add iniquity, unto
iniquity, Sin unto Sin: we will be brought to such a custom in evil, as that
it will be easier for a black-moor to change his skin, and a Leopard his spots,
then for those that have been accustomed to do evil, to learn to do well, Jer.
13.23. It will be to as much purpose to wash an Aethopian, as to go to put off
that ill custom, and shake off that second Nature. Sin is a Hammer, and sin is
a Nail too. Every sin strikes the former sin home to the Head, that whereas
before it might easily have been drawn out, it roots it in so fast, as that it
can very hardly be plucked out. Mark how the Apostle describes this cursed
nature of sin: Having eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin,
beguiling unstable souls, a heart they have exercised with covetous practices,
2 Pet. 2.14. What makes a man prompt in any thing but Exercise? When a man is
exercised in sin, see the event of it: it brings him to that vicious habit, as
that at length he cannot cease from sin. If a man deal with a young twig, it
will bend, and break at his pleasure; but when it comes to full growth, it is
past his strength. So fares it with sin: if thou dealest with it whilst thou
art Young, and it in thee, before it has taken Root, thou may easily wield
it, at least with more facility, then otherwise thou could; but if thou let
it run on to Confirmed Habits, it becomes immovable. Wherefore says the
Apostle, Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside the sin which does so easily beset us. The
reason is evident, because, else we shall be so hardened, as that we shall not
be able. A man that has a green wound, if he will seek for his cure betimes, it
may be quickly, and easily remedied; but through delay, it begins to fester,
and must be lanced to the quick, not without great Pain and Anguish to the
Patient. Sin is such a wound; if it be let alone, it corrupts; and Proud flesh
the more grows up, the longer the cure is delayed. This therefore should be a
chief thing we should take heed of, how we put from us Gods time, and the
Proffers of Mercy, till another day.

2. But there are another sort, as greatly befooled, as these, yea more, The
folly of those that defer their repentance till death.
if more may be: and those are they who put it off till the Hour of their
Death, till the last gasp, as if they desired to give God, as little of their
service, as possibly they might, who think if they can but cry Peccavi, and
Lord have mercy on me, when their breath departs their bodies, they show a good
Disposition, and perform such Acceptable service, as that God cannot choose, but
grant them a pardon: But think not all will be surely well, because thou
hastest to shake han^s with God, at thy Journeys end, when thou have not walked
with him a^l the way.

Obj. But did not the Thief repent at the last on the Cross, Obj.
and why not I on my Death bed.

Sol. This is no good Warrant for thy delay, Sol.
for Christ might work This miraculously, for the Glory of his Passion. Do
thou think when in thy Health, and Strength, thou have (for several Years)
despised the Riches of Gods goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering that
leads thee to Repentance, that as soon as thou art cast on thy Deathbed, and
ready to breath out thy Soul, the Rocks shall be Rent again, and the Graves
opened, to quicken thy Repentance and beget in thee a Saving Faith? Trust not
therefore on this, nor content thy self with good Intentions, but set about the
business in good earnest and presently. Our Deathbeds will bring so many
disadvantages, as will make that time very Unseasonable: Whether we respect.

1. External hindrances, such as are pangs and pains in thy body, which must
be undergone: and thou shall find it will be as much, as thou well can do, to
support thy self under them. Every noise will then offend thee; yea thou will
not be able to endure the speech of thy best friends. When Moses came to the
Children of Israel, and told them God had sent him to deliver them, what
acceptance found this comfortable message? The Text says, Exodus 9.6. They
hearkened not through anguish of their spirits. See here the effects of Anguish
and Grief: Moses spoke comfortably, but by reason of their pains, they hearkened
not unto him; they were indisposed to give attendance. Trust not to deathbed
repentance.
So shall it be with us on our deathbeds, through the Anguish of our Spirits,
we shall be unfit to meddle with ought else; especially, when the the Pains of
Death are upon us, the Dread whereof is terrible: How will it make us tremble,
when death shall come with that Errand, to divide our Souls from our Bodies,
and put them into possession of Hell, unless we repent the sooner. Now thou art
in thy best strength, consider what a Terror it will be, what a sad Message it
will bring, when it comes not to cut off an Arm, or Leg, but Soul from Body.
Now then make thy Peace with God: but that these men are Fools, they would
through fear of death be all their lifetime in bondage. It Is the Apostles
expression, Heb. 2.15. The consideration hereof should never let us be at rest,
till we had made our Peace with God; it should make us break our Recreations
and Sports. The considerations of what will become of us, should put us in an
Ecstasy. Nor are these all our Troubles; for besides these, outward Troubles
will then even overwhelm us, when a man is to dispose of his Wife and Children,
House and Lands, he must needs be very unfit at this time, for the Work of
Repentance. These things will cast so great a damp on his heart, as that he
shall be even cold in his seeking after Peace with God.

2. But suppose these outward hindrances are removed, that neither Pain of
Body, nor Fear of Death seize on thee, neither Care of Wife nor Children,
Houses, nor Lands distract thee, but that thou might then set about it withal
thy might, though thou were in the most penitent condition, that might be to
man's seeming, yet where is the Change or new nature should follow thy
Contrition, unless we see this in Truth, we can have but little Comfort. Shall
I see a sinner run on in his ill courses, till the day of Death, I will be hard
to prove deathbed repentance to be sound.
and then set on this work, I could not conclude therefore the safety of his
soul, because it is the Change of the Affections, not of the Actions, that God
looks after; for the Fear of Death may Extort this Repentance, where the Nature
is not Changed. Take an example of a Covetous Man, which dotes on his Wealth
more then any thing else in the World; suppose him in a ship with all his
ri^hes about him, a tempest comes and puts him in danger of losing all, both
Life and Goods, in this strait he sticks not to cast out all his Wealth, so he
may preserve his Life; and shall we therefore say he is not covetous? No, we
will account him nevertheless Covetous for all this, nor that he loved his
Goods the less, but his Life the more. It Is so in this case, when an impenitent
person is brought upon his Deathbed; he is apt to cry out in the Bitterness of
his Soul, If God will but grant me Life, and spare me now, I Will never be a
Drunkard, Swearer, or Covetous Person, more. Whence comes this? Not from any
change of his Nature, and loathing of what he formerly loved, but because he
cannot keep these and Life together: Fear alters his disposition, the Terrors
of the Almighty lying upon him. I have my self seen many at such a time as
this, that have been so exceeding full of Sorrow, and penitent Expressions,
that the standers by have even wished their Souls to have been in the other
Souls cases, and yet when God has restored them, they have fallen into their
former Courses again; And why is this? But because when Repentance comes this
way, it alters only the outward actions for the Present, not the sinful
dispositions, things that are extracted from a man, alter the outward
appearance, not the Nature. Therefore says the Lord, I Will go and return to my
place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: In their
affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. last. Mark, when Gods hand is on
them, they will seek him: And as in the 6. Chap. 1. v. say one to another, Come
let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal us, he has
smitten and he will bind us up: How penitent were they, when Gods hand was on
them: but let it once be removed, and hear how God presently complains of them:
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I'do unto thee? For
your goodness is as a Morning Cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. Mark,
thy goodness is as a Morning Cloud, such a Goodness as is Extorted, that is as
Temporary as Earthly Dew! Another considerable place we have in the Psalm.
78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired
early after God. Was not this a great Conversion? When they were in this dismal
Condition, they were not troubled with Cares, for Wife or Children, Houses or
Lands, how can we think but that these men died in Peace, that were in so good
a Humor; yet see what follows, verse 36. Nevertheless they did flatter him
with their mouths, and lied unto him with their tongues.

Besides, consider the Unworthiness of it; I Will Forsake Sin, when Sin Forsakes
me: We leave it when we can keep it no longer: Thank you for nothing, may God
say, if you could, you would sin longer, this is that Folly, which deferring
our Repentance brings us to.

But to draw to a conclusion: God has set us a Certain Day, and if we pass the
time, woe be to us. For though he is full of Mercy, and Patience yet Patience
hurt, oftentimes harms, and provokes the Almighty to Fury. God will not always
strive with man, Genesis 6.3.
but his days shall be an hundred and twenty years, if he convert in that
space, and return, well, if not, he shall be swept away. And to this purpose is
that parable, Luke 13.6. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his Vineyard,
and he came and sought Fruit thereon and found none, Then said he unto the
dresser of his Vineyard, behold these three years I came seeking fruit on this
fig tree, and find none: Cut it down, why combreth it the ground? There is an
appointed time, then fore- ordained by God, wherein he offers us Grace. Let it
alone, says the dresser, one year more: It may be seven years, or ten, it may
be but two hours (for ought thou know) that God may offer thee, longer, this
space. No man knows the time, and its continuance, but he that has appointed
it to this purpose: Which is a point I thought not to speak of, but not I will.

You hear much talk of Gods eternal and everlasting election, and we are to apt
to rest on this, that if we are elected to salvation we shall be saved, and if
not, we shall be damned, troubling our selves with Gods work of
Praedestination, whereas this works no Change in the party elected, until it
come unto him in his own Person. What is God's election to me: Its nothing to
my comfort, unless I my self am effectually called. We are to look to this
effectual calling. The other is but Gods love to sever me from the Corrupt mass
of Adams posterity. But what is my effectual calling? Its that, when God
touches my heart, and translates me from the Death of sin, to the life of
Grace. Before this effectual calling, even the elect Ephesians were without
Christ, Aliens from the Commoa-Wealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenant of
promise, having no hope and without God in the World. Ephesians. 2.12. Now there
are certain times which God appoints for this effectual calling, wherein he
uses the means to work on us, and of which he can say, what could I do more
then I have done? And may thou not fear an actual rejection, since thou have
lived thus long under the means of Grace; That God has waited these, not only
three, but many years, the dew of Heaven, continually falling on thee, and that
yet thou should remain unfruitful. Do thou not fear, I say, that dismal
sentence, cut it down why combereth it the ground; Gods grace is not to be
dallied with, as wanton Children do with their meats, if we do thus slight him,
he may justly deprive us of all. See a terrible place to this purpose, Heb.
6.7, 8. The earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from
God, but that which bears Thorns and Briers, is rejected, and is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned. Consider these places, God calls us, where
the droppings of his Grace are distilled; consider then, do we bring forth that
fruit which is meet for the dresser, answerable to those continual distillings
and droppings on us? If our consciences witness for us, happy are we, but when
there have been these showers of grace out of Gods word flowing down upon us,
and yet we have received so much Grace in vain; O what can we expect, but a
curse in this life, and eternal death in the World to come? What can we look
for, but the fig trees curse, which was barren? The Tree was not cut down, but
withered: We are near the same curse, if we answer not Gods grace. When we have
had so long a time, the Ministry of the Word, and yet suffer it to be lost
through our barrenness, our condition is sad, and woeful, we can look for
nothing, but withering. Heb. 6.9. But beloved, I must hope better things of
you, and such as accompany salvation: Its our wisdom to arm against Satan's
fallacy, and hearken to God in his accepted time.
Labor therefore to prevent, and arm your selves against this suggestion and
fallacy of Satan, and resolve to hear God in this acceptable time, now to set
to the work, which if we do, all will be well, God will be gracious to us. If
otherwise, we are undone for ever. Till you have learned this lesson, you can
no further. Wherefore let not Satan possess you with that madness, to cause you
to pass and let slip this golden opportunity, through a false conceit, that
you may have a more seasonable day of your own, for repentance hereafter. I
will not say, that a deathbed repentance is always fruitless; the Ancient
Fathers, though they give no encouragement to defer it till then, yet in case
it be so long put off, they enjoin it even then. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Psalm.
51. page 675, and 705. Edit. Savi-lian.

As long as thou breathest, even in the last day of thy life, upon thy bed,
when thou art expiring, and about to depart from the Theater of this life, then
repent: the straitness of the time does not exclude the Philanthropy of God,
that love which he bears to Mankind. Only remember what I have said of the
danger of this procrastination and how unfitting a season it is, for so great a
work, and what reasons we have, to judge it seldom serious.

GAL. 6.3, 4. For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing,
he deceives himself. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he
have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.


HAving entered on the Doctrine of the conversion of a sinner, in that Text,
Heb. 4.7. upon which depends our everlasting salvation. I labored to persuade
you of the necessity of taking the accepted time of embracing the proffers of
Gods grace, and of the necessity of doing it speedily.

I showed you that there is a certain time in which God will be found, and that
this time was the present time.

I declared unto you the great danger that would follow, if we took not God at
his word, but refused his day for a day of our own, as if we were wiser than
he; If when God calls, and holds out the Golden Scepter, we refuse to draw
near, and touch it: Also what danger there is of being deluded by Satan, and
our own hearts.

I showed you farther, that the work was half done is this were done, if we
could but learn this lesson.

And now all that I shall speak will be to little purpose, if this be not first
wrought. If it be already wrought in us, blessed are we. Our condition were
thrice happy, would God now strike in, and cause us to return to himself. It Is
not good to dally with God, the time may come when it will be too late, when we
shall wish he had done otherwise, and taken the accepted time.

Now I will go on to a farther point, which is this, when Satan cannot prevail
with a sinner, to say to his soul, or to think with himself, I will do it
hereafter, or I will at the day of death, when he cannot prevail with him to
defer it, and leave it quite undone for the present: then he will give way to
his doing a little to it, but it shall be so superficial, and on such false
grounds, that he had as good leave it undone; For Satan makes him thus conclude
with himself, well, since I see it is a duty so necessary, I will not defer, I
will not put it off to an hour, but yet I see no such matter required in
conversion, no such great need of being new molded. But now in the point of
conversion, there are two things to be thought on.

First what estate the sinner is in for the present, and then, when he has
made search, and found it to be amiss, then the next thing is, he must turn
unto God, and resolve to amend.

I shall not now stand to speak of that common aspersion cast upon Religion,
and the ways of God (that men must sail to Heaven by the Gates of Hell) of
which many are so much afraid: But yet we must not think that our Savior came
to heal those, which were whole already; he is a God of Wisdom, and the
Physician of the Soul; he comes to find, that which is lost: So that we must be
lost in our own apprehensions, if we will be found, as David was, Ps. 119. ult.
He first says, I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, then seek thy
servant. If now we are once lost, we are lost for ever, if he seek us not;
therefore we should first consider with our selves, what estate we are in now,
how the case stands with us at present, that if God should come and strike thee
with Death, if thou were now to come to Judgment, what would trouble thee most,
what could thou then answer him? Therefore since it is uncertain how soon God
may deal thus with thee, it is wisdom to be always ready. Lam. 3.40. Let us
search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Let us first try how
the matter stands with us, at the present, let us examine our selves and our
ways, and see if all be well, and then may we go on with comfort in the way
wherein we are.

But when we have searched, and find things not to go as well as they ought, or
that we are not in a right way, then after our searching we must,

Turn unto the Lord: Thus the Prophet did, Psalm. 129.57. I thought upon my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. First he thought on his ways,
he considered, whither he was going, to Heaven, or Hell; then when he had thus
thought, he made have, and turned his feet unto Gods testimonies. Here are both
put together: first he made have and thought on his ways, and then he turned.

I took this Text to show that one of these is as dangerous as the other, and
how men are apt to deceive themselves in their search and examination. It Is as
dangerous not to prove our ways, as to put off and defer our ^ur^ing to God.
This is a dangerous disease, that when men come to examine and try their
spiritual estates, they have false weights and unequal balances to prove
themselves by: they are very willing to save themselves the labor, though they
be deceived. A man is loath to be cozened by another; but here is his folly,
that he is willing enough to dec^ive and betray himself. Such Fools the Devil
makes many men, because they take not right Glasses to look on themselves in,
and so they deceive themselves. For if a man think himself to be something when
he is nothing; he deceives himself; but let every man prove, etc.

In the words here are, 1. The Disease. 2. A Remedy.


1. The Disease is in the 3d. v. If a man think himself ^o be something, when
he is nothing, etc. This is a common dangerous disease; and a disease which is
both common and dangerous is the more to be feared, the more careful must the
Physician be. This is the most common disease, for there is not a man but finds
a smatch of it in his own heart. And it is the more dangerous; for who is in
more danger, than he that is blind and will be blind? that is willing to be
cheated by Satan, and himself. This is the patient. Now what his disease is,
and the dangerousness of it, the Apostle tells us: He thinks himself to be
something, and is nothing. This is the Patient to be cured, and that is his
disease, than which none more common: for there is not the worst of men, but
will say, I thank God I am something, and I am not half so bad as the Preacher
would make me, I have some good thing in me.

Now this his disease stands in two things.

1. That he is nothing. 2. That he thinks himself to be something.
1. He is nothing. And for a man to be brought before Gods Judgment Seat, and
have nothing to answer, how will it fare with him then? But yet this man cannot
but think, he is something: Well then, something he is, but nothing to the
purpose: As we say of an Idol, An Idol is nothing in the World: that is,
Nothing that can help, or succor those that bow to it, and adore it, nothing
that can relieve the worshipper of it. An Idol is something indeed, for it is
Silver, or Gold, or Brass, or Stone, etc. But it is nothing, that is, is nothing
to the purpose, nothing that can plead for a man when he holds up his hand at
Gods Bar.

2. He thinks himself to be something though he be nothing: He thinks he shall
come to Heaven, though he be not in the way; as the foolish Virgins, that
thought they should be let in, feared not the contrary, till they came to the
Marriage Chamber door. Matthew. 25.11. So these men walk in their way all their
life, and yet fear not entrance into Heaven, till they receive sentence to the
contrary. If these men knew themselves to be nothing, they would seek something
for themselves; but now they are nothing, though they think themselves
something. This is the Disease.

2. The Remedy is in the next Verse, Let him prove his own work. Let him view
himself in a true Glass, and that is the point we shall insist on. If then we
provide, that Satan shall not delude us in deferring, and putting off our
repentance; so let us also provide, that he deceive us not with a false conceit
of our ways and estate* that we may not make our selves something, when we are
nothing. Therefore let us see what false Glasses they are, that men get to
themselves. If Satan bring us to have a good opinion of our selves, and our
condition, and persuade us, that it is not with us, as precise Preachers tell
us; that it is no such matter to go to Heaven, but that it may be done with less
pains and more ease: when, I say, Satan lulls a man asle^p with such plausible
things as these, he has him where he would have him. Why then no marvel, if
this man like his ways, when he looks upon them with false Glasses.

1 Glass. Self-love.
1. The first false glass is Self-love, and the property of love is to make the
good things in the party it loves very great, and the vices very little,
Self-love represents nothing in it is true shape. The Apostle speaking of the
latter days, 2 Timothy 3. says, There shall be perilous times: And wherein
lies the peril? Men shall be lovers of their own selves. As if he had said,
that is one of the worst perils, for a man to have a great conceit of himself.
If one be sick of this disease, it will so blind him, that he shall never see a
thing in its right place: we may see it by the contrary in the want of love.
Suppose it in the case of a malignant neighbor, for example; he that is full
of malice and envy toward his neighbor, (consider what a false glass this
is.) will never want matter of quarrel against him. The man that wants love,
see how the good and bad deeds of his neighbor show themselves to him: when he
looks on the good actions of his neighbor, they appear but very small, he is
always abridging and contracting his virtues and good things, making them seem
less then indeed they are. On the other side, all things he sees amiss in him,
this want of love makes them far greater, then they are. Love breeds the
contrary; when a man loves himself, his good things seem very great, and his
evil things very small, those he abridges and contracts; and hereupon is that
instance brought of the Jews, Romans 2.3. Think^st thou O man that judg^st them
that do such things, that thou shall escape, etc. When such a man looks upon
his own sins; they appear small to him; but when on the infirmities of others,
they seem very great. With one eye he looks on himself, with another on his
neighbor. This man perchance is a Drunkard as well as his neighbor, covetous,
as well as him, yet he concludes them great evils in his neighbor, but
extenuates them within himself: Self-love causes this difference. As long as
this sways us, that we love things, because they are our own, we shall never be
able to guess at our own condition. If another man should look on you both,
would he not account thee partial? If a man has a Son or Daughter, though they
be not so wise or beautiful, as another man's, yet he delights in them as much
as if they were, he loves them because they are his own. Let a man be born in a
barren Country, he will praise it most, not because there is none so good, but
because he loves it best, it is his own Country. Thou will never be a good
Judge of thine own estate if thou viewest thy self in this false glass, for it
will easily deceive a man.

True, I know self-love is a deceitful glass, and looking therein, a man will
be favorable to himself, and so deceive himself, for it renders things in a
bigger sh^pe, then in truth and reality they are. But

2. I thank God, my neighbors also, and all others that know me, 2 Glass.
Others good opinion.
speak well of me. I have not only a good conceit of my self, but every man
about me can speak well of me, cannot say, black is mine eye. I have a good
report of all men. But if this were enough and sufficient to assure thee of the
goodness of thy estate, it were well, but it is not enough. True it is, a good
report from men for fair and honest dealing is not to be despised; yet it will
do no good, unless thou have it from God. It was one of the happinesses of our
Savior, that he was in favor with God and men; it was with God too as well as
men. When both meet together, it is well indeed. Demetrius in John 3.12. we
read, had a good report of all men, and of the truth it self. To have a good
report from men, and also from the truth, is an happy thing: but having it not
from the truth, Woe to us, when all men speak well of us. What folly is it to
rest upon a good report from men, when I have it not from the truth? The like
madness it is, as for a man to trust in the absolution of his fellow prisoners,
when the Law of the Land condemns him. Shall a sick man be so mad, as to say he
is well, because others say so? As if we should seek our selves out of our
selves, No, Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself, and not in another. Romans 2. ult. He is a Jew, which is one
inwardly, whose praise is not of men but of God. Not as if this did dis-common,
or turn out the praise of men; but it is comparatively spoken, and it is meant,
whose praise is not so much of men as of God. So that this is the second false
glass, when a man concludes himself to be in a good estate because men praise
him, thinks it well with him, because others think so, and say so. He has a
good opinion of himself, but that is not a ll, other men give him a good report
too. And this follows the former: for a man needs never fear flattery from
others, that does not flatter himself.

But these are not my only grounds that I have so good opinion of my self, and
that others speak well of me, but when I compare my self with my self, I find
wherein I may rejoice. So that this is the

3. Glass. When a man compares himself with others.
3. Third Glass, when a man compares himself with others, and himself.

1. When he compares himself with others. I thank God, says he, I am better
then twenty of my neighbors; I know this man follows such courses, and another
lives in such a foul sin. Sure, says he, I am not such a sinner as these,
therefore I am happy, and I doubt not room in Heaven. This is the cause that
the Pharisee went home unjustified, because looking on other men, he justified
himself. God I thank thee I am not as other men, no extortioner, etc. This
fellow is so far from begging any thing of God, that he fills up his time with
thanksgiving, he thinks he wants nothing, and that is his error; he looks on
other men, and compares himself with them, and thence concludes he is well
enough, because he is not so bad as this or that man. This is the common
deceit, when men take this for a rule, that because they are not so bad as the
offscouring of the World, but are better then the ordinary sort of men,
therefore they suppose they are very well, or as well, as they need to be: As
if a sick man should say, I am not so sick, as such a man, who is at the point
of death, therefore I am very well. I would desire such men, that as they look
on those that are under them, so they would a little cast up their eyes on
those that are above them. When you look on the Publican, this and that man,
and bless your selves, because you are not so bad as these, who perchance are
before you in points of morality: If you stand on comparisons, look on those
that are above you, that go beyond you in grace and zeal, and look not so much
on the sins of others, as your own: Another man's sins may condemn him, they
cannot save thee. When a Thief and a Murderer are both arraigned at the Bar
for their lives, will the Thief say to the Murderer thy sin is greater, thy
fault is of an higher nature, therefore I shall be saved, because mine is not
heinous, when they both are punishable with death? The fault of another will
not make thy case the better. It Is no point of Justification, thus to deceive
thy self, and to conclude because another is worse then thee, that therefore
thy estate is blessed. So we see the degrees of false glasses. Self-love: or
self conceit: Then a good opinion of men: and conferring a man's self with some
others. He Is better then they, therefore his estate is good. An absurd
conclusion; the Devil will mightily insult over such as he can so easily
deceive.

But this man goes farther; I not only compare my self with others, but with my
self too, and find good ground to conclude the safeness of my condition. I
remember a time, when I was vain and idle, when I ran in a way contrary to God.
But now I have sowed my wild-oats; and whereas before I was loose and
dissolute, I have care to do my duty, to serve God, etc. I am not so profane
as formerly, my estate must needs be good. This is a very dangerous thing to
say, that because I am not as bad, as I was, I am therefore good: It is as if a
man had a debtor, a slack paymaster, to whom the Creditor calls earnestly to
pay the debt, the best answer the debtor gives is this, I am sure there are
many worse paymasters in the World then I am, and I my self have been a worse,
and more slow paymaster heretofore then I am now. Well, because there are worse
paymasters, and he himself has been a worse, does this make him a better now?
And shall this serve to excuse thee, by comparing thy self with others that are
worse? And with thy self, that because thou have mended thy self in some
particulars, therefore thou art in the way to Heaven? It is a fal^e and foolish
Conclusion.

4. Glass. Partial Obedience.
4. Now we come to the main thing, another false glass, which we call Partial
obedience, when a man goes furthet, looking upon the letter of the Commandment
only, saying, I thank God I forbear many sins, and do many duties, I am not a
Thief, nor a Murderer, Swearer, Drunkard, or covetous person: I do not take
Gods name in vain; I have not broken the Sabbath, though I doubt whether it be
moral or no. I have served God in coming to his house, given obedience to my
Parents, etc. And looking on this he concludes, doubtless all is well with him:
As when I have a thousand thorns in my feet, and have three or four taken out,
will this help me? because I have not the Stone or the Gout, shall I conclude I
am well, as if I could not be sick without this or that disease. Because I do
something that God requires, shall I think I do as much as I need? No, we must
take heed of that, God will not be contented with Partial Obedience, He will
have the whole heart or none.

Obj. But mine is not Partial obedience, I do my endeavor, Obj.
as far as I am able to do, what God requires: Here comes in natural reason,
and says, I thank God I do what I can, and I see no reason, why more should be
required. I conform my self, as I am able, and I see it needful, to the
greatest duties of Christianity; I lead such a blameless life, that no man can
tax me in any particular what God has enabled me to do; and according to moral
Philosophy, I know not how more can be required: I go as far as Seneca's rules,
and somewhat farther, and sure this is not Partial obedience.

Sol. I speak not against Morality. But yet let me tell thee, if thou have no
more then Morality, it will not bring thee to Heaven. Sol.
Not but that a moral man is an excellent stock, whereon to graft grace and
virtue, it is a good help to Heaven, yet it comes far short of bringing him
thither. Natural reason was once a full and fair glass, till it was broken by
the fall: but now it is insufficient. The Tables in Moses hands were excellent
things, God made the first Tables with his own hand, and perchance they may be
therein typical, when these were broken, Moses makes the second, these not so
excellent as the former, though I should esteem a piece of these, more
excellent, then all the relics of the Papists, for there was something of the
first in them, God writes them with his own finger. This glass which then was
so perfect, is now broken, and is not so perfect as it was, though there be
something yet remaining in it; We may see something of its ancient luster in
the Gentiles, for these having not a Law, are a Law unto themselves. There are
practical principles, yet remaining in the Tables of our hearts, so that they
that care not for the Law, shall be judged by that natural light, which is in
them. We have a conscience to difference between good and evil. This is the
truth. It Is a part of the Image of God implanted in us, which we are not to
despise lest we be judged with those that hold the truth in unrighteousness:
The truth is the principle of difference betwixt good and bad: The soul was to
have a seat as a Queen to rule all our actions: But now this Queen is taken
captive, and all is lost: Morality and inward principles are to be much
esteemed, as things which God at first planted, yet do they come short of
bringing a man to Heaven. The young man in the Gospel had a good esteem of
himself, and was doubtless well esteemed of others, and did many things: but
yet our Savior tells him, how hard a thing it was for one no better qualified
than at that time he was, or rather impossible (for he preferred his wealth
before the blessed society of Christ) to come to Heaven: Although he thinks
himself well enough, though he were rich not only in great outward
possessions, but in his moral Virtues too, so that when our Savior tells him
of the Commandments, he replies: all these, have I kept from my youth, which
evidenced him to have bin a good moral man indeed in that he had done so much,
yet this was not enough one thing lacked: go and sell all that thou have, etc.
However because there was so much in him, we read Mark. 10.21. Jesus loved him:
he shows that his cause was heavy, that going so far he should not attain his
end. But this was not to be despised, for this Jesus loved him. So 1 Kings
14.13. He only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is
found some good things toward the Lord. If there are but some good things in a
man, the remains of Gods work, God loves his own work; Here Is the point then,
though Morality be good, and natural reason be good: And what through the
providence of God remains in us, since the state of our first creation; (For
this state was a pure and a full glass, made by God himself, but since the
fall, is much darkened: If we consult with natural reason and Moral Philosophy,
they will discover many things:) yet this comes short. There are abundance of
things that it cannot discover, manifold defects which it cannot discern. The
Apostle says in the Romans c. 7. v. 7. I had not known sin but by the Law. I
had not known lust to have been a sin, had not the Law said, thou shall not
lust. We have many sins we cannot know, but by the Law, yea such secret sins,
as must be repented of. Our Savior overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers,
and would not suffer them to carry Burdens through the Temple, though for the
use of those that sacrificed, a thing which had some show of Religion in it. He
whipped both out, not only those that had residence there, but those that passed
through: He would suffer none but those that could justifi^ what they did by
the Law. Now, as God would not have sin lodge and make its abode in the Soul,
so he would not have it made a through fare for sin: he would not have vain
thoughts come up and down in the hearts. Now, By the Law comes the knowledge of
these secret sins. Reason is a glass much to be esteemed for what it can show;
but it is not a perfect glass; sometimes it shows a sin, but many times
diminishes it, that we cannot see it in full proportion. The Apostle makes this
use of the Law, that by it sin becomes exceeding sinful. Thou may see sin to
be sin by natural reason, but to see it exceeding sinful, this morality comes
short of, thou must have this from the Law of God.

Another false Glass.

The Devil transforms himself into an Angel of light.


5. There is another false glass, when the Devil transforms himself into an
Angel of light, when he preaches Gospel to a man. Beware of the Doctrine when
the deceiver preaches. This may be his Doctrine, He that believes and is
Baptized shall be saved. From this, by Satan's cunning delusion the natural man
thus concludes: A mere Heathen shall be shut out of Heaven gates, but I believe
in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, therefore I am in a good condition.
Why then should I trouble my self any further? There is no man can accuse me,
and my own good works will testify unto me, that I do enough. Strictness in
Religion is troubleness, and it is an unreasonable thing to do more: But this
is but a mere delusion of Satan, for there is nothing more quiets, and
satisfies a man, then Religion; there is nothing in the World more reasonable,
then the service of God. First then know thy disease, and then apply those
sweet and sovereign Cures. It is no easy matter for a man to believe: We block
up the strait ways of God, if we think it an easy matter to believe of our
selves. It must be done by the mighty power of God: It Is as great a work of
God, as the Creation of the World, to make a man believe: It Is the mighty power
of God to salvation. Such a one must not receive Christ as a Savior, but as a
Lord too. He must renounce all to have him, he must take him on his own terms.
He must deny the World and all, looking before hand what it will cost him. Now
for a man to take Christ, as his Lord, denying himself, the World, and all, to
resolve to pluck out his right eye, cut off his right hand rather then to part
with him, and account nothing so dear to him as Christ, is no small matter.
Thou can not be Christ's Spouse, unless thou forsake all for him. Thou must
account all things as Dung and Dross in comparison of him: And is not this a
diffi^u^t thing? Is this an easy task? Easily spoken indeed, not as easily
done: it must be here as in the case of marriage; a man must forsake all others,
yea the whole World, else Christ will not own him. Observe the speech of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.19. What is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward that
believe, etc. Mark, is to believe so easy a matter think you? Why, unless the
mighty Power of God be engaged for it, with that strength as it was engaged in
raising Christ from the dead, it cannot be. When thou art to believe, and
united unto Christ, the agreement is not that thou shall take him as thy Wife,
and thou shall be his Husband: No, he must be thy Husband, and thou his Wife,
and according to the Obligation of that relation, thou must be in subjection to
him, and must obey him. Now for a man to be brought out of his natural
condition, and to take Christ on any terms, so he may be saved by him in the
end, is not so easy. Can thou think there is no more required but only the
outward Baptism, or that there is no more in Baptism but the outward washing of
the flesh? No, He Is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is in the flesh; but he is a Jew that is so inwardly, and
cireumcision is that of the heart. Romans 2.29. Thou then entrest into Gods
livery. Mark this, for by it I strive only to bring thee back to thy self.
Thou entrest into covenant with him; thou bindest thy self to forsake the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and we should make this use of Baptism, a^ ^ow
to put it in practice. When we promised, there were two things in the
Indenture; one, that God will give Christ to us, the other, that we must
forsake all the sinful lusts of the flesh: This is that which makes Baptism to
be Baptism indeed to us. The other thing required is, that we forsake all, Romans
6.2. It is not confined to the very act, but it has a perpetual effect all the
days of thy life. I add, it never has its full effect till the day of our
death, the abolition of the whole body of sin. That which we seal, is not
complete till then, till we have final grace. The water of Baptism quenches the
fire of Purgatory; for it is not accomplished till final grace is received. We
are now under the Physicians hands, then shall we be cured. Baptism is not done
only at the Font, which is a thing deceives many; for it runs through our
whole life: nor has it consummation till our dying day, till we receive final
grace: The force and efficacy of Baptism is for the washing away of sin to
morrow, as well as the day past: the death of sin is not, till the death of the
body, and therefore its said we must be buried with him by Baptism into his
death. Now at our death we receive final grace; till when, this washing and the
virtue thereof has not its consummation.

Let no man therefore deceive you with vain words; take heed of looking on your
selves in these false glasses, think it not an easy thing to get Heaven, the
way is strait, and the passage narrow. There must be a striving to enter; there
must be an ascending into Heaven, a motion contrary to nature: And therefore
it is folly to think we shall drop into Heaven, there must be a going upward, if
ever we will come thither.

EPHESIANS. 2.1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins,
where in times past you walked according to the course of this World, according
to the Prince that rules in the Air, the Spirit that works in the Children
of disobedience. Amongst whom also, etc.


THE last time I declared unto you the duty that was necessarily required of us
if we look to be saved, that we must not only take the matter speedily into
consideration, and not be deluded by our own hearts and the wiles of Satan; but
that we must not do it superficially or perfunctorily, but must bring our
selves to the true touchstone, and not look upon our selves with false glasses,
because there is naturally in every one self-love; and in these last and worst
times men are apt to think better of themselves then they deserve. If there be
any beginning of goodness in them, they think all is well, when there is no
greater danger in the World then being but half-Christians. He thinks (the
half-Christian I mean,) that if he has escaped the outward pollutions of the
world, through lust, and be not so bad as formerly he has been, and not so bad
as many men in the World are, therefore he is well enough: Whereas his end
proves worse then his beginning. This superficial repentance is but like the
washing of a Hog, Superficial repentance will not change the nature of a man.

No morality, nor external change of life will do, without quickening grace and
a new life wrought.


the outside is only washed, the swinish nature is not taken away. There may
be in this man some outward abstaining from the common gross sins of the World,
or those which he himself was subject unto; but his disposition to sin is the
same, his nature is nothing changed: there is no renovation, no casting in a
new mould, which must be in us. For it is not a little reforming will serve the
turn, no, nor all the morality in the World, nor all the common graces of Gods
Spirit, nor the outward change of the life: they will not do, unless we are
quickened, and have a new life wrought in us; unless there be a supernatural
working of Gods Spirit we can never enter into Heaven. Therefore in this case
it behooves every man to prove his own work, Gal. 6.4. A thing men are hardly
drawn unto, to be exact examiners of themselves Coelo discendit (...), a
Heathen himself could say, to know a man's self is a heavenly saying; and it is
an heavenly thing indeed, if we have an Heavenly Master to teach us. The Devil
taught Socrates a lesson that brought him from the study of natural to moral
Philosophy, whereby he knew himself; yet the Devil knew morality could never
teach him the lesson indeed. All the morality in the World cannot teach a man
to escape Hell: We must have a better instructor herein than the Devil, or our
selves; the Lord of Heaven must do it, if ever we will be brought to know our
selves aright. St. Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, one of the
learned Doctors of the Pharisees, and yet he could not teach him this. When
he studied the law, he thought himself unblameable, but coming to an higher and
better Master; he knows that in him, that is, in his flesh dwells no good
thing, Romans 7. By self-examination a man may find many faults in himself, but
to find that which the Apostle afterward found in himself, to see the flesh a
rottenness, the sink of iniquity that is within him, and to find himself so bad
as indeed he is, unless it please the Lord to open his eyes, and to teach him,
he can never attain it.

Now we come to this place of the Apostle, wherein we see the true glass of our
selves, the Spirit knows what we are, better then our selves and the Spirit
shows us that every man of us either was, or is such as we are here set down to
be. We are first natural before we can be spiritual, there is not a man, but
has been, or is yet, a natural man, and therefore see we the large description
of a natural man before he is quickened, before God, which is rich in mercy,
enlivens him being dead in sins, and saves him by grace in Christ. Thus is it
with us all, and thus must it be; and we shall never be fit for grace till we
know our selves thus far, till we know our selves as far out of frame, as the
Spirit of truth declares us to be. In this place of Scripture consider we

1. Who this carnal man is; what they are which the Apostle speaks of, to be
dead in sins: and that walk after the course of the World, led by the Devil,
and have their conversation after the flesh, Children of wrath. These are big
words and heavy things: Consider first the subject, of whom this is spoken.

Then follows the Praedicate, or

2. What that ill news is, which he delivers of them. We begin with the first.

1. Who they are of whom this is spoken: and that is (you) You has he quickened
who were dead: and ( ye) (in the words following) that in times past walked
after the course of the world: and in the third verse more particularly: Among
whom also we all had our conversation in times past. He speaks now in the first
person, as before in the second, so that the subject is we all and ye all. Not
a man in this Congregation, but is or was as bad as the holy Ghost here makes
him. But

2. To come to that, which is delivered of him: he is one not quickened, dead in
sins: no better then nature made him, that corrupt nature which he has from
Adam, till he is thus spiritually enlivened.

Now he is described.

1. By the quality of his person.

2. By his company. Even as others. Thou may think thy self better then
another man, but thou art no better; never a barrel the better herring (as we
say:) Even as others, thou art not so alone, but as bad as the worst, not a man
more evil in his nature then thou art. When thou go to Hell, perhaps some
difference there may be in your several punishments, according to your several
acts of Rebellion: but yet you shall all come short of the Glory of God, And
for matter of quickening you are all alike.

1. First concerning their quality: And this is declared.

1. By their general disposi^ion, they are dead in trespasses and sins. Dead,
and therefore unable and indisposed to the works of a spiritual living man:
Besides, not only indisposed and unable thereto, but dead in trespasses and
sins. For the separation of the Soul from God, is a more dangerous death, than
the separation of the Soul from the Body, and this is the reason, why St. John
calls, damnation the second death. Rev. 20.14. reckoning (in comparison) the
natural death for none. Accordingly also speaks the learned Patriarch of
Alexandria, St. Cyril. Tom. 6. p. 415. (...) (...). That is not properly death,
which separateth Soul from the body, but that which separateth God from the
Soul. God is the life of the Soul, but he that is separated from life, is dead,
being deprived of alacrity and cheerfulness, as of life. He lies rotting in his
own filth, like a rotten carcass, and stinking carrion in the nostrils of the
Almighty, so loathsome is he: all which is drawn from Original sin. Not only
dis-enabled to any good, but prone to all sin and iniquity.

2. By his particular conversation: And that appears in the verse following.
Where in times past ye walked. How? Not according to the word and will of God,
not according to his rule, but they walked after three other wicked rules. A
dead man then has his walk you see: a strange thing in the dead, but who
directs him in his course? These three, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
the worst guides that may be; yet if we look to the conversation of a natural
man, we see these are his Pilots, which are here set down.

1. The World. Wherein times past ye walked after the course of the World. He
swims along with the stream of the World. Nor will he be singular, not such a
precise one as some few are, but do as the World does, run amain whither that
carries him. See the state of a natural man. He Is apt to be brought into the
slavery of the World. This is his first guide. Then follows

2. The Second, which is the Devil. The Devil leads him as well as the World:
According to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in
the Children of disobedience. In stead of having the Spirit of God to be led
by, he is posted by the Spirit of Satan, and the lusts of his Father the Devil
he will do, He has not an heart to resist the vilest lusts the Devil shall
persuade him to. When Satan once fills his heart, he has no heart to any thing
else, then to follow him.

3. There remains the Flesh, his guide too, and that is not left out, v. 3.
Amongst whom we had our conversation in times past in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. So that you see the three
guides of a natural man; and he is as bad as these three can make him: and till
the stronger man comes and pulls him out, in this condition he remains, and in
this natural estate, he is a son of disobedience. We see then the state of
disobedience described to be wretchedness.

3. This further appears by that which must follow, which is cursedness.
Rebellion and wretchedness going before, cursedness will follow. For God will
not be abused, nor suffer a Rebel to go unpunished: Therefore says the
Apostle, We are by nature the Children of wrath. Being the natural sons of
disobedience, we may well conclude we are the Children of wrath. If we can well
learn these two things of our selves, how deep we are in sin, and how the wrath
of God is due to us for our sins, then we may see what we are by Nature. Thus
much concerning the quality of a natural man. Next follows

2. His company. Even as others. By nature we are the Children of wrath even as
others. That is to say, we go in that broad wide way that leads to damnation,
that way we all naturally rush into: though we may think it otherwise, and
think our selves better, yet we are deceived. For it is with us even as with
others. Naturally we are in the same state that the worst men in the World are;
so that we see the glass of a natural man, or of a man that has made some
beginnings, till Christ come and quicken him.

Q. See we then who it is spoken of to be dead men, Quest.
that are rotten and stinking, as bad as the World, the Flesh, and the Devil
can make them? Who should these be?

A. I answer, it is you: you has he quickened. And ye, Ans.
wherein ye walked, etc. But who are they?

The Ephesians perhaps that were in times past Heathens: I hope it belongs not
to us. They were Gentiles and Pagans that knew not Christ, v. 12. Aliens to the
Commonweal of Israel, strangers to the covenant of promise, having no hope,
without God in the World. (...), as the Text renders it, Atheists, and
therefore they might well be so. But I hope it is not thus with me, I was never
a Pagan or Heathen, I was born of Christian Parents, and am of the Church.

But put away these conceits. Look on the 3d. v. Amongst whom we also had our
conversation: and wherein ye your selves, etc. It Is not only spoken of you
Gentiles, but verified of us also: As if he had said here as Gal. 2. We who are
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. He paints out not only you
the Gentiles in such ugly colors, but we Jews also, we of the Commonwealth of
Israel. We, before we were quickened, were in the same state that you are
described to be in.

Obj. Oh but the Apostle may do this out of fellowship, Obj.
and to avoid envy, as it were making himself a party with them, as Ezra did
cap. 9. that included himself in the number of the offenders, though he had no
hand in the offense: O our God (says he) what shall we say? Our evil deeds,
etc. and how shall we stand before thee because of this? Making a particular
confession, whereas he was not accessory to the fault, but to sweeten it to
them.

Sol. But here the Apostle does not so, he was not thus minded, but it is we
all, he puts universality to it: So that it is clear, Sol.
that before conversion and quickening by grace from Christ, we all, all of us
are in as foul and filthy a condition, as this which is here des^ribed and set
down: So that this is the point, that it is not spoken of some desperate
sinners, but that it is the common state and condition of all the sons of Adam.

Doct. All men, every man and woman in this place, either is or has been in
the state that here the Apostle describes the natural man to be in. Doct.


Therefore we have all need to examine our selves, whether we yet remain in
that condition or not. The Apostle brings this description to testify the
truth of the point, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin. The
whole current and course of the Scripture shows the universality of it, that
it is true of all. See, the Apostle speaking of himself and the rest, Tit. 33.
says, We our selves also, not only you of the Gentiles, but we our selves
also were foolish, disobedient, etc. But after the kindness of God toward man
appeared, etc. That is, before the day star of grace did arise in our hearts,
there is not the best of us all but have been thus and thus.

Romans 3.19. There the Apostle insists on the point expressly, that every mouth
might be stopped; to show the state of all men naturally, having laid down a
large beadrole of the iniquities of the Heathen, he comes afterward to
convince the Jews. What are we better then they; no in no wise: for we have
proved before that all are under sin: there is none good, no not one.

Obj. But though you bring many places to prove that all are sinners, yet I
hope the Virgin Mary was not. Obj.


Sol. An inch breaks no squares, but All are sinners. There is none righteous
no not one. The drift of the Apostle in this, Sol.
is to show that these things are not spoken of some heinous sinners only, but
there is not one to be exempted; and therefore in his Conclusion, v. 19. he
says that whatever things the Law says, it says to them which are under the
Law. That every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty thefore
God: and that by the deeds of the Law no flesh can be justified from sin.

So that now having proved this so clearly to you, consider with your selves
how needful it is to apply this to our own souls. Many men, when they read such
things as these of the Scripture, read them but as stories from strange
Countries. No natural man does judge himself so bad as he i^.
What, are we dead in sin^, not able to stir one foot in Gods ways? bad we are
indeed: but dead, rotten, and stinking in sins and trespasses? What as bad as
the World, the Devil, and Flesh, can make us? What, Children of wrath?
Firebrands of Hell? Few can persuade themselves that it is so bad with them.
Therefore take this home to your selves; think no better of your selves then
you are: for thus you are naturally. Therefore consider if thou were now going
out of the world, what state thou art in, a child of wrath, a child of Belial,
or the like. Set about the work speedily, go to God, pray, and cry earnestly;
give thy self no rest, till thou know this to be thy condition: Let not thy
corrupt nature deceive thee, to make ^hee think better of thy self, then God
says thou art.

Now that we may the better know to whom these things belong, know it is thou
and I, we all have been, or are in this estate, till we have supernatural
grace; and therefore we are declared to be Children of wrath, and Children of
disobedi^nce, till regenerated. Why? It Is because it is thy nature, it belongs
to all. Now we know the common nature always appertains to the same kind:
There Is nothing natural, but is common with the kind. If then by nature we are
Children, then certainly it belongs to every Mothers son of us, for we are all
Sons of Adam. In Adam we all die, Romans 5. That Is the fountain whence all misery
flows to us. As thou receivedst thy nature so the corruption of thy nature from
him; For he begat a son in his own likeness. Genes. 5.3. This therefore is the
condition of every one. The Apostle in 1 Cor. 15. speaks of two men, the first
was from the earth, earthly, the second was the Lord from Heaven. What were
there not many millions and generations more? True, but there were not more men
like these men of men, two head-men, two Fathers of all other men. There were
but two, by whom all must stand or fall, but two such m^n. By the fall of the
first man we all fell; and if we rise not by the second man, we are yet in our
sins. If he rise not, we cannot be risen. We must rise or fall by him. He is
the Mediator of the second Covenant. If he rise and we are in him, we shall
rise with him; but if not, we are dead still. So it is in the first Adam, we
all depend on him, he is the root of all mankind. It Is said in Esaias 53. Our
Savior should rejoice to see his seed. His seed, that is to say, he is the
common father of all mankind, I mean of all those that shall proceed from him
by spiritual generation. He shall present them to his father, as when one is
presented to the University: Heb. 2.14. Behold here am I, and the c^ildr^n t^ou
have given me. So in Adam he being the head of the Cov^nant of nature or works
that is, the Law, if he had stood, none of us had fallen; if he f^ll, no^e of
us all can stand. He is the peg, on which all the k^yes ^^ng: if that stand,
they hang fast; but if that fall, they fall with it. As we see in matter of
bondage; if the father forfeit his liberty, and become a bondsman, all his
Children are bondmen to a hundred generations, here is ^ur case. We were all
once free, but our father ha^h forfeited his liberty; and if he become a Slave,
he cannot beg^t a Freeman. When our Savior tells the Jews of being freemen:
We were never bond men, say they, though it be false; for even Cicero himself
could tell a Jew that he was a slave, genus hominum ad servitium natum,
although they had a good opinion of themselves: But our Savior says, you are
bond men unto sin and Satan. For till the Son make you free, you are all
bondmen: But when he makes you free, then are you free indeed. So that we see
our condition here set down.

1. We are dead in trespasses and sins; that is, there is an indisposition in
us to all good works. A dead man cannot walk, or speak, or do any act of a
living man; so these cannot do the actions of men that are quickened and
enlivened, they cannot pray with the spirit, they cannot love God, etc. They
cannot do those things that shall be done hereafter in Heaven. There Is not one
good duty, which this natural man can do. If it should be said unto him. Think
but one good thought, and for it thou shall go to Heaven, he could not think
it. Till God raise him from the sink of sin, as he did Lazarus from the grave,
he cannot do any thing that is well pleasing unto God. He may do the works of a
moral man, but to do the works of a man quickened and enlightened, it is beyond
his power. For if he could do so, he must then have some reward from God; for
however we deny the merit of good works, yet we deny not the reward of good
works to a man, that is in Christ. There Is no proportionable merit in a cup of
cold water and the Kingdom of Heaven, yet he that gives a cup of cold water to
a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward. Here then is
the point. The best that a natural man does, cannot so relish with God, as that
he should take delight in it, or reward it: The best works of a natural man
cannot please God.
whereas the least good thing that comes from another root, from a quickened
spirit, is acceptable and well ple^sing to him. Consider for this end that
which is set down, Prove. 15.8. T^ke the best works of a natural man, his
prayers, or sacrifice, and see there what is said. The sacrifice of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord. Its said again, Prove. 21.27. where there are
additions, The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: How much
more when he brings it with a wicked mind? Suppose there should come upon this
man a sit of devotion, where he has or should have some good motions, is it
then accepted? no, it is so far from being accepted, that it is an Abomination
to God; how much more then, if he brings it with wicked mind? That is, if he
brings it not with a wicked mind, it is an abomination, how much more with it?
See the case set down in Haggai 2.12.13, 14. If one bear holy flesh, etc. shall
it be holy? And the Priest answered no. Then said Haggai, if an unclean person
touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And he said, it shall be unclean. Then
answered Haggai, so is this people, so is this nation before me, says the
Lord, and so is every work of their hands, it is unclean. A man may nor say,
prayer is a sin, because it it is so in them; no, it is a good duty, but spoiled
in the carriage. He marrs it in the carriage; and therefore inste^d of doing a
good work, he spoils it; and so in stead of a reward, must look for punishment,
1 Timothy 15. The end of the Commandment is love out of a ^ure heart, a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. Let the things thou do be according to the
Commandment: Look what thou do be in the middle, end, and beginning according
to the Commandment. If wrong in all these, then though the work be never so
materially good, being faulty in the original* middle, or end, it is so far from
being a good work, that God will not accept of it. and thou may rather expect
a plague for spoiling it, then a reward, for doing it.

See then the beginning of a good work, it must be from a pure heart. Look to
the original of duties.
A man not ingrafted into Christ, is a d^filed, polluted person, his very mind
and conscience are d^filed. The consc^ence is the purest thing a man has, it
holds out last, and takes part wit^ God, that as Jobs messenger said, I only
am esc^ped to tell the^: Job. 1 15. So conscience only remains to declare a
man's faults to God. and to witness against the man; and yet this very light,
the eye of the soul is de^iled: therefore if thou have a corrupt f^untain, if
the heart be naught, the fountain muddy, whatever stream comes from it cannot
be pure.

Look to the end of duty.
Again, the end of it is love. Consider when thou do any duty, what puts thee
on work. Is it love does constrain thee? If love do not constrain thee, it is
manifest that thou do not seek God but thy self, and art to every good work a
Reprobate, Tit. 1.16. that is, thou art not then able to do any thing that God
will accept; the best thing thou do, will not relish with God. A hard estate
indeed, that when a man shall come to appear before God, he shall not have one
good thing, that he has done in all his life, that God will own. Some there be
that take a great deal of pains in coming to the word, in prayer public and
private, in charity and giving to the poor: Alas, when thou shall come to an
account, and none of these things shall stead thee, not one of them shall speak
for thee, but all shall be lost; How heavy will thy case be? 2 John 8. Look to
your selves, that you lose not the thing that you have wrought: By being
indisposed to do the works of a living man, we lose all; that is to say, God
will never own nor accept them: we shall never have reward for them. So that
here is the case, thou being dead, unable to perform the works of a living man,
can have no reward from heaven at all, until a man is quickened, and has life
from Christ, his works are dead, as well as his person. Without me, says our
Savior, you can do nothing, Ja. 15.5. St. Austin on this place observes that
Christ says not, Without me ye can do no great matter: No, but unless you be
cut off from your own stock, taken from your own root, and be ingrafted into
me, and have life from me, and be quickened by me, you can do nothing at all:
Nothing, neither great nor small, all that you do is lost. So that if there
were nothing but this being dead, you could do no good action. I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh (says St. Paul) there dwells no good thing, Romans
7.18. that is, nothing spiritually good, nothing for which I may look for a
reward in heaven. The Lord will say of such a man, thou have lived ten, twenty,
forty, or it may be fifty years under the Ministry, and yet have not done a
good work, or thought a good thought that I can own. Cut down this fruitless
tree, why cumbers it the greund? Luke 13.7. And this is the case of every man
of us, while we continue in our na^ural condition, till we be ingrafted into
Christ, and live by life, God will own nothing we do.

But now we are not only dead, and indisposed to the works of a living man,
though this be a very woeful case, and we need no more misery; for this will
bring us to be cut down and cast into the fire, if we continue so: But this is
not the only sad case of a natural man, but he is very active and fruitful in
the works of darkness, the others were sins of omission. Here he is wholly set
upon the commission of sins and trespasses, Heb. 6, 7.7. He not only brings not
forth meet fruit, or good fruit, or no fruit, but he brings forth thorns and
briars; and is therefore rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burnt. Thou art not only found a barren tree, and so deservest to be cut down;
but thou bring forth thorns and briars, and deservest to be burnt; not only
no good fruit, but noxious, bad and poisoned fruit; and this does mightily
aggravate the matter. Now for us that have lived so long under the Ministry,
and the Lord has watered, and dressed, and hedged us, do we think the Lord
expects from us no good fruit? Had we lived among heathens, or where the Word
is not taught, then so much would not be expected; but we have heard the Word
often and powerfully taught, and therefore it is expected, that we should not
only bring forth fruit, but meet fruit* answerable to the means. Where God
affords greatest means, there he expects most fruit. If a man live thirty or
forty years under powerful means, the Lord expects answerable fruit, which if
he bring forth, he shall have a blessing from the Lord. But when a man has
lived long under the means, and brings forth no fruit pleasing to God, but all
Gods cost is lost, when notwithstanding the dew and the rain which falls often
upon him, he brings forth nothing but thorns and briars, he is rejected, and
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burnt. The earth which drinks in the
former and the latter rain, etc. if it bring not forth fruit answerable to the
labor of the dresser, it is nigh unto the curse.

Now if we consider but the particulars, and search into Gods Testimonies, we
shall see how b^d this man is.

But who should this man be?

We have Gods own word for it. It Is men, generally all men, Genesis 6.5. God saw
the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every thought and
imagination of his heart was only evil continually. Every word is as it were a
thunder bolt: and was it not time, when it was thus with them for God to bring
a flood? The thoughts are the original, from which the words and actions do
usually proceed. Now all their thoughts were evil: What was there no kind of
goodness in their thoughts? No, they were only evil continually: and that was
the reason the flood came. Well, but though it were so before the flood, yet I
hope they were better after the flood. No, God said again after the flood, cap.
8. The thoughts of the hearts of men are evil, etc. Like will to like. Men are
of one kind, till they receive grace from Christ. We are all one nature, and
naturally all the thoughts and imaginations of our hearts are only evil
continually.

See it in the understanding, 1 Cor. 3.14. The natural man perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, for they are foolishness
unto him, etc.

Look upon his will, Romans 8. It is not subject to the will of God, neither
indeed can it be. Our Savior, Mat. 15.8. does anatomize the heart of such a
man. Those things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and they
defile the man, for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, etc. these are they which defile the man, because they come from
his heart from within. If a man go by a house, and seeing great flakes of fire
come out of the chimney, though he see not the fire within, yet he cannot know
but there is fire within, because he sees the flakes without. I am not able to
see the heart of any man, and to declare to you what I have seen with mine
eyes; but yet if I see such to come forth, as murder, thefts, blasphemies,
lying, and the like. I may say there is hellfire in the heart; thy heart is a
little hell within thee, these manifestations from without make it appear to be
so. The words of this man are rotten words and stinking words, and his heart is
much more. So, this is the point, we are utterly indisposed, aliens to all
good, and bent to all evil. I am carnal (says the Apostle) we are sold under
sin, slaves unto it; sin is our Lord, and we its slaves. We have generally
forfeited our happy estate, and are servants to S^tan, whom we obey. Therefore
this is a thing not easily to be passed over; this our condition, of which if
we were once truly persuaded, we would never give our selves any rest, till we
were got out of it.

If the party that goes to the Physician, could but know his disease, and cause
the Physician to know it, and the causes of it, whether it came from a hot
cause or a cold, it were easily cured, it were as good as half done: That is
the chief reason why so many miscarry, because their disease is not perfectly
known. That is the reason we are no better, because our disease is not
perfec^ly known: That is the reason that we are no better, because we know not
flow bad we are. If we did once know our disease, and knew our selves to be
heart-sick, and not like the Laodiceans, which thought themselves rich and
wanted nothing, when they were poor, blind and naked, then we would seek out,
and were in the way to be cured. So much for this time, but we will have
another Lecture on this point.

GAL. 3.22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.


YOu see in this excellent portion of Scripture, the two Covenants of Almighty
God: to wit, the Covenant of Nature, and the Covenant of Grace. The first of
Nature, which was written by God in man's heart, and this is the holy Law of
God, by virtue whereof a man was to continue in that integrity, holiness and
uprightness, in which God had first created him, and to serve God according to
that strength he first enabled him with, that so he might live thereby.

But now, when man had broken this Covenant, and entered into a state of
Rebellion against God, he is shut up in misery, but not in misery for ever, as
the Angels that fell ^ere, being reserved in chains till the judgment of the
great day, Jud. v. 6. No, the Lord has shut him up in prison, only for a
while, that so he may the better make a way for their escape and deliverance,
and for their entrance into the second Covenant of Grace: that so making him
see his own misery, wherein by nature he is, and cutting him off from his own
stock, he may be ingrafted in Christ, draw sap and sweetness from him, and
bring forth fruits to everlasting life. And this is the method the Scripture
uses: It concludes all under sin, that so the promise by faith of Jesus Christ
might be given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22. It Is no new Doctrine devised by
us, but it is the course and method of the Scripture: for it begins in this
great Work with imprisoning and shutting up. The Law is as a Justice of Peace,
by his Mittimus commands us to prison: It Is a Sergeant that arrests a man, and
carries to the Gaol: But why does the Scriptures do thus? It Is not to destroy
you with famine; the Law sends you not hither to starve you, or to kill you
with the stench of the prison, but thereby to save and preserve you alive, and
that you may hunger and thirst after deliverance. So that we find the reason
added in the Text, The Scripture concludes all under sin, why? It Is that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given ^o them that believe. You are
shut up as prisoners and rebels, that having found the smart of it, seen your
misery, and learned what (...) is to be at enmity with God, and the folly to
make your selves wiser an^ (...) than God, you may submit your selves, casting
down your plumes, and desire after Christ with an hungry and thirsty appetite,
for not only a Prie^^ to sacrifice himself for you, and a Prophet to teach and
instruct you, (...) King to be swayd by him, earnestly craving from your soul
to be his (...), and to be admitted into the privilege of his subjects in the
Com^onwealth of Israel and esteem it your greatest shame that ye have been
a^^ens so long, so long excluded. The Scripture then concluded you under sin,
and shut up by it, not to bring you to despair, but to bring you to salvation:
(...) a Physician, which gives his Patient bitter pills, not to make him sick,
but that so he may restore him to health: or as a Surgeon, that lays sharp
drawing plasters, and cuts the flesh, not with an intent to hurt, but to cure
the wound.

This is the Scriptures method, it concludes all under sin, (...), has shut up
all. The Text says not (...), but (...), not all men in the masculine gender,
but all things in the neuter. And it is all one, as if the Apostle had said,
The Scripture arrests not only thy person but thine actions: The Scripture lays
hold not only of the man, but of every thing in him. This word ( all) is a
forcible word, and empties us clean of every thing, that we may truly confess
with the Apostle, In me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.
It Is impossible a man should by nature think thus of himself, that there is no
good in him; or that he should by asking others find himself half so bad, as
the Law makes him to be, by shutting up a man under sin, and all things in a
man, yea all good whatsoever is in thee.

And this it does that thou may come to Christ: as it is enlarged in the
second verses following. Before faith came (says the Apostle) we were kept up
under the Law, shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be revealed:
wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith. Before the time then that thou have faith, (which is the
day wherein salvation comes to thine house) thou art kept under the Law. Thou
art not assured of salvation, nor can thou expect, till then, that God should
show thee mercy. We have a conceit, that though we are never transplanted, nor
cut off from our own stock, yet God will show us mercy: But we shall beguile
our selves to hell therein; for we are kept under the L^w till faith comes,
that so we may know our selves. We are kept, etc. ( Kept) It Is a Metaphor drawn
from Military affairs, when men are k^pt by a Garrison, and kept in order. Now
the Law is Gods Garrison, which keeps men in good awe, and order. The Law does
this, not to terrify you too much, or to break your minds with despair, but to
fit you for the faith: It Is a shutting up, till that faith comes, which should
afterward be revealed. He Is a miserable Preacher which ends with preaching of
the Law; the Law is for another, it is to fit us for faith. It Is our
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. We thunder not the Law, to make men run
away from God, but to bring them home unto him. The Schoolmaster by the smart
of his rod makes the child weary of his bondage, and desire earnestly to be
past his nonage; and this is his end, not that he delights to hear him cry.
Thus are we beaten by the Law, not that God delights or loves to hear us sigh
or sob, but that we may grow weary of our misery and cruel bondage, may desire
to be justified by faith. The Law then is so a Schoolmaster, as that by making
us smart, it might bring us home. We see then the course and method of the
Scripture, it has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe.

Now because men like not this kind of Doctrine, to begin with Preaching of the
Law, and therefore think there may be a shorter and nearer way to preach Christ
first, I will therefore make knwon unto you this method of the Scripture, and I
will justify it unto you.

There must be this Preparative, else the Gospel will come unseasonably. If
before we are sowred by the leaven of the Law Christ be preached, he well be
but unsavory and unpleasant to us.

2. Does God at the first Preaching of the Gospel begin with Adam by Preaching
Christ, It Is necessary to preach the Law before the Gospel.
before he saw his sin and wickedness? No, he said not to him presently, as soon
as he had sinned, Well, Adam, thou have sinned, and broken my covenant, yet
there is another covenant, thou shall be saved by one that comes out of thy
loins: But God first summons him to appear, he brings him out of his shelters
and hidings places, tells him of his sin, and says, Have thou eaten of the
tree which I forbad thee to eat of? But the man shifts it off, and the woman
also to the serpent: ^he serpent beguiled guiled me, and I did eat: Yet all
this will not excuse him, Gods judgments are declared, his sin is made
apparent, he sees it: Then being ^hus humbled, comes in the promise of the
Gospel, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. This is the 1
Instance.
Be ye open then ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.

2 Instance.
2. John the Baptist, who was the Harbinger to prepare the way for Christ,
Preaching to the Scribes and Pharisees, warned them, O generation of vipers. He
came to throw down every high hill, and to beat down every mountain: calls them
serpents. This was his office, to lay the Ax at the root of the Tree.

3 Instance.
3. And Christ himself coming into the World, and Preaching to Nicodemus,
begins: Unless a man be b^rn again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
John 3. A man in his natural condition can never enter into Heaven, for he is
carnal. That that is born of the flesh is flesh, and that that is born of the
Spirit is Spirit. It Is carnal, and must be born again. A little patching will
not serve the turn. Thou must be new born, new molded, a little mending is not
sufficient: A man must be a new creature, and new made. So that this is the
substance of this Doctrine of Christ, that if thou be no better than moral
virtue, or civil education can make thee; if thou have any thing less than
Regeneration, believe me thou can never see heaven. There Is no hope of heaven
till then, till thou art born again: till then our Savior excludes all false
fancies that way.

4. The Apostles begin to gather the first Church after Christ's Resurrection,
Act. 2.23. They do not begin to preach Christ first, his Virtue and Efficacy;
but first they tell them of their great sin, in crucifying the Lord of Life,
viz. Whom with wicked hands you have taken and crucified. But what was the end
of their doing thus? It Is set down, v. 37. They were pricked to the heart, and
then they cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? See, this
was the end of all, the humbling of them, that by declaring what they had done,
they might be pricked at the heart; so that now they see it, if it be no better
with them, then for the present, it is like to go ill with them. This makes them
cry out, What shall we do? Then (says Peter) repent and be baptized, and you
shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. After he had told them their own, and
had brought them to their search, which is their first work, then comes the
promise of Christ. Observe the Apostles method in the Epistle to the Romans:
which Book is a perfect Catechism of the Church, which contains these three
parts of Divinity, Humiliation, Justification, and Sanctification. See how the
Apostle orders his method. From the first Cap. to part of the third, he treats
all of the Law, and convinces both Jew and Gentile, and all of sin. Then Cap.
3.19. mark his Conclusion: that every mouth may be stopped. When he had stopped
every mouth, cast down every strong hold, which lifted it self up against God:
when he had laid all at Gods feet, and left them bleeding, as it were, under
the knife of God, then comes he to Christ, Romans 3.21. The righteousness of God
without the Law is manifest. He had done his first business in humbling them,
in showing them their sins by the Law: and as soon as that was done, when every
mouth was stopped, then comes he to the promise by faith in Jesus Christ to all
that believe.

You see then the method of the Scripture is first to conclude all under sin,
and so to fit men for the promise of Jesus Christ. Know therefore, that Law is
the highway to the Gospel, the path that leads to it, that way which must be
trodden in: we are still out of our way, till we have begun our walks in this
path: And if thou art not terrified by the Law, and the sight of thy sins, been
at thy wits end, as it were, weary of thy condition and bondage, thou art not
in the way yet. Our sowing must be in tears, Psalm. 126.5. And it is said, that
in the Church Triumphant all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes. That Is a
promise: But is it possible that tears should b^ wiped from our eyes before we
shed them? Shall we look to go to Heaven in a way that was never yet found out?
Shall it be accounted a point of preciseness to walk in this way, or a
soul-torturing doctrine to preach it? This is the way that all our Forefathers
have both preached, and gone. This is that time of sowing spoken of in Psalm.
126.5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. It brings us joy in the
end, to begin our sowing in tears. It waters that precious seed, and makes it
bring forth joy unto us in abundance, yea such as no man can take from us.

So then having laid laid this point for a foundation, we now will come to the
next.

That until we come to Christ, the Law lays hold of us. Till Christ come, we
are shut up under the Law, kept under it. And if there were nothing else in the
World to make a man weary of his condition, this were enough. Until a man has
given over himself to Christ, and renounced his own righteousness, he is
subject to the Law, kept under it, not under grace. It brings a man only to the
place, where grace is. Put this therefore close to your consciences, and jumble
not these two together. First Nature comes, and whilst you are under that, you
are under the Law. Never think you are under the Covenant of Grace, till you
believe (of which belief we shall speak more hereafter.) Whilst you are under
the Law, you are held under it and by it made obnoxious to the wrath of God;
Whoever is under the Law, is under the curse.

Now that I may unfold it, and show what a fearful thing it is to be under the
Law, to be held under it (although many think it no great matter) hearken what
the Apostle says of it: Cursed be every one that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. Well then, art
thou under the Law? Then never think of being under grace at the same time; not
but that we may hope to be under grace afterward: By this Law we must be
judged, and the Judgment of the Law is very severe: It requires not only, that
thou do this, or that good thing; but if thou continuest not in every thing,
that is written therein, it condemns thee.

Strange conceits men have now adays, and strange Divinity is brought forth
into the World: That if a man does as much as lies in him, and what he is of
himself able to do; nay farther, though he be a Heathen, that knows not Christ,
yet if he does the best he can; if he live honestly toward men; according to
the conduct of his reason, and has a good mind toward God, it is enough, he
need not question his eternal welfare. A cursed and desperate Doctrine they
conclude hence? Why (say they) may not this man be saved as well as the best?
But if it be so, I ask such, What is the benefit and advantage of the Jew more
then the Gentile? What is the benefit of Christ? of the Church? of Faith? of
Baptism? of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? This ground of Pelagianism, is
that, for which the devout Spouse of Christ, the Church abhors us: when we
shall undertake to bring a man to salvation without Christ: whereas, if he be
not under grace, under Christ, he is accursed. If thou will be saved by the
Law, it is not thy endeavor or doing, what lies in thee; that will serve the
turn; every jot and ^ittle that the Law requires, must be fulfilled. What would
be thine estate, if thou should be examined according to the strict rigor of
the Law? Not the least word or thought, that is contrary to it, but thou must
give an account for. If thou stand upon thine own bottom, or look to be
saved by thine own deeds; not one vain word which thou speak, but thou shall
be questioned for, cast, and condemned. Consider then the great difference of
being under Christ and grace, and of being under the Law. When we are under
Christ, we are freed from a great deal of inconvenience: we are not liable to
answer for those evil things, which we have committed; as in that comfortable
place of Ezekiel, All his iniquities that he has done shall not be mentioned
unto him. When a man is come to forsake his old way; his evils are cast out of
mind; a mavelous comfort to a Christian: whereas if a man be not in Christ,
every idle word he must be accountable for; if in Christ, the greatest sin he
ever committed he shall not hear of. All they that stand on Gods right hand,
hear only of the good things they have done, you have fed, clothed, and
visited me: But they on the left hand hear not a word mentioned concerning the
good they have done, only their evil deeds are reckoned up.

Now that I may declare to you the difference between the Law and the Gospel: I
will difference it in three particulars.

1. The Law rejects any kind of obedience besides that which is thorough,
sound, full, and perfect, without any touch of the flesh. It rejects all cracked
payment: it will take no clipped coin. That obedience which has any imperfection
joined with it, will not be accepted: But here I must not speak without book.
See Romans 7.14. We know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal. And then
concludes, O wretched man, etc. The Law is spiritual, What Is that? We may know
the meaning of it by the particle ( but) but I am carnal. The Law is spiritual.
That is, it requires, that all our works be spiritual, without any carnality,
or touch of the flesh. If in any point of our obedience there be a smell of the
cask, it is rejected. If the beer be never so good, yet if it have an evil
smatch, it will not relish. Let our services have this savor of the flesh, and
they will not be pleasing to God, neither will they have a right savor in his
nostrils. And thus the Law is spiritual, but w^ are carnal. Now it is otherwise
here in the state of the Gospel: Alas* We are carnal, it is true. The Apostle
himself complains, That th^re is ^ law in his members rebelling against the law
of his mind, and le^ding him ^aptive, etc. Yet notwithstanding the Gospel
accepts our obedience, thoug^ ^he Law will not. What Is the reason of this? Why,
it is plain. When ^he Law comes, it looks for justice, it presents a strict rule
to us; it requires w^ should be complete: But now the Gospel does not so; it
requires ^ot justifi^ation of our own, but looks that being justified by Gods
free grace, we should ^h^w forth our thankfulness, and express that we are so
in heart, b^ our obedience to our utmost power. Here Is all the strictness of
the Gospel. If there b^ a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to what a man has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. God takes well the
desires of our mind. This i^ then our blessed condition under the Gospel: it
requires not perfect obedience, but thankfulness for mercies received, and a
willing mind. Suppose we cannot do what we would, that is no matter. God looks
to our affections, and the willingness of our minds; if it be according to the
strength that thou have, it is received with acceptance. Here then arises the
second point of difference, and that is.

2. The Law considers not what thou now have, but what thou once had. If thou
say, I have done my best; and what, would you have a man do more then he can
do? The Law heeds not that: It considers not what thou do, but what thou
ough^st to do. It requires that thou should perform obedience according to
thy first strength, and that perfection once God gave thee, that all thou do
should have love for it is ground: that thou should love the Lord thy God with
all thine heart, and strength. Mat. 22.37. Her^ the Law is very imperious, like
those Taskmasters in Egypt, that laid burdens on the Israelites too heavy for
them to bear. They had at first materials, and then they delivered in the full
tale of bricks: But when the straw was taken from them, they complain of the
heaviness of their burden. But what is the answer? You are idle, you are idle,
you shall deliver the same tale of bricks as before, Exodus 5.17. So stands the
case here. It Is not enough to plead, Alas! if I had strength, I would do it;
but I have not strength, I cannot do it. But the Law is peremptory, you must do
it: you are compelled by force, you shall do it. The impossibility of our
fulfilling it, does not exempt us, as appears by comparing Romans 8.3. with Romans
7.6. although it be impossible, as the case stands, for the Law to be by us
fulfilled, yet we are held under it, as appears plainly thus. If I deliver a
man a stock of money whereby he may gain his own living, and be advantageous to
me; and he spend it, and when I require mine own with increase, he tells me,
True Sir, I received such a sum of money of you for this purpose, but I have
spent it, and am disinabled to pay. Will this serve the turn? will it satisfy
the Creditor, or discharge the debt? No, no, the Law will have its own of him.
If thou payest not thy due, thou must be shut up under it. It Is otherwise under
the Gospel: that accepts a man according to what he has, not according to what
he has not. And here comes in the third point.

3. Under the Gospel, although I am fallen, yet if I repent, the greatest sin
that is, cannot condemn me. By repentance I am safe. Let our sins be never so
great, yet if we return by repentance, God accepts us. Faith and Repentance
remove all. The Law knows no such thing. Look into the Laws of the Realm. If a
man be indicted and convinced of Treason, Murder or Felony; though this man
plead, True, I have committed such an offense; but I beseech you Sir, pardon
it, for I am heartily sorry for it: I never did the like before, nor never will
again. Though he thus repent, shall he escape? No, the rigor of the Law will
execute Justice on him: there is no benefit had by repentance, the law will
seize on him, he should have looked to it before. If thou committest Murder or
Burglary, it is not enough to put one good deed for another; to say, I have done
thus and thus for the King; I kept such a Fort, or I won such a Town: this will
not serve thy turn, it will not save thy neck: the law takes no knowledge of
any good thing done, or of any repentance. This is thy estate. Consider then
what a case they are in, that are shut up under the Law: until a man has
says, it admits no exeuse, requires things far above thy power to perform; it
will accept no repentance: And therefore we may well make this Conclusion in
the Galathians, As many as are under the law, are under the curse, as it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the law to do them, Gal. 3.10.

But now, where are we thus shut up? It Is under sin, as the Apostle ^ells us.
For the Law discovers sin to be sin indeed: that sin by the commandment may
become exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13. The Law makes us see more of it than we
did, or possibly could come to have seen, Romans 3.20. By the Law comes the
knowledge of sin: I had not known sin, but by the law. Yes, peradventure I
might have known Murder, Adultery, etc. to have been sins; but to have known
them to have been exceeding sinful, I could not but by the law. To know what a
kind of plague sin is in it self, so as not to make a game of it, or a small
matter, as many usually make it; to see the ugliness of it, I cannot without
the law. But that we may know what sin is, and that we may see it to be
exceeding sinful, I here bring you a few Considerations, which I would have you
ponder on, and enlarge them to your selves, when you come home.

1. Consider the baseness of him that offends, and the excellency of him that
is offended: You shall never know what sin is without this twofold
Considerations: lay them together, and it will make sin out of measure sinful.
See in David, The drunkards made songs and ballads of him. He aggravates the
indignity offered him, in that he was their King, yet that those wretched and
filthy beasts the drunkards made songs of him. See it likewise in Job, Cap. 29.
when he had declared unto them in what glory he once was, that he was a King
and Prince in the Country. Then see Cap. 20. They that are younger than me have
me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs
of my flock. He aggravates the offense. First from the dignity of the persons
wronged, a King, and a Prince. Then from the baseness and vileness of those,
who derided him, They were such as were younger than he, such as whose fathers
he would have disdained to have set with the dogs of his flocks. A great
indignity, and mightily aggravated by these circumstances, that a King should
be abased by such vile persons. Now some proportion there might be between
David and the drunkards, Job and these men; but between thee and God what
proportion can th^re be? Who art thou therefore that dare set thy self in
opposition and rebellion against God? What a base worm that crawleth on the
earth, dust and ashes, and yet dare thou thy Maker? Do thou (says God)
lift thy self up against him, before whom all the powers of Heaven do tremble?
whom the Angels do adore? Exaltest thou thy self against him who inhabiteth
E^ernity? What, oppose thy self, a base creature, to Almighty God thy Creator?
Consider this, and let the baseness of the delinquent, and the Majesty and
Glory of that God against whom he offends, be the first aggravation of sin, and
thou shall find sin out of measure sinful.

2. Consider the smalness of the Motives, and the littleness of the inducements
that persuade thee so vile a creature, to set thy self against so glorious a
God. If it were great m^tters set thee a work, as the saving of thy life, it
were somewhat: But see how small and little a thing does usually draw thee to
sin. A little profit it may be, or pleasure: It may be neither of these, or not
so much. When thou breathest out oaths, and belchest out fearful blasphemies
against God; when thou rendest and tearest his dreadful and terrible name: what
makes such a base and vile villain as thou thus to fly in Gods face? Is there
any profit or delight in breathing forth blasphemies? Profit thou can take
none, and if thou take pleasure in it, then the Devil is in thee: yea, then
thou art worst than the Devil himself. This is the second Consideration which
may make us to see the vileness of sin, and abhor our selves for it: to wit,
the slenderness of the temptations, and smalness of the motives to it.

3. Add what strong helps and means God has given thee to keep thee from sin.
As, I say, thou should consider the bitterness of the delinquent, the glory
of the offended, the mean motives whch cause so base a creature to do so vile
an act; so also consider the great means God has given thee to keep thee from
sin.

He has given thee his Word, and this will greatly aggravate thy sins, to sin
against his Word, Genesis 3.11. When God convinces Adam, he proceeds thus far with
him: Have thou (says he) eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou
should not eat? What, have thou done it, as if thou would do it on purpose
to cross God? God has given thee an express command to the contrary, and yet
have thou done this? Have thou so often heard the Law, and prayed, Lord have
mercy on me, and incline my heart to keep this law, and yet will thou lie,
swear, commit adultery, and deal falsely, and that contrary to the command of
God, obstinately disobey him?

Now God has not only given this great means of his Word and Commandment, but
great grace too. Where understand that there is not only final grace, but
degrees of grace: else the Apostle would not have said, receive not the grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ in vain. 2 Cor. 6.1. Consider then how much grace thou
have received in vain. How many motions to good have thou rejected? Perhaps thy
heart is touched at this Sermon, though it is not my tongue, nor the tongue of
the most elegant in the world, that can touch the heart, but the Spirit that
comes along with his Word. Now when thou findst with the Word a Spirit to go
with it, it is a grace. If thy conscience be enlightened, and thy duty revealed
to thee, so that it tells thee what thou art, what thou ought to do, and not
to do, it is a grace. Now if for all this, thou blindly runnest through, and
art never the better, but obstinately set thy self against God, and do
many things which others that have not received the same grace would not have
done, know then that thou receivest this grace in vain, and thy case is
lamentable.

4. Consider God's great goodness, which ought to restrain thee from sin upon a
double account.

1. First, his goodness in himself should keep thee from offending him. There Is
nothing but goodness, infinite goodness in him, and can thou find in thy
heart to sin against so good a God? To offend, and wrong a good disposition'd
person, one of a sweet nature and affection, it aggravates the fault, it is pity
to wrong or hurt such a one, as injures no body. Now such a one is God, a good
God, infinite in goodness, rich in mercy, very goodness it self; and therefore
it must needs aggravate the foulness of sin to sin against him: But now he is
not only thus in himself, but

2. Secondly, He Is good to thee, Romans 2. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance? etc. What have thou that thou have not received from
his bountiful hand? Consider of this, and let this be a means to draw thee off
from thy sinfulness. When David had greatly sinned against God, and when God
brings his murder home to him, he pleads thus with him: When thou were nothing
in thine own eyes, I brought thee (says God) to the Kingdom, I took thee from
the sheepfold, and exalted thee, and brought the to a plentiful house, Vid. 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. And may not God say the like to us? and do you thus requite the
Lord, O you foolish people and unwise, Deuteronomy. 32.6. that the more his mercy and
goodness is to you, the higher your sins should be against him.

5. Besides, consider more than all this, we have the examples of good men
before our eyes. God commands us not, what we cannot do: If God had not set
some before our eyes, that walk in his ways, and do his will, then we might say
that these are precepts, that none can perform: But we have patterns, of whom
we may say, such a man I never knew to lie, such a one never to swear, and this
should be a means to preserve us from sinning, Heb. 11.7. Noah was a good man,
and being moved with fear, set not at naught the threatening of God, but built
the Ark, and thereby condemned the world. His example condemned the world, in
that they followed it not, although it were so good, but continued in their
great sins. So, art thou a wicked deboist person? there is no good man but
shall condemn thee by his example. It Is a great crime in the land of
uprightness to do wickedly, Isa. 26.10. to be profane, when the righteous by
their blameless lives may teach thee otherwise.

6. And lastly, add to all the consideration of the multitude and weight of thy
sins. Had thou but sinned once or twice, or in this or that, it were somewhat
tolerable. But thy sins are great and many: They are heavy, and thou
continually encreasest their weight, and addest to their number. Jer. 5.6. A
lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of the evening shall spoil
them, a leopard shall watch over their Cities, and every one that goes out
thence shall be torn in pieces. Why? Because their transgressions are many, and
their backslidings are increased. If thou had committed but two, or three,
or four sins, thou might have hope of pardon; but when thou shall never have
done with thy God, but wilt be still increasing, still multiplying thy sins,
then may thou expect to hear from Gods mouth that dreadful expostulation in
the Prophet, Jer. 5.7. How can I pardon thee? Thus David sets out his own sins
in their weight and number, Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head,
as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me. The continual multiplying of them
adds to their heap both in number and weight.

Thus I have showed you what the Law does in respect of sin, the benefit of
being under the Law, that it makes sin appear in its own colors, and sets it
forth to be, as indeed it is, exceeding sinful. But the Law does not yet leave
sin, nor let it escape thus: But as the Law discovers our sinfulness, and
accursedness by sin, its wretchedness and man's misery by it, till his
blessedness comes, from the hand of his Jesus: so it lays down the miserable
estate which befalls him for it. If he will not spare God with his sins, God
will not spare him with his plagues. Let us consider of this accursedness sin
brings on us: God will not let us go so, but as long as we are under the Law,
we are under the Curse; and till we are in Christ, we can expect nothing, but
that which should come from the hand of a provoked God. Assure thy self, thou
that please thy self in thy abomonations, that God will not take this at
thine hands, that by so base a creature as thou art, so vile a thing as sin is
should be committed against him. But of the woeful effects of sin, which is Gods
wrath, we will speak the next time.

LAM. 5.16. Woe unto us that we have sinned.


I Declared unto you heretofore, what we are to consider in the state of a
natural man, a man that is not new fashioned, new molded, a man that is not
cut off from his own stock, a man that is not ingrafted into Christ, he is the
son of sin, he is the son of death. First I showed you his sinfulness, and now
Secondly I shall show you his accursedness, that which follows necessarily upon
sin unrepented of. I declared before what the nature of sin is: And now I come
to show what the dreadful effects of sin are; I mean the enevitable consequence
that follows upon sin, and that is, woe and misery, Woe unto us, that we have
sinned. A woe is a short word, but there lies much in it.

Doct. Woe and anguish must follow him that continues sinning against God.

And when we hear this from the Ministers of God, it is as if we heard that
Angel, Rev. 8.13. flying through the midst of Heaven, denouncing, Woe, woe, woe
to the Inhabitants of the earth. The Ministers of God are his Angels; and the
same that I now deliver to you, if an Angel should now come from Heaven, he
would deliver no other thing. Therefore consider that it is a voice from
Heaven, that this woe, woe, woe, shall rest upon the heads, upon the bodies and
souls of all them that will not yield unto God, that will not stoop to him,
that will be their own masters, and stand it out against him: woe, woe, woe
unto them all. Woe unto us. It Is the voice of the Church in general, not of one
man; but but woe unto us, that we have sinned.

That I may now declare unto you, what these woes are, note by the way, that I
speak not to any particular man, but to every man in general. It is not for me
to make particular application, do you do that your selves: We are all children
of wrath by nature: in our natural condition we are all alike, we are all of
one kind, and every kind generates its own kind: It Is an hereditary condition,
and till the Son makes us free, we are all subject to this woe. By nature we
are all children of wrath, as well as others. Ephesians. 2.3. Now that I may not
speak of these woes in general, I have showed how two woes are p^st and a third
woe is coming. God proceeds punctually with us. And are not our proceedings in
Judiciary Courts after this manner? The Judge when he pronounces sentence,
does particularize the matter; Thou shall return to the place, from whence thou
came, thou shall have thy bolts knocked off, thou shall be drawn to the place
of execution, thou shall be hanged, thou shall be cut down, and quartered; and
so he goes on. And this is that, which is the witness of Justice. Thus is it
here, the Spirit of God thinks it not enough to say barely, the state of a
sinner is a woeful estate; but the woes are punctually numbered, and this shall
be my practice. Now

1. The first thing that follows after sin is this: After the committing of
sin, there comes such a condition into the soul that it is defiled, polluted,
and becomes abominable. And this is the first woe.

2. The soul being thus defiled and abominable, God loathes it; for God cannot
endure to dwell in a filthy and stinging carrion-soul, he startles as it were,
and seems afraid to come near it, he forsakes it, and cannot endure it. And
that is the second woe: First sin defiles it, then God departs from it, there
must be a divorce.

3. When God is departed from the soul, then the Devil enters in, he presently
comes in, and takes up the room, there will be no emptiness or vacuum. And this
is a fearful woe indeed: for as soon as God is departed from a man, he is left
to the guidance of the Devil, his own flesh, and the World. There will be no
emptiness in the heart: no sooner God departs, but these step in, and take Gods
place.

4. Then in the fourth place, after all this is done, comes sin and cries for
its wages, which is death. The terrible death which comprehends in it all that
beadroll of curses, which are written in the Book of God; and not only those,
but the curses also which are not written, Deuteronomy. 28. which are so many that
they cannot be written. Though the Book of God be a complete Book, and the Law
of God a perfect Law, yet here they come short, and are imperfect: For the
curses not written shall light upon him, which are so many, as pen and ink
cannot set down, nay, the very pen of God cannot express them, so many are the
calamities, and sorrows, that shall light upon the soul of every sinful man.

Now let us take these woes in pieces one after another.

1. The first woe is the polluting and defiling of the soul by sin. A thing (
it may be) that we little think of; but if God once open our eyes, and show us
what a black soul we have within us, and that every sin, every lustful thought,
every covetous act, every sin sets a new spot and stain upon the soul, and
tumbles it into a new puddle of filth, then we shall see it, and not till then;
for our eyes are carnal, and we cannot see this. If once we did but see our
hateful and abominable spots, that every sin tumbles us afresh into the mire:
did we see what a black Devil we have within us, we would hate and abhor our
selves, as Job did. It would be so foul a sight, that it would make us out of
our wits, as it were, to behold it. A man that is but natural, cannot imagine,
what a black Devil there is within him: But though he sees it not, yet he that
has eyes, like as flame of fire, Rev. 1.14. sees our stains, and spots.

Our Savior shows the filthiness of the heart, by that which proceeds out of
the mouth, Mat. 15.18. Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from
the heart. And v. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, etc. Observe. Of
all evils we account evil thoughts the least. This we think strange, what,
thoughts defile a man? what, so light a matter as a thought? Can they make any
impression? Yes, and defile a man too, leaving soch a spot behind them, which
nothing but the hot blood of Christ can wash away. So many evil thoughts, so
many blasphemies, so many filthy things come from the heart, every one being a
new defilement and pollution that a man is made so nasty by it and filthy, that
he cannot believe that it is so bad with him, as indeed it is. the Apostle
having shown the Corinthians their former life, and exhorted them against it, 1
Cor. 6. goes on cap. 7. v. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh, and spirit. Mark then, there is a double filthiness, a filthiness of
the flesh, and a filthinest of the spirit. The filthiness of the flesh, that
every one acknowledges to be filthy carnality, Fornication, and Adultery, etc.
These bestial lusts every one knows to be unclean. But then there is a filth of
the Spirit too, and such are evil thoughts. They are the filth of the Spirit.
Corruption optimi est pessima. The corruption which cleaves to the best thing is
worst. The Soul is the Best thing, the most noble thing; the filthiness, which
cleaves to it therefore must needs be the greatest. Fleshly filthiness, as
Adultery, is filthy; but Contemplative Adultery, to dwell thereon, is worse:
however such a man may be pure from the filth of the flesh, yet if he delight
himself in filthy thoughts, his spirit is abominable in the sight of God: There
is a stain by every one of thy impure thoughts left behind. However an actual
sin be far greater then the sin of a thought, yet if that be but once
committed, and these are frequently in thee; if thou always lie tumbling in the
suds of thy filthy thoughts, thy continuing therein makes thy sin more
abominable, then David's outward act, which he but once committed. So that we
see there is a filthiness of the spirit, as well as the flesh. In James 1.21.
we have a word sets out the filthiness of it, which is ( Superfluity.) Lay
apart (says he) all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness.

First, it is expressed by the name of filthiness, showing there is nothing so
defiles a man as sin.

Then it is called superfluity of naughtiness; But what, is there any
naughtiness to be born with? And what exceeds that, it is superfluity? No,
that is not the meaning of the place. By superfluity, is meant the excrements of
sin. Excrements are the refuse of meat, when the good nourishment is taken away
from it. And it is as if he had said, Lay aside filthy, nasty, or
excrementitious sin. The word was used in the Ceremonies of the Jews, and
thereby we may see what was taught concerning sin, Deuteronomy. 23.12, 13. Thou shall
have a place without the camp whither thou shall go, etc. Though the
comparison be homely, yet it shows the filthiness of the sin, that it is a very
excrement. Thou shall have a paddle, and it shall be that when thou will ease
thy self, thou shall dig therewith, etc. And thou shall cover that which comes
from thee. But what, did God care for these things? No, it was to teach them a
higher matter: As the reason following implies. For the Lord thy God walks in
the midst of the Camp. God would thereby show them, that those things at which
every man stops his nose, are not so filthy to man, as a sin is unto God. So
that you see how the case stands with a sinful man: Sin defiles him, it
pollutes him.

2. And then in the next place, It makes Gods soul to hate and abhor him. It Is
true, some sins there are that every man imagines to be shameful and filthy;
but we see all sin is so to God, it is filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. A man may
hate carnality, fleshly filthiness; peradventure also he may hate covetousness,
but pride and prodigality that he may get (as he thinks) credit by, that he
cannot maintain the reputation of a Gentleman without them. A miserable thing,
that a man should account that a garnish of the soul, which does defile and
pollute it. If a man should take the excrements of a beast to adorn himself,
would not we think him an Ass? Well, when we thus defile our selves by sin, God
cannot endure us, he is forced to turn from us, he abhors us; And that is the
next woe.

2. When thou have made thy self such a Black Soul, such a Dunghill, such a Sty,
then God must be gone, he cannot endure to dwell there: It stands not with his
honor, and with the purity of his nature to dwell in such a polluted heart,
there must now be a divorce: Holiness becomes his House for ever. His delight
is in the Saints, Psalm. 93.5. Psalm. 16.3. Rev. 15.3. He is King of the Saints,
he will not be in a Sty: When thou have thus polluted and defiled thy soul, God
and thou must presently part: God puts thee off, and thou put God off too,
We read in that place before alleged, Ephesians. 2.12. that before they knew Christ,
they were without God in the world, etc. Atheists, (...). And in cap. 4. v. 18.
Having their understanding darkened, and being alienated from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them. The presence of God is the life of our
souls; and we having through sin and ignorance banished God, we become strangers
until the time of our ingrafting into Christ; we are aliens from the life of
God: whereupon comes a mutual kind of abhorring one another. God abhors us, and
we vile and filthy wretches abhor God again. There is enmity betwixt God and
us, and between all that belongs to God, and all that belongs to us. There Is an
enmity betwixt God and us, and observe the expression of it, Levit. 26.15. If
you shall despise my statutes, or if your souls shall abhor my judgments, so
that you will not do my commandments, etc. See here how we begin to abhor God,
and then for judgment on such persons, v. 30. My soul shall abhor you. We are
not behind hand with God in this abhorring, Zach. 11.8. My soul loathed them,
and their soul abhorred me. When we begin to abhor God, Gods soul also abhors
us. When a man has such a polluted soul, he becomes (...), a hater of God, and
hated of him. When thou have such a stinking soul, God must needs loath it as a
most loathsome thing; and so thou art not behind God neither. Thy filthiness
makes God abhor thee, and thou abhorrest him. (...), haters of God is one of
the titles of natural men drenched in sin, Romans 1.30. And this is thy case, by
hating thou art hated of God.

Nor is this all the enmity. There is enmity also betwixt all that belongs to
God, and all that belongs to us. Gods children and the wicked have ever an
enmity betwixt them, such an enmity as will never be reconciled. It Is set down
in Prove. 29.27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is
upright in his way, is an abomination to the wicked. Just as it is between God
and the seed of the Serpent, so it is between both the seeds. A wicked man is
an abomination to the just, and an upright man is an abomination to the wicked.
There is a pale of abomination set between them: so that this is the second
woe. We come now to the third.

3. And the third woe is that which immediately follows, Gods leaving of us.
When we have polluted our selves with sin, and God by reason thereof abhors us,
and turns from us, then are there others ready presently to take up the room;
so soon as God departs, the Devil steps in and becomes thy God. He was thy God
by Creation, this by usurpation: He was thy Father that would have given thee
every good thing; but now thou art Fatherless, or rather worse, thou have the
Devil for thy Father, and better is it to be without one. When the Devil is thy
Father, his works thou must do. When the Spirit of God departed from Saul,
presently the evil Spirit entered into him, 1 Samuel 16.14. If the good Spirit be
gone out, the evil Spirit soon comes in: he comes and takes possession, and is
therefore called The God of this world: And while we are in that state, we walk
after the course of him that works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.
We would account it a terrible thing, for our selves or any of our children to
be possessed of a Devil; but what it is to be possessed of this Devil thou
know not. It Is not half so bad to have a Legion possess thy Body, as to have
but one to possess thy Soul. He becomes thy God and thou must do his work; he
will tyrannize over thee. What a fearful thing therefore is this, that as soon
as God departs from us and forsakes us, and we him, that the Devil should
presently come in his room, and take up the heart? Mark that place in Ephesians. 2.2.
Where in times past ye walked according to the course of the world, according
etc. As Soon as God leaves a man, what a fearful company assail him? They all
concur together, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: These take Gods place.

The world is like the tide, when a man has the tide with him, he has great
advantage of him that rows against the tide.

But here is the Devil too. The world is as a swift current, and besides this
comes the Devil and fills the heart, the Prince of the Power of the Air. While
thou were carried with the world, thou went with the Stream, and had the
tide with thee; but now the Devil being come, thou have both wind and tide; and
how can he choose but run, whom the Devil drives?

But this is not all: There must be something in thine own disposition too,
that it may be completely filled: Though there be wind and tide, yet if the
Ship be a slug, it will not make that have that another light ship will:
Therefore here is the flesh too, and the fulfilling the desires thereof, which
is a quick and nimble vessel, and this makes up the matter. So that if we
consider the wind and tide, and lightness of the Ship, it will appear how the
room is filled: And how woeful must the state of that man be? It is a fearful
thing to be delivered up unto Satan, but not so fearful as to be delivered up
to ones own lusts. But by the way observe this for a ground: God never gives us
up, God never forsakes us till we first forsake him. He is still before hand
with us in doing us good; but in point of hurt we our selves are first, in the
point of forsaking we are always before hand with God. If it should be proposed
to thee, whether thou will forsake God or the Devil, and thou do forsake God
and chusest the Devil, thou deservest that he should take possession of thee.
When a man shall obstinately renew his gross sins, does he not deserve to be
given up? Observe the case in our first Parents. God told the woman one thing,
the Devil persuades her another; she hearkens to the Devil, and believes him
rather than God; and when we shall desire to serve the Devil rather than God,
the God that made us, and that made heaven for us, do we not deserve to be
given up to him? For his Servants we are whom we obey, Romans 6.16. And thus we
see how fearful a thing it is, to be delivered up to our selves and to the
Devil, Psalm. 81.11. First they forsake God: God comes and offers himself unto
them, I will be thy God, thy Father, thou shall want nothing: yet
notwithstanding Israel would not hear, they would have none of me. And then if
thou will have none of me, I will have none of thee says God. Then see what
follows, v. 12. God commits the Prisoner to himself: I gave them up to their
own hearts lusts, etc. And there is no case so desperate as this, when God shall
say, If thou will be thine own Master be thine own Master. Thus to be given up
to a man's self, is worse than to be given up unto Satan: To be given up unto
Satan may be for thy safety; but there is not a mountain of Gods wrath greater,
than to give a man up unto himself. We would fain go over the hedges; but when
God loves us he hedges up our ways, Hos. 2.6. If God love us he will not leave
us to our selves, though we desire it. But when God shall say, go thy ways, if
thou will not be kept in, be thy own Master, this is a most fearful thing: And
this is the third woe. First the soul is polluted with sin; it forsakes God,
and God forsakes it: Then the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, these fill up
the room; and then what follows, when these three rule within? But all kinds of
sin: And so all kinds of punishment, which is the next Woe.

4. And this woe brings in all the curses of Almighty God, an Iliad of evils.
Sin calls for its wages, viz. Death, Death. That Is the payment of all: The
wages of sin is death. And this is the next thing; which I shall open and
explain.

Now in handling hereof, I will first show how death in general must of
necessity follow sin, that thou who have forsaken the fountain of life, art
liable to everlasting death. And for this see some places of Scripture, Romans
6.2, 3. The wages of sin is death. Consider then, first what this wages is.
Wages is a thing which must be paid: If you have an hireling, and your hireling
receive not his wages, you are sure to hear of it, and God will hear of it too,
James 5.4. He which keeps back the wages of the labourer, or the hireling,
their cry will come into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. As long as hirelings
wages are unpaid, Gods ears are filled with their cries, Pay me my wages, pay
me my wages. So sin cries, and it is a dead voice, Pay me my wages, pay me my
wages, the wages of sin is death. And sin never leaves crying, never lets God
alone, never give^ him rest, till this wages be paid. When Cain had slain Abel,
he thought he should never have heard any more on it; but sin has a voice, The
voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. So Genesis 18.20. the
Lord says concerning Sodom, Because the cry of Sodom is great, and their sin
very grievous, therefore I will go down and see, whether they have done
according to the cry that is come up into mine ears. As if the Lord had said,
It Is a loud cry, I can have no rest for it, therefore I will go down and see,
etc. If man had his ears open, he would continually hear sin crying unto God,
Pay me my wages, pay me my wages, kill this sinful soul: And though we do not
hear it, yet so it is. The dead and doleful sound thereof fills Heaven: It
makes God say, I will go down and see, etc. Till sin receive its wages, God
has no rest. Again, see Romans 7.11. Sin taking occasion by the Commandment,
deceived me, and by it slew me. I thought sin not to have been so great a
matter, as it is. We think on a matter of profit or pleasure, and thereupon are
enticed to sin; but here is the mischief, sin deceives us. It is a weight, it
presses down, it deceives men, it is more then they deemed it to be. The
committing of sin, is as it were running thy self upon the point of Gods blade.
Sin at first may flatter thee, but it will deceive thee: It Is like Joabs kiss
to Amasa. Amasa was not aware of the sword that was in Joabs hand, till he
smote it into his ribs that he died. 2 Samuel 2.26. When sin entices thee on by
profits, and pleasures, thou art not aware, that it will slay thee: But thou
sh^lt find it will be bitterness in the end. A sinner that acts a tragedy in
sin, shall have a bloody Catastrophe. Romans 6. What fruit had you then in those
things whereof you are now ashamed? Blood, and death is the end of the Tragedy.
The end of those things is death. The sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. What is
sin? It Is the sting of death: Death would not be death, unless sin were in it.
Sin is more deadly then death it self; It Is sin enableth death to sting;
enableth it to hurt and wound us: So that we may look on sin, as the Barbarians
looked on the viper on Paul's hand, they expected continually when he would have
swollen and burst. Sin bites like a Snake, which is called a fiery Serpent, not
that the Serpent is fiery, but because it puts a man into such a flaming heat,
by their poison: And such is the sting of sin, which carries poison in it, that
had we but eyes to see our ugliness by it, and how it inflames us, we should
continually, every day look, when we should burst with it. The Apostle, James
1.15. uses another metaphor. Sin when it is accomplished brings forth death.
(...), says the Original, sin goes as it were with child, with death. The
word is proper to Women in labor, who are in torment till they are delivered.
Now as if sin were this Woman, he uses it in the faeminine gender. (...). So
it is with sin, sin is in pain, cries out, has no rest till it be delivered of
this dead birth, till it have brought forth death: That is, sin grows great
with child with death, and then it not only deserves death, but it produces
and actually brings forth: This is generally so.

Now consider with your selves, death is a fearful thing. When we come to talk
of death, how does it amaze us? The Priests of Nob are brought before Saul for
relieving David, and he says, Thou shall surely die Ahimelech. And this is
your case, you shall surely die: death is terrible even to a good man. As
appears in Hezekiah, who though he were a good man, yet with how sad a heart
does he entertain the message of death? The news of it affrighted him; it went
to his heart, it made him turn to the wall and weep. How comes it to pass that
we are so careless of death? That we are so full of infidelity, that when the
word of God says, Thou shall die Ahimelech, we are not at all moved by it?
What, can we think these are Fables? Do we think God is not in earnest with us?
And by this means we fall into the temptation of Eve, a questioning, whether
Gods threats are true, or not? That which was the deceit of our first Parents,
is ours. Satan disputes not whether sin be lawful, or not: Whether eating the
fruit were unlawful: Whether Drunkenness, etc. Be lawful; he will not deny, but it
is unlawful. But when God says, If thou do eat, etc. Thou shall die: he
denies it, and says, ye shall not die. He would hide our eyes from the
punishment of sin. Thus we lost our selves at the first, and the Floods of sin
came on in this manner: When we believed not God, when he said, If thou do
eat thou shall surely die: And shall we renew that Capital sin of our Parents,
and think, if we do sin, we shall not die? If any thing in the World will move
God to show us no mercy, it is this when we slight his Judgments, or not
believe them. This adds to the height of all our sins, that when God says, if
thou do live in sin, thou shall die, and yet we will not believe him: That
when she shall come, and threaten us, as he does, D^ut. 29. v. 19. When he
shall curse, and we shall bless our selves in our hearts, and say, we shall
have peace though we go on, etc. v. 20. The Lord will not spare that man, but
the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against him. It is no small
sin, when we will not believe God: This is as being thirsty before, we now add
Drunkenness to our thirst: That is, when God shall thus pronounce curses, he
shall yet bless himself, and say, I hope I shall do well enough for all that.
There are two words to that bargain. Then see what follows, The anger of the
Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, etc. We are but now entered
into the point; but it would make your hearts ache and throb within you, if you
should hear the particulars of it. All that I have done, is to persuade you to
make a right choice, to take heed of Satan's delusions. Why will ye die? Ezekiel.
33.11. Therefore cast away your sins, and make you a new heart and a new
spirit, for why will you die? Ezekiel. 18.31. Where the Golded Candlestick stands,
there Christ walks, there he says I am with you. Where the Word and Sacraments
are, there Christ is, and when the Word shakes thy heart, take that time, now
choose life. Why will you die? Consider of the matter: Moses put before the
people life and death, blessing and cursing: Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19. We put life and
death before you in a better manner: He was a Minister of the letter, we of the
spirit. 2 Cor. 3.6. Now choose life. But if you will not hearken, but will
needs try conclusions with God, therefore because you will choose your own
conclusions, and will not hearken unto God, because you will needs try
conclusions with him, will not obey him when he calls, therefore he will turn
his deaf ear unto you, and when you call and cry, he will not answer, Prove.
1.28. I press this the more, to move you to make a right choice.

But now to turn to the other side, as there is nothing but death for the wages
of sin, and as I have showed you where death is: So give me leave to direct you
to the Fountain of life: There is life in our blessed Savior; if we have but
an hand of faith to touch him, we shall draw virtue from him to raise us up
from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness, 1 John. 5.12. He that has
the Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life. You have heard of a
death that comes by the first Adam, and sin, and to that stock of Original sin
we had from him, we have added a great heap of our own actual sins, and so have
treasured up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2.5. Now here
is a great treasure of happiness on the other side in Christ; have the Son, and
have life. The question is now, whether you will choose Christ, and life, or
sin, and death? Consider now the Minister stands in Gods stead, and beseeches
you in his name, he speaks not of himself, but from Christ. When he draws near
to thee, with Christ's broken body, and his blood shed, and thou receivest
Christ; then, as thy natural life and strength is preserved and increased by
these Elements, so have thou also spiritual life by Christ. If a man be kept
from nourishment a while, we know what death he must die: If we receive not
Christ, we cannot have life, we know that there is life to be had from Christ,
and he that shall by a true, and lively faith receive Christ, shall have life
by him. There is as it were a pair of Indentures drawn up between God and a
man's soul: There is blood shed, and by it pardon of sin, and life conveyed unto
thee on Christ's part. Now if there be faith and repentance on thy part, and
thou accept of Christ, as he is offered, then thou may say, I have the Son,
and as certainly as I have the bread in my hand, I shall have life by him. This
I speak but by the way, that the Sun might not set in a cloud, that I might not
end only in death, but that I might show, that there is a way to recover out of
that death, into which we have all naturally praecipitated our selves, by our
apostasy from God.

ROMANS 6.23. The wages of Sin is death.


THe last day I entered on the Declaration of the cursed effects and consequents
of sin, and in general showed that it is the wrath of God; that where sin is
there wrath must follow. As the Apostle in the Epistle to the Galathians, As
many as are under the works of the Law, are under the curse. Now all that may
be expected from a God highly offended, is comprehended in Scripture by this
term, Death. Wheresoever sin enters, death must follow, Romans 5.12. Death passed
over all men, forasmuch as all had sinned: If we are children of sin, we must
be children of wrath, Ephesians. 1.3. We are then children of wrath even as others.
Now concerning death in general, I showed you the last time that the state of
an unconverted man, is a dead and desperate estate: He is a slave, it would
affright him, if he did but know his own slavery, and what it is that hangs
over his head; that there is but a Span betwixt him and death, he could never
breath any free air, he could never be at any rest, he could never be free from
fear. Heb. 2.15. the Apostle says, that Christ came to deliver them that
through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. This bondage
is a deadly bondage, that when we have done all that we can do, what is the
payment of the service? Death: And the fear of this deadly bondage, if we were
once sensible, if God did open our eyes, and show us as he did Belshazar, our
doom written, did we but see it, it would make our joints loose, and our knees
knock one against another. Every day thou live thou approachest nearer to
this death, to the accomplishment and consummation of it: Death without and
Death within; Death in this World and in the World to come.

Not only death thus in gross and in general, but in particular also.

Now to unfold the particulars of death, and to show you the ingredients of
this bitter Cup, that we may be weary of our estates, that we may be drawn out
of this death, and be made to fly to the Son, that we may be free indeed;
observe: that Death is not here to be understood of a separation of the Soul
from the Body only, but a greater death than that, the death of the Soul and
Body. We have mention made of a first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and
happy is he that has his part in the first Resurrection, for on such the
second death has no power. What is the first resurrection? It is a rising from
sin: And what is the second death? It is everlasting damnation. The first Death
is a Death in sin, and the first Resurrection is a rising from sin.

And so again for all things, the judgments or troubles that appertain to this
death, all a man suffers before. It is not, as fools think, the last blow that
fells the Tree, but every blow helps forward. It Is not the last blow that kills
the man, but every blow that goes before makes way unto it. Every trouble of
mind, every anguish, every sickness; all these are as so many strokes that
shorten our life, and hasten our end, and are as it were so many deaths:
Therefore however it is said by the Apostle, It is appointed for all men once
to dye, yet we see the Apostle to the Corinthians of the great conflicts that
he had, in 2 Cor. 11.23. says, that he was in labors abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons frequent, in deaths often. In deaths often, what is
that? That is, however he could d^e but once; yet these harbingers of death,
these stripes, bonds, imprisonments, sicknesses, etc. all of them were as so
many deaths, all these were comprehended under this curse, and are parts of
death; in as much as he underwent that which was a furtherance to death, he is
said to die. So we read Exodus 10.17. Pharaoh could say, Pray unto your God that
he would forgive my sins this once, and entreat the Lord that he will take away
from me but this death only. Not that the Locusts were death; but are said to
be so because they prepared and made way for a natural death. Therefore the
great judgments of God are usually in Scripture comprised under this name
Death. All things that may be expressions of a wrath of an highly provoked God,
are comprehended under this name: All the judgments of God that come upon us in
this life, or that to come; whether they be spiritual and ghostly, or temporal,
are under the Name of Death.

Now to come to particulars, look particularly on Death, and you shall see
death begun in this world, and seconded by a death following, the separation of
body and soul from God in the world to come.

1. First, in this life he is always a dying man: Man that is born of a woman,
what is he? He is ever spending upon the stock, he is ever wasting like a
Candle, burning still and spending it self as soon as lighted, till it come to
its utter consumption: So he is born to be a dying man, death seizes upon him
as soon as ever it finds sin in him, Genesis 2.1. In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall dye, says God to Adam, though he lived many years after.
How then could this threatening hold true? Yes it did, in regard that presently
he fell into a languishing estate, subject and obnoxious to miseries and
calamities, the hastners of it. If a man be condemned to dye, suppose he be
reprieved, and kept prisoner three or four years after, yet we account him but
a dead man: And if this man's mind shall be taken up with worldly matters,
earthly contentments, purchases or the like, would we not account him a Fool or
a stupid man, seeing he lightly esteems his condemnation, because the same hour
he is not executed? Such is our case, we are while in our natural condition in
this life dead men, ever tending toward the Grave, toward corruption, as the
gourd of Jonah, so soon as ever it begins to sprout forth, there is a worm
within, that bites it and causes it to wither. The day that we are born, there
is within us the seed of corruption, and that wastes us away with a secret and
incurable consumption, that certainly brings death in the end: So that in our
very birth begins our progress unto death, A time, a way we have, but it leads
unto death. There is a way from the Tower to Tyburn, but it is a way to death:
Until thou come to be reconciled unto Christ, every hour tends unto thy
death; there is not a day that thou can truly say thou live in, thou art
ever posting on to death, death in this world, and eternal death in the world
to come.

And as it is thus with us at our coming into the world, so we are to
understand it of that little time we have above ground, our days are full of
sorrow. But mark when I speak of sorrows here, we must not take them for such
afflictions and sorrows as befall Gods children, for theirs are blessings unto
them: Chastisements are tokens of Gods love, For as many as I love, I rebuke
and chasten: (says Christ.) Revel. 3.19. Affliction to them is like the Dove
with an Olive Branch in her mouth, to show that all is well; but take a man
that is under the Law, and then every cross whether it be loss of friends, loss
of goods, diseases on his body, all things, every thing to him is a token of
Gods wrath, not a token of Gods love, as it is to Gods children; but it is as
his impress money, as part of payment of a greater sum, an earnest of the wrath
of God, the first part of the payment thereof.

It Is the Apostles direction, that among the other Armor, we should get our
feet shod, that so we might be able to go through the afflictions we shall meet
withal in this life, Ephesians. 6.15. Let your feet be shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace. What is the shooing of the feet a part of the Armor? Yes:
For in the Roman discipline there were things they called Galltraps, which were
cast in the way before the Army, before the horse and men; they had three
points, so that which way soever they threw them, there was a point upwards.
Now to meet with and prevent this mischief, they had brazen shoes that they
might tread upon these Galltraps and not be hurt: As we read of Goliath, amongst
other Armor he had boots of Brass. To this it seems the Apostle had reference
in this metaphorical speech: The meaning is that as we should get the shield of
faith and sword of the spirit, so we should have our feet shod, that we might
be prepared against all those outward troubles, that we should meet with in the
world, which are all of them as so many stings and pricks; all outward crosses
I say are so: And what is it that makes all these hurt us? what is it that
makes all these as so many deaths unto us but sin? If sin reign in thee and
bear rule, that puts a sting into them. It is sin that arms death against us,
and it is sin that arms all that goes before death against us. Have thou been
crossed in the loss of thy Wife, Children, good friends, etc. why the sting of
all is from sin, sin it is which makes us feel sorrow. What shall we then do?
Why get thy feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Prepare thy
self, get God at peace with thee; and then whatsoever affliction comes,
howsoever it may be a warning piece to another that Gods wrath is coming, yet
to thee it is a messenger of peace. Now these outward troubles are the least
part of a wicked man's p^yment, though all these are a part of his death, so
long as he remains unreconciled, whatsoever comes upon him whereby he suffers
either in himself or in any thing that belongs unto him, they are all tokens of
Gods wrath, and are the beginnings of his death, in the 26th of Levit. and the
28th of Deuteronomy. the particulars of it are set down. But this is that I told you
the last time, how that the law of God is a perfect law, and nothing is to be
added to it, yet the variety of the curses belonging unto a man unreconciled
are so many, that the ample book of God cannot contain them, Deuteronomy. 28.61. All
the curses which are not written, etc. we read v. 27. The Lord shall smite thee
with ^he botch of Egypt, and with hemeroids, and with a scab* and with itch.
See the diversities of plagues, all these are made parts of the curse. The very
itch and scab is a part of the payment of Gods wrath in hell, Lev. 26.26. I
will send a Sword amongst you, which shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant,
the sword that shall destroy you, that when you shall hear of war, of the
coming of the sword, (which the children of God need not fear. all is alike
unto them) it shall be to avenge the quarrel of Gods Covenant. The Book of God
comprehends not all the curses that are to light on the wicked. And therefore
we find in Zachary, a Book, a great Folio Book, every side whereof was full of
curses, Cap. 5.2. He said unto me, what se^st thou? And I said I see a flying
roll, the length thereof is 20 cubits; and the breadth thereof is 10 cubits.
Here Is a big book indeed; but mark what is in it: Sure it is not for naught
that the Holy Ghost sets down the dimensions of it: there is something
questionless in it, the length thereof is 20 cubits, and the breadth 10 cubits:
a huge volume. Nor is it a Book but a Roll, so that the crassitude goes into
the compass, and this is written thick within and without, and is full of
curses against sin. Now for the dimension of it, compare this place with 1
Kings 6.3. and you shall find them the very dimensions of Solomon's Porch: A
great place where the people were wont to come for the hearing of the Word, and
not only in that time, but it was continued to the time of Christ and the
Apostles: For we read how our Savior walk^d in Solomon 's Porch, and the
Apostles were in Solomon's Porch, Acts 5. So large then was this Roll, that it
agreed in length and breadth with Solomon's Porch, and so many curses were
written in it as were able to come in at the Church door. It is as if we should
see a huge book now, coming in at the Church door, that should fill it up. Such
a thing was presented unto him, and it was a Roll full of curses, and all these
curses shall come on those that obey not all the Commandments, all shall come
upon them and overtake them. Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall
thou be in the field, cursed in thy basket and in thy store, cursed when thou
come in, and when thou go forth, Deuteronomy. 28.16. Till a man come to receive
the Promises, till he come to be a son of blessing, till he be in Christ, he is
beset so with curses, that if he lie down to sleep there is a curse on his
pillow; if he put his Money in his cofer, he lays up a curse with it, which as
rust eats it out and cankers it; if he beget a child, he is accursed, there is a
curse against his person, and his goods, and all that belongs unto him, there is
still a curse over his head.

The creditor in this World by the Laws of the Realm may choose, whether he
will have his debtors person seized on, or his goods, and chattels: But not so
here, this writ is executed against his person, and goods, and all that belongs
unto him. So that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God. If this be the condition of a wicked man, that his very blessings be
curses, what a woeful case is it! There Is nothing till he be reconciled to
Christ, but has a curse at the end of it.

Consider that one place in the Prophecy of Malachy, where the very blessings
are accursed: not only when God sends on him the itch, or botch, or scab, or
sword, but in blessings, cap. 2.2. he is accursed. If you will not hear, and if
you will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name, says the Lord, I will
even send a curse upon you. But how? See how this curse is threatened: I will
curse your very blessings, yea I have cursed them already, because you do not
lay it to heart. Mark, is it not a great blessing that God yet affords the
Word, that we yet enjoy it; but if we come to hear but formally, to hear it
only, and lay it not to heart, God curses this blessing, yea I have cursed it
already, says the Lord. When thou prayest in hypocrisy, thy prayer is a curse
to thee. If thou receive the Sacrament unworthily, the cup of blessing is a cup
of poison, a cup of cursing to thee. Stay not therefore one hour longer quietly
in this cursed condition, but fly unto Christ for life and blessing: run to
this City of refuge, for otherwise there is a curse at the end of every outward
thing, that thou enjoyest. I have cursed these blessings already. It is as
sure, as if already passed on thee. What a woeful thing then is it (think you)
to be liable to the curse of God!

2. But what is become of the soul now? Why, if thou did but see the cursed
soul, that thou carriest in thy body, it would amaze thee. These outward
curses, are but flea-bitings to the blow that is given to the soul of an
unregenerate man, that deadness of spirit, that is within: did thou but see
the curse of God that rests upon the soul of this man, even while he is above
ground, it would even astonish thee.

1. Consider there are two kinds of blows that God gives unto the soul of an
unregenerate man. The one is a terrible blow. The other, which is the worst of
the two, is an insensible blow. The sensible blow is when God lets the
conscience out, and makes it fly into the face of a man, when the conscience
shall come, and terribly accuse a man for what he has done. This blow is not
so usual as the insensible blow; but this insensible is far more heavy. But as
it falls out, that as in this World, sometimes before the glory in Heaeen, the
Saints of God have here a glimpse of Heaven, and certain communion with God and
Christ, certain love tokens, a white stone, a new name engraven, which no man
knows, but he that receives it: And this is the testimony of a good
conscience, which is hidden joys: Privy intercourse is between Christ and
them, secret kisses: And as Gods Children do, as it were, meet with a Heaven
upon Earth sometimes, and are, as we read of Paul, caught up into the third
Heaven, which to them is more then all the things in the World besides: So the
wicked have sometimes flashes of Hell in their consciences. If you had but seen
men in the case that I have seen them in, you would say they had an Hell within
them; they would desire rather, and they have expressed it, to be torn in
pieces by wild horses, so they might be freed from the horrors in their
consciences. When the conscience recoyls and beats back upon it self, as a
musket over charged, it turns a man over and over: And this is a terrible
thing. This sometimes God gives men in this World: And mark, where the word is
most powerfully preached, there is this froth most raised, which is the cause
many desire not to come where the word is taught, because it galls their
consciences, and desire the Mass rather, because they say, the Mass bites not:
They desire a dead Minister, that would not rub up their consciences, they
would not be tormented before the time: They would so, but it shall not be at
their choice, God will make them feel here the fire of Hell, which they must
endure for ever hereafter. This is the sensible Blow, when God lets loose the
conscience of a wicked man; and he needs no other fire, no other worm to
torment, nothing else to plague him: he has a weapon within him, his own
conscience, which if God lets loose, it will be Hell enough.

But now besides this blow which is not so frequent, there is another more
common and more insensible blow. God says, he is a dead man, and a flave to
sin and Satan, and he thinks himself the freest man in the World. God curses
and strikes, and he feels it not. This is an insensible blow, and like unto a
dead palsy: Thou art dead, and yet walk about, and art merry, though every
one that has his eyes open sees death in thy face. O this deadness, this
senselesness of heart is the heaviest thing that can befall a sinner in this
life. It is the cause the Apostle speaks of in the Rom: when God delivers up a
man (...), to a reprobate mind: And so in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 4.19.
declares such a man to be past feeling: Who being past feeling, have given
themselves over to lasciviousness to work all uncleanness even with greediness.
Although every sin, (as I told you before) is as it were the running a man's
self on the point of Gods sword, yet these men being past feeling, run on, on,
on, to commit sin with greediness, till they come to the very pit of
destruction, they run amain to their confusion. When this insensibleness is
come upon them, it is not Gods goodness that can work upon them. Who art thou
that despisest the riches of Gods goodness, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee unto repentance. Romans 2.4. It is not Gods judgments that will
move them, they leave no impression, as Rev. 9.20. And the rest of the men
which were not killed by these plagues* yet repented not of the works of their
hands, that they should not worship Devils, etc. brass, nor stone and wood,
which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. They repented not though they were
spared, but worshipped Gods which cannot see, nor hear, nor speak, so brutish
were they to be led away by stocks and stones? I think the Papist Gods cannot
do it unless it be by couzenage, yet such is their senselesness, that though
Gods fury be revealed from Heaven against Papists, such as worship false Gods;
yet are they so brutish that they will worship things which can neither hear,
nor see, nor walk. They that made them are like unto them, and so are all they
that worship them, as brutish as the stocks themselves: They have no heart to
God, but will follow after their puppets and their Idols, and such are they
also that follow after their drunkenness, covetousness, etc Who live in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.2. that run into all kind of
excess; and marvel that you do not so too. They marvel (that ye that fear God)
can live as ye do; and speak evil of you that be good; call such Hypocrites,
Dissemblers, and I know not what nicknames. This, I say, is a most woeful
condition; it is that dead blow. When men are not sensible of Mercies, of
Judgments, but run into all excess of sin with greediness: And this is a death
begun in this life, even while they are above ground.

But then comes another death, God does not intend sin shall grow to an
infinite weight, His Spirit shall not always strive with man, but at length
God comes and crops him off, and now comes the consummation of the death begun
in this life: Now comes an accursed death.

3. After thou have lived an accursed life, then comes an accomplishment of
curses.

First, a cursed separation between body and soul, and then of both from God
for ever, and this is the last payment, This is that great death which the
Apostle speaks of, Who delivered us from that great death. 2 Cor. 1.10. So
terrible is that death. This death is but the severing of the body from the
Soul: This is but the Lords Harbinger, the Lords Sergeant to lay his Mace on
thee, to bring thee out of this World into a place of everlasting misery, from
whence thou shall never come, till all be satisfied, and this is never.

First, Consider the nature of this death, which though every man knows, yet
few lay to heart. This death, what does it?

First, it takes the things which thou spentst thy whole life in getting. It
robs thee of all the things thou ever had: Thou have taken pains to heap and
treasure up goods for many yeors, presently when this blow is given, all is
gone: For honor, and preferment, it takes thee from that; pleasure in idle
company-keeping, it bars thee of that. Mark, this is the first thing that death
does, it takes not only away a part of that thou have, but all, it leaves thee
quite naked, as naked, as when thou came into the World: Thou thoughtst it
was thy happiness to get this and that. Death now begins to unbewitch thee,
thou wast bewitched before, when thou did run after all wordly things: Thou
wast deceived before, and now it undeceives thee; it makes thee see what a
notorious fool thou wast, it unbefools thee. Thou had many plots, and many
projects, but when thy breath is gone, then without any delay in that very day
says the Psalmist, all thy thoughts perish, Psalm. 146.4. all thy plottings,
and projections go away with thy breath: A strange thing, to see a man with
Job, the richest man in the East, and yet in the evening (we say) as poor as
Job: He has nothing left him now. Now though death takes not all things from
thee, yet it takes thee from them all; and so in effect them also from thee;
though they remain in thy house, and grounds, yet they are as far removed from
thee, is ahou from them. All thy goods, all thy books, all thy wealth, all thy
friends thou may now bid farewell: now adieu for ever, never to see them
again. And that is the first thing.

2. Now death rests not there, but comes to seize upon thy body. It has
bereaved thee of all that thou possessedst of all thy outward things, they are
taken away: Now it comes to touch the wicked man's person, and see what then. It
touches him, it rents his soul from his body: those two loving companions that
have so long dwelt together, are now separated. It takes thy soul from thy
body: This man does not deliver up his spirit, as we read of our Savior,
Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit, or deliver their spirits as Stephen
did: But here it is taken from them; it is much against his mind, it is a pulling
of himself from himself. This it does.

3. But then again, when thou art thus pulled asunder, what becomes of the
parts separated?

1. First, The body as soon as the soul is taken from it, hastens to
corruption, that must see corruption; yea it becomes so full of corruption,
that thy dearest friend cannot then endure to come near unto thee. When the
soul is taken from the body, it is observed that of all carcasses that are, man's
is the most loathsome, none so odious as that. Abraham loved Sarah well, but
when he comes to buy a monument for her, see his expression, Genesis 23.8. He
communes with the men and says, if it be your mind to sell me the field, that
I might bury my dead out of my sight. Though he loved her very well before, yet
now she must be buried out of his sight. It is sown in dishonor, and it is the
basest thing that can be: Therefore when our Savior was going near to the
place where Lazarus lay, his Sister says, Lord by this time he stinketh, Joh.
11.39. I have said to corruption thou art my Father (says Job) and to the worm
thou art my Mother and my Sister: Job. 17.14. As in the verse before, The grave
is my house, I have made my bed in the darkness. Here then he has a new
kindred, and though before he had affinity with the greatest, yet here he gets
new affinity: He says to corruption thou art my Father, and to the worm thou
art my Mother and my Sister. The worm is our best kindred here; the worm then
is our best bed; yea worms thy best covering, as Esaias. 14.11. Thus is it thy
Father, thy Mother, and thy Bed: nay, it is thy consumption and destroyer also,
Job. 26. Thus is it with thy body, it passes to corruption, that thy best or
dearest friend cannot behold it or endure it.

2. But alas! what becomes of thy soul then? Thy soul appears naked, there is no
garment to defend it, no Proctor appears to plead for it: It is brought singly
to the bar, and there it must answer. It is appointed for all men once to dye,
but what then? And after that to come to judgm^nt, Heb. 9.27. Eccles. 12.7. The
body returns unto the earth from whence it was taken, but the Spirit to God who
gave it. All men's spirits as soon as their bodies and souls are parted, go to
God to be disposed of by him where they shall keep their everlasting residence.
Consider when thou hear the Bell rung out for a dead man, if thou had but
the wings of a Dove to fly, and could fly after him, and appear with him
before Gods Tribunal, to see the account that he must give unto God for all
things done in the flesh: and when no account can be given, what a state of
misery and horror would thou see him in! and this is a silent kind of
judging: The last day of judging shall be with great pomp and solemnity. This
is a matter closely carried between God and thy self; but then thou must give
an account of all that thou have received, and then when thou can not give a
good account; then is thy talent taken from thee. Why, says God, I gave thee
learning, how did thou use it? I gave thee other gifts of mind, how did
thou employ them? God has given thee wisdom and wealth, Moral virtues,
meekness, and patience, etc. These are good things, but mark whatsoever good
things thou had in this world, is now taken from thee. If a man could but see
the degrading of the Soul, he should see that those moral virtues in which his
hope of comfort lay, even these, though they could never bring him to heaven,
yet they shall be taken from him. As when a Knight is degraded; first his sword
is taken from him, then comes one with a hatchet and chops off his golden
Spurs, and then go Sir Knave. This is the degrading of the soul before the
judgment is received: the moral virtues are taken from him and then see what an
ugly soul he has, he had hope before, now he is without hope: he had some
patience in this world, but he made no good use of it; and now his patience is
taken from him: And when thou shall come to a place of torment, and thy hope
and patience be taken from thee, what case will thou be in then? Patience may
stay a man up in trouble, and hope may comfort a man up in torment, but both
these are taken away. This is a thing we very seldom think; but did we
seriously consider of this first Act of the Judgment before the Sentence, we
would not be idle in this world.

3. Then Lastly, he is put into an unchangeable estate: So soon as ever death
lays Gods Mace upon him, he is put into an estate of unchangeableness. Such is
the terribleness of it, that now, though he yell and groan and pour out Rivers
of Tears, there is no hope of change.

Consider now what a woeful case this is, if some friend of this man's should now
come to him, would he not tell him we have often been very merry together, but
did thou know the misery that I am in, thou would be troubled for me: Half
those tears that I now pour forth would have put me into another place, had I
taken the season, but now it is too late. Oh! therefore do thou make use of
tears, a little may do it now, hereafter it will be too late.

That Is the thing we should now come to speak of, the Second death: But think
not that I am able to speak of it now: No, that which is everlasting deserves
an hour at least in speaking, and an Age in thinking of it. Therefore that
everlasting torment, horror, and anguish, which God has reserved for those
that make not their peace with him (which is easily done God knows) I shall
speak of the next time.

REV. 21.8. But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars,
shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.


THe last day I entered, you know, upon the miserable estate of an unreconciled
sinner, at the time of his dissolution, when his soul shall be taken from him,
and be presented naked before Christ's Tribunal, there to receive according to
the works which he has done in the flesh: And I showed that the wofulness of
that estate consisted in two acts done upon him: The one before he comes to his
place, before he is thrust away from Gods presence into hell fire; which I
showed you the last day, and did then promise to show you the other: To wit,
the wofulness of his estate, being once come into his place. The act done to
the sinners soul before he is sent to hell, is the deprivation of his light,
the taking away of his talent. For whilst a man is in this world, he has many
good things in him, too good to accompany him to Hell: Now all these excellent
gifts and natural endowments which did adorn a wicked man's soul, before the
soul is hurled into hell, must be taken away from him. There is a kind of
degradation of the soul, it is depriested as it were, and becomes like a
degraded Knight rhat has his honor taken from him. All the rich talents, and
all the rich prizes that were put into the fools hand, shall be taken from him.
Is there any moral virtue? Are there any common graces and natural endowments
in the miserable soul? it shall be stripped of all and packt to Hell. You that
have abused your learning and gifts that God haah given you, do you think that
they shall go with you to Hell? No such matter, you shall be very Sots and
Dunces there. All your learning shall be taken from you, and you shall go to
Hell arrant Block-heads. He that had sortitude in this World, shall not carry
one dram of it to Hell: All his courage shall then be abased, and his
cowardly heart shall saint for fear. Fortitude is a great advantage to a man in
distress, but let not the damned soul expect the least advantage: His fortitude
which he h^d whilst h^ was in the way shall be taken from him. It may be he had
patience in this World: Now patience is a virtue unfit for Hell, therefore
shall that be taken from him. A man if he were in most exquisite torment, yet
if he had patience it would bear it up with head and shoulders (as we say) but
this shall add to his torments, that he shall not have any patience left him,
to allay it. A man has perhaps hope in this World, and as the Proverb is, were
it not for hope the heart would burst; yet even this too shall be taken away
from him, he shall have no hope left him of ever seeing Gods face again, or of
ever having any more tastes of his favor: And so what has been said of some,
may be said of all his graces and endowments: He shall clean be stripped of all
ere he be sent to Hell.

I come now to speak of the place of torment it self, wherein the sinner is to
be cast eternally, which is the second act. But think not that I am able to
discover the thousandth part of it, no nor any man else: God grant that no soul
here present ever come to find by experience what it is. What a woeful thing is
it; that many men should take more pains to come to this place of torment, then
would cost them to go to h^aven, that men should wilfully run themselves upon
the pikes, not considering how painful it is, nor how sharp those pikes are:
And this I shall endeavor to my power to set forth unto you. This Text
declares unto us two things.

1. Who they are for whom this place is provided. 2. The place it self, and the
nature of it.
1. For whom the place is provided. The Text contains a Catalogue of that black
Roll (though there are many more then are expressed) but here are the grand
crimes, the ring leaders to destruction, the mother sins And here we have in
the first place the Fearful: whereby is not meant those that are of a timorous
nature (for fear simply is not a sin) those that are simply fearful; but such
as place their fear on a wrong object, not where it should be: That fear not
God, but other things more then God. Such as if affliction and iniquity were
put to their choice, will rather choose iniquity then affliction: Rather then
they will have any cross betide them, rather then they will incur the
indignation of a man, rather then they will part with their life and goods for
God's cause, will adventure on any thing, choosing iniquity rather then
affliction; Job. 36.21. being afraid of what they should not fear, never
hearing the great and mighty God: This is the fearful here meant. See how Elihu
in Job expresses it. Job. 36.21. This have thou chosen. This (that is) iniquity
rather then affliction, to sin rather then to suffer. Christ bids us not
fear poor vain man, but the omnipotent God, that is able both to kill, and to
cast into Hell. The man that fears his Landlord, who is able to turn him out
of his house, and does not fear God, who is able to turn him into Hell, this
dastardly spirit is one of the Captains of those that go to hell, those
timorous and cowardly persons, that tremble at the wrath or frowns of men, more
then of God. But what is the reason men should thus stand more in fear of men,
then of God? Why, it is because they are sensible of what men can do unto their
bodies, but they cannot with Moses by faith see what that is that is invisible.
They are full of unbelief; for had they faith, they would banish all false
fears. See what the Lord says, Esa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, I will
help thee, says the Lord. He says not, Fear not ye men, or thou man, for then
perhaps thou might be thought to have some power to resist, but fear not
thou worm. A worm (you know) is a poor weak thing, apt to be crushed by every
foot; yet be this thy case, be thou a worm, unable to resist the le^st
opposition, yet fear not thou worm. Fear not, why? For I will help thee says
the Lord. Could thou but believe in God, this would make thee bold; and had
thou faith thou would not fear. When word was brought to the house of Jacob,
that two Kings were come up into the Land to invade it, Esaias. 7.2. it is said,
his heart was moved, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. But what
is the remedy of this fear? See Esaias. 8.12. Fear not their fear, nor be afraid
(that was a false and a base fear) sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and let
hin be your dread. Esaias. 51.12. there is an object of our faith and comfort,
and a remedy against fear proposed: I, even I, am he that comfort thee, who
art thou that should be afraid of a man that shall dye, and the son of man
that is as grass? What, art thou one that have God on thy side? how unworthy
art thou of that high favor, if thou fear man? The greatest man that lives
cannot shield himself from death; and from a covering of worms, and will thou
be afraid of a man, and forget the Lord thy Maker? The more thou art taken up
with the fear of man, the less thou fear God; and the more thou remembrest
man, the more thou forgettest thy Maker.

You have seen the Main, the Ringleaders, which are these fearful, faithless,
dastardly, unbelieving men.

Now see what the filthy rabble is that follows after, and they are
Abominable, Murderers, etc. Abominable, that is, unnatural, such as pollute
themselves with things not fit to be named, but to be abhorred whether it be by
themselves or with others. They are the abominable here meant, such as Sodom
and Gomorrah, who were set forth to such as an example, suffering the vengeance
of eternal fire, Jude v. 7. (...), such are abominable, being given up to
unnatural lust. Let them carry it never so secretly, yet are they here ranked
amongst the rest, and shall have their portion in the burning Lake.

After these come Sorcerers, Idolaters, Liars: Though these may be spoken
fairly of by men, yet cannot that shelter them from the wrath of God, they
shall likewise have their part in that lake, when they come to a reckoning. If
there be, I say, a generation of people that worship these, say what you will
of them, when they come to receive their wages, they shall receive their
portion in that burning lake with hypocrites: Those that make so fair a show
before men, and yet nourish hypocrisy in their hearts, these men, though in
regard of the outward man, they so behave themselves that none can say to them,
black is their eye, though they cannot be charged with those notorious things
before mentioned; yet if there be nothing but hypocrisy in their hearts, let
it be spun with never so fair a web, never so fine a thread, yet they shall
have their portion in the lake, they shall have their part, their portion, etc.
Then it seems these of this black guard have a peculiar interest unto this
place. And as it is said of Judas, Acts 1.25. that he was gone (...), to his
proper place. So long as a man that is an enemy to Christ, and yields him not
obedience is out of Hell, so long is he out of his place. Hell is the place
assigned to him, and prepared for him; he has a share there, and his part and
portion he must have, till he is come thither he is but a wanderer. The
Evangelist tells us, Mat. 23.15. that the Scribes and Pharisees went about to
gain Proselytes, and when they had all done, they made them seven times more
the children of hell than themselves, filios Gehennae: So that a Father has
not more right in his Son, than Hell has in them: He is a vessel of wrath
filled top full of iniquity, and a child of the Devils: So that as we say, the
Gallows will claim its right, so hell will claim its due. But mistake me not,
all this that I speak concerning hell, is not to terrify and affright men, but
by forewarning them to keep them thence. For after I have shown you the danger,
I shall show a way to escape it, and how the Lord Jesus was given to us to
deliver us from this danger: But if you will not hear, but will try conclusions
with God, then you must to your proper place, to the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone.

A Lake, it is a River, a flaming River, as Tophet is described to be a lake
burning with fire and brimstone, a Metaphor taken from the judgment of God on
Sodom and Gomorrah, as in that place of St. Jude before mentioned, as also in 2
Pet. 2.6. where it is said God turned the Cities of Sodom into ashes, making
them an example to all them that should after live ungodly. Mark the judgment
of God upon these abominable men, the place where they dwelt is destroyed with
fire, and the situation is turned into a lake, full of filthy bituminous stuff
called Lacus Asphaltites, which was made by their burnings. And this is made an
instance of the vengeance of God, and an Emblem of eternal fire; therefore,
said he, you shall have your portion with Sodom. Nay, shall I speak a greater
word (with Christ) and tell you, that though they were so abominable, that the
lake was denominated from them, yet it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah
than for you, if you repent not while you may, but go on to despise Gods grace.
But can there be a greater sin than the sin of Sodom? I answer yes. For make
the worst of the sin of Sodom, it is but a sin against nature; but thy
impenitency is a sin against grace, and against the Gospel, and therefore
deserves a hotter hell, and an higher measure of judgment in this burning pit.

But what is this second death?

2. Sure it has reference to some first death or other going before. A man
would (as it is commonly thought) think that this second death, is opposed to
that first death, which is the harbinger to the second, and separates the soul
from the body, but it is far otherwise. That, alas, is but a petty thing, and
deserves not to be put in the number of deaths. The second death in the Text
has relation to the first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that
has his portion in the first Resurrection, on such the second death shall have
no power. The first death is that from whence we are acquitted by the first
Resurrection, and that is the death; for that is a kind of death (as St. Paul
speaking of a wicked and voluptuous Widow, says, she is dead while she lives)
and the time shall come and now is, when they that are dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: And again, Let the dead
bury their dead. So that the first Resurrection is, when a man hearing the
voice of the Minister, is rouzed up from the sleep of sin and carnal security,
and the first death is the opposite thereunto: So that the death of the body is
no death at all, for if it were, then this were the third death: For there
would be a death of sin, a death of the body, and a death of body and soul:
This death of the body is but a flea-biting in comparison of the other two.
This second death is the separation of the body and soul from God, and this
death is the wages of sin, and God must not, will not lie in arrear to sin, but
will pay its wages to the full. All the afflictions a wicked man meets withal
here, are but as Gods press-money, and part of payment of that greater sum: But
when he dies, the whole sum comes to be paid: Before he did but sip of the Cup
of Gods wrath, but he must then drink up the dregs of it down to the bottom,
and this is the second death, it is called death. Now death is a destruction of
the parts compounded, a man being compounded of body and soul, both are by this
death eternally destroyed. That death (like Sampson pulling down the pillars
whereby it was sustained, pulled down the house) draws down the Tabernacles of
our bodies, pulls Body and Soul in sunder. A thing which has little hurt in it
self, were it not for the sting of it which makes it fearful: To dye is
esteemed far worse than to be dead, in regard of the pangs that are in dying,
to which death puts an end. This temporal death is in an instant, but this
other eternal, whereby we are ever dying, and never dead, for by it we are
punished with an everlasting (...), 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. and that from the presence of
the Lord by the glory of his power. Then which piece I have no need to add
more; for, as much as can be said of men and Angels is fully comprehended in
it. The Apostle terms this a fearful thing indeed, Heb. 2.15. whereon if a man
but think (if he has his wits about him) he would for fear of it be all his
life long subject to bondage. He would scarce draw any free breath, but would
still be in bondage and drudgery, till he were delivered. Thus I have declared
the nature of the place, and of this second death.

That I may now go farther, know that this Lake and this place is the place
that the Lord has provided for his enemies: It is the Lords slaughterhouse;
its called a place of torments, Luke 16. verse. 24, 28. a place wherein God will
show the accomplishment of his wrath, and revenge upon his enemies, Those mine
enemies that would not have me to reign over them, bring them forth, and slay
them before my face. Luke 19.27. Those vessels of wrath, those Rebels; the King
is enraged, and his wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, which makes all the
beasts of the Forest to tremble, Prove. 19.12. And where there is the wrath of
such a King, the issue thereof must needs be death, Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a
King is as a messenger of death. How much more fearful is the wrath of the King
of Kings. God has sharp arrows, and he sets a wicked man as his Butt to shoot
at, to show his strength, and the fierceness of his wrath. See the expression
of Job in this case, The arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me, and the
venom thereof has drunk up my spirits: In so few words there could not be an
higher expression of the wrath of God. First, that God should make thee a Butt,
and that thou should be shot at, and that by Gods arrows: And then they are
not shot by a child, but ( as the man is, so is his strength) by the Almighty,
by his bow, wherein he draws the arrow to the head. And then again these arrows
are poisoned arrows, and such poison as shall drink up all thy soul and spirit:
Oh, what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of such a God: It Is a
saying of Moses, Psalm. 90.11. (for it is Moses Psalm.) Who knows the power of
thine anger? The power of Gods anger is unknown. And so in his Song, Deuteronomy.
32.22. he sets it out in some measure. A fire is kindled in mine anger, which
shall burn unto the lowest Hell, etc. Mat. 25.41. So that the King, being thus
provoked, is provoked to curse thee, Mat. 29. It Is put into the form of thy
sentence: this cursing shall be thy lot in hell, it shall be thy very sentence,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. There is nothing but cursing: As Job cursed
himself, and the day of his birth, so then shall cursing be all thy song: thou will curse thy self, that thou did not hearken to the Preacher, that thou
would not accept of Christ, and the means of mercy and grace, when it was
offered thee: And thou will curse the time thou were acquainted with this man,
and that man, and others will curse thee for drawing them to sin: God curses
thee, and man curses thee; and God curses not in vain, when he curses: Others
will curse thee, and thou, thy self and others; and think then how cursed will
be thy condition? All the curses, that cannot be thought on, shall rest on the
head of an impenitent sinner, to show Gods terrible and just indignation
against him. O beloved to deliver us from this curse, Christ the Son of God was
made a curse for us: the curse is so great, naught else can free us from it.
But now that I may rank these punishments of the damned, and bring them for
memories sake into some order (although there be no order there, for it is a
place of confusion Job. 11.22.) you may consider that the penalties of Gods
enemies are penalties partly of loss, and partly of sense.

1. Of loss. And that consists in the deprivation of every thing that might
administer the least comfort to him; and for this cause Hell is termed utter
darkness. Now darkness is a privation of all light, so is Hell of all comfort,
to show that there is not the least thing that may give thee content, nor is
the poorest thing thou can desire to be had there. Darkness was one of the
plagues of Egypt, though there were no kind of sense in it, yet we may think
what a plague and vexation it was to them, to sit so long in d^rkness. The
darkness of Hell is darker then darkness it self. They shall never see light,
Psalm. 49.19. says the Scripture, they shall not have so much as a glimpse of
it: To be cast into this utter darkness, where shall be nothing to administer
the least comfort, what an infinite misery will that be? Were it only the loss
of the things we now possess, and enjoy, of all which death robs us, as pomp,
honor, riches, and preferment, this were grievous to a wick^d man: These are
things death dispossesses a man of, these cannot follow him, naught but thy
works accompany thee: Thy friends may follow thee to the grave, but there they
shall leave thee. To have been happy, and to be miserable, is the greatest woe,
to have lived in good fashion, and to be wretched, is the greatest grief. How
will this add to the sinners misery, when he shall say to himself, I had once
all good things about me, but have now for my portion nothing but woe: I had a
bed of down, but it is now exchanged for a bed of fire: I was once honorable,
but now I am full of shame and contempt; this will greatly add to his misery.
But all this is nothing, these are but the beginnings of his sorrow in regard
of loss: for a man to be rich and wealthy to day, and to morrow to be stripped of
all, and left not worth a groat, to have all swept away, this is a woeful case.

2. But if this be so grievous, what is it to lose Heaven? Certainly, to lose
the high^st and greatest good, is the greatest evil, and punishment, that can
be inflicted upon a creature. Which makes many Divines think, that the
penalties of loss are far greater then those of sense, though they seem not to
make that impr^ssion. It Is another thing to judge of things by sense, then by
loss: As for example, a man is greatly troubled with the toothach, and he
thinks his case more miserable then any, and thinks no man ever endured so much
misery as himself, he judges of his misery by sense: Another man is in the
consumption, and he has little or no pain at all; yet if a man come with a
right judgment, he will judge his condition far worse, then the others. So take
all the pains in Hell, though sense may say they are the greatest that can be,
yet discreet judgment can say, that the loss of God the greatest good, is the
worst of evils. Now (if thou be a firebrand of Hell) thou must be for ever
banished from Gods presence Thou base wretch, do thou think Heaven a place
for thee? Not so. It Is. without are dogs and sorcerers, etc. Revel. 22.15. Thou
art a damned dog, therefore thou must out from God, and from the company of the
blessed Saints and Angels. When Peter saw Moses and Elias with Christ in his
Transfiguration, though he had but a glimpse of glory, yet he says, It is good
for us to be here: Mat. 17.14. But oh how infinite good will it be, to be in
Heaven? How shall we be then rapt up with glory, when we shall be for ever with
the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.11. On the contrary, how
exceeding terrible will it be to be shut out from the presence of God? When God
shall say, avaunt hence, whip out this dog, what does he here? Let him not
defile this room, this is no place for such a filthy dog. Oh the unspeakable
horror and dread! Oh the infinite shame of that man, who is in such a case!
But this is not all.

There is yet one thing more, the wicked shall not only be banished from Gods
gracious presence, and cast into Hell, but this shall be done in the sight of
Heaven. The glorious Saints of God have continually a sight of Gods justice
upon sinners, that they may glorify his mercy the more. The Scripture runs
much to this purpose, Rev. 14.10. If any man worship the beast and his image,
the same shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of God and
of his holy Angels. This in the 9th verse is the portion of them that worship
the beast, that is, the Pope, and receive the mark of his name. That is, if any
will be an express public or private Papist, if any one will be a slave to the
Pope, see his portion; he shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and be
banished from the society of holy Angels, and be tormented with hell fire in
their presence. Oh what a vexation will this be to the damned, when they shall
see others in heaven, and themselves shut out of door? This will cause weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth. It will go to their very heart, when they
shall see Moses and Aaron, and the Prophets, and holy Saints in joy and glory,
and shall consider and remember, that if they had made use of those means and
opportunities of grace, they might have lived in heaven too, whereas now they
must be everlastingly tormented in that lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, and that without any hope of recovery, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of
his power. You know that by the Law of Moses, whenever an offender was to
receive his strokes, Deuteronomy. 25.2, 3. The Judge was to cause him to lie down, and
to be beaten before his face, and he himself was to see it done. So when God
comes to give the damned their strokes in hell (for hell is the place of
execution, wherein he that knows his masters will and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes) he himself will see them beaten in the presence of
all his holy Angels, and if so, how shameful will their punishment be? when
there shall be so many thousand witnesses of it, when they shall be made (as we
say) the worlds wonder. These are they that shall rise to everlasting contempt,
Dan. 12.2. So in Esaias ult. Cap. v. ult. it is said of the damned, their worm
shall not dye, nor their fire be quenched, but they shall be an abhorring to
all flesh, and the holy Angels and Saints shall go forth and look upon them:
those proud ones that scorned Gods people here, shall then be abhorred and
scorned of them.

4. Add to all this, that he is not only banished from the presence of God for a
while, but from all hope of ever seeing God again with comfort. Thy estate is
endless and remediless. Whilst thou art here in this life, of a Saul thou may
become a Paul, and though thou art not yet a beloved Son, yet thou may come
in favor: Whilst thou live under the means of grace, there is yet hope of
recovery left thee, it may be this Sermon may be the means of thy conversion:
But then amongst all thy punishments, this will be one of the greatest, that
thou shall be deprived of all means of recovery, and this shall be another hell
to thee in the midst of hell, to think with thy self I have heard so many
Sermons and yet have neglected them, I had so many opportunities of grace, and
yet have slighted them, this will make the sinner rage, and bite his tongue,
and tear himself, to think how that now all means are past. And this is the
first penalty, the penalty of loss.

That of the sense succeeds. By the former we are deprived of all the joys and
comforts of heaven and earth, of Mount Sion, shut out of the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, deprived of an innumerable company of Saints, of
the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, of God himself the judge of
all, and the souls of the Saints made perfect. This shall make a sinner curse
himself.

Now follows the penalty of torments and sense. When Adam was banished out of
Paradise, he had the wid^ world to walk in still, but it is not so here: Thou
art not only cast out of heaven, but cast into hell, and art deprived of thy
liberty for ever: 1 Pet. 3.19. It Is said Christ preached to the Spirits in
prison, them that in the days of Noah were disobedient, and for this cause are
now in prison. Hell is compared to a prison, and a prison indeed it is, and
that an odious one. For,

1. Look on thy companions. If a man were to be kept close prisoner, it were a
great punishment, but go ye cursed, says God, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. To be among such comp^nions is most infinitely
miserable, there is nothing but Devils and damned howling Ghosts, woeful
companions: If there be an house poss^ssed wi^h an evil Spirit, a man will
scarce be hired to live in it, but here the d^mned spirits, the filthy and
cursed host must be thy yoke-fellows: Suppose there were no torment to suffer,
yet to be banished from Heaven, and to be tied and yoked to wicked spirits,
were a torment sufficient to make the stoutest that ever was tremble and quake,
and be soon weary of it.

2. But it is a place of torment too, a prison where there is a rack; to which
thou must be put, and on which thou must be tormented: I am tormented in this
flame, says Dives. Luke 16.24. To speak of the torments there, will be matter
enough for another hour, but I delight not to dwell on so sad a subject: only
this is that which prepares the way to the glad tidings of salvation, therefore
I shall a little longer insist upon it. The body and soul, the whole man, shall
be there tormented; not the soul only, but even the body too after judgment. Do
you think the members of the body, which have been the instruments, shall
escape? be raised, and cast into Hell to no purpose? Why should God quicken it
at the last day, but to break it on the anvil of his wrath, and to make it
accompany the soul, as well in torments as in sinning. It Is true, the soul is
the fountain of all sense, and the body without it has no sense at all: Take
away the soul, and you may burn the body, and it will not feel it, Now the soul
being the fountain of sense, and the body being united to it, when God shall
lay his ax at this root, at this fountain, how dreadful shall it be? How shall
the body choose but suffer too? Should any of us be cast into a fire, what a
terrible torment would we account of it? Fire, and water, we say, have no
mercy; but alas, this fire is nothing to the fire of Hell, it is but as painted
fire to that which burns for ever and ever. The furnace wherein Nebuchadnezzar
commanded those to be thrown that fell not down to the graven-Image which he
had set up, was doubtless at every time a terrible place. Hell is compared to
such a furnace; but what shall we think of it, when the King in his wrath shall
command the furnace to be heated seven times hotter then usual? Nay, what shall
we think of Hell, when the King of Heaven shall command it to be heated seventy
times seven times hotter then before? When there shall be a fire, and a fire
prepared: for so is this fire of Tophet, it is a pile of much wood. Isai. 30.33.
When the King of Heaven shall as it were set to work his wisdom, to fit it in
the sharpest manner, in procuring such ingredients as may make it rage most,
and be most violent: It is a fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, the
strongest of creatures, for the punishment of principalities and powers: And if
it can master Angels, think not but that God has a fire to roast thy soul. It
is the soul that is in Hell only till the day of judgment, though the body be
not there. A man would think that the soul did not suffer, but Philosophy tells
us, that the soul suffers mediante corpore, in and by the body: Therefore it is
a rule in Divinity, that whatsoever God does by means, he can do without means.
Though the body be not there, but the soul only, yet God is able, nay does make
the soul as well feel grief, without the body, as he does by means of the body.

3. But now besides thy fellow prisoner^ in that cursed Gaol, consider who are
thy tormentors, thou that do continue in impenitency. Now thy tormentors are
these three.

1. The Devil. 2. Thy self. 3. God Almighty.
1. The Devil, who is thy deadly enemy, a bloody-minded adversary, a murdering
and merciless-minded Spirit, a murderer from the beginning, a merciless
tormentor, who being in plagues and torments, and thereby even at his wits end,
would fain ease himself in tormenting thee. When the Devil, as we read, was
dispossessed of a child wherein he was, he rends and tears, leaves him foaming,
that there was little hope of life in him: Mar. 9.20. But now when a man shall
be delivered into the hands of this merciless Spirit, when God shall say to the
Devil, take him, do what thou will with him, do thy worst to him: When thou
shall be thus put into the hands of one that hates thee, and delights in thy
ruin, how will he tear thee into pieces? How will he torment thee? In how
desperate and wretched a case will thy soul and body be?

But the tormentor within thee is far more heavy, painful, and grievous, Mar.
9.44, 46, 48. That never dying worm within, the sting of a guilty and wounded
conscience, this, like a sharp dagger, is still stabbing thee, at the very
heart. This by a reflecting act upon it self, will cause thee to revenge Gods
quarrel on thy self; and as a musket overcharged beats back on the shooter, so
will it most furiously return upon thee. This is that, that smote David, when
it is said David's heart smote him. Sam. 24.10. A man needs no other fire, nor
other worm to torment him, then that within him: Which as the worms on the
carcass, gnaws on a wretched soul. But there is a greater tormentor then both
these behind, and that is

3. God himself, he is highly offended and enraged at thee, and therefore comes
and takes the matter into his own hand, and will himself be executioner of his
fury. There is a passage in the These. To this purpose, which methinks is more
then can be spoken by men or Angels Epist. 2. cap. 1. v. 9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. Mark that, God whom thou have so highly provoked to
wrath, has a strong hand, and glorious power. He showed the glory of his power
in the making the world, and all things in it; and all that infinite power
which he has manifested in the creation of heaven and earth, shall be engaged
in the tormenting of a sinner. Were there a man that should lay a target of
brass, or a target of steel on a block, and should then cleave all in sunder at
a blow; this would sufficiently manifest his strength: So does God make
manifest his power in crushing thee to pieces. There are still new charges and
discharges against sinners, to make his power therein manifest. What if God,
willing to make his power known, (says the Apostle Romans 9.22.) suffered a
while the vessels prepared to destruction? God will manifest his power by the
strength of his stroke on those that rebel against him. Hence proceeds
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, which is a Metaphor taken from one
either that has a great coldness on him, or from the symptoms of a Fever.

Add to all that has been said these two things,

1. The torment shall be everlasting, you shall desire to die, Rev. 9.6. that
your torments may have end: And here you may expect that I should say something
of the eternity of the torments of the damned; but I am not able, nor any one
else sufficiently to express it: It shall continue ten thousand thousand years,
after that an hundred thousand times ten thousand, and yet be no nearer end
then at the first beginning. Thou must think of it seriously thy self, and pray
to God to reveal it to thy soul, for none else sufficiently can.

2. But besides, as it is everlasting, so is it unabateable. If a man were cast
into a fire, the fire coming about him, would in short time blunt his senses,
and take away his feeling, and besides the materials of the fire would soon
spend and wast: But it is not so here, here is not the least abatement of the
horror, nor the least inch of torment taken away throughout all eternity. It
was a poor request of Dives (one would think) that Lazarus would dip the tip of
his finger in water, and cool his tongue: Luke 16.14. A cold comfort, but one
drop of water for the present, which would soon be dried, and yet that is
denied him, he must have no abatement of his torment. Nor is there any
abatement of thy feeling, but thou art kept in full strength; and as long as
God is God, shall Tophet burn, and thou feel it.

Obj. But (may some say) this is preaching indeed, this would affright a man,
and make him go hang himself, sooner then be converted.

Sol. True, should God let loose the cord of our conscience, it were the way
(such would be the terrors of it) to make a man find another cord, did not God
restrain him. I desire not by this to hurt you, but to save you. I am a
messenger not sent from Abraham, Luke 16.27. (as Dives entreated) but from the
God of Abraham, to forewarn you that you come not to that place of torment.

But now (Beloved) there is a way to escape this misery, and that is by Jesus
Christ, Mat. 1.21. He was for this end called Jesus, because he saves his
people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. And consequently from wrath: Which how it is
done I shall show in a word, and that is 1. By Christ Jesus offered for us. And
2. By Christ Jesus offered to us.


By Christ offered for us, he must die for us, and if there be any death more
cursed then other, that death must he die; if any more painful, that must he
suffer Thus he undertakes thy cause and suffers what for sin was due to thee.

And then being offered for us, he is offered to us, as we may see in the
Sacrament, where there are two acts of the Minister, the one the breaking the
bread, the other the offering it to the people. Thou have as good warrant to
take Christ offered, as thou have to take the bread and wine, which thou art
commanded to receive. Thus I thought good to add something to sweeten the rest,
that I might show that there is a way to be freed from the bitter pains of
eternal death.

PHIL. 2.6, 7, 8. Let this mind be in you, which also was in Jesus Christ; who
being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: but made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men: And being found in fashion of a man, be humbled himself
unto the death, even the death of the Cross.


YOU have heretofore heard that point of Christian Doctrine which concerns the
knowledge of our misery, and wretched estate by nature. The substance of all
is, That we are the children of wrath and disobedience, as well as others. You
see then in what state every man stands, before he has made his peace with
God: as long as he stands on terms of Rebellion. You see what the Holy Ghost
says, We were all the sons of disobedience, and Children of Wrath as well as
others. This I tell you (as has often been declared) not to discourage a
sinn^r, or to drive him to desperation, but because it is fit he should know his
estate in which he is. If they will try conclusions with God, if they oppose
him, the Lord comes with a Rod of Iron, and will break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel; Psalm. 2.9. Those mine enemies that will not have me to reign
over them, bring them, and slay them before me; Luke 19.27. It is fit every man
should know this; This part is only for this end, that it may awaken us;
otherwise to what purpose do we preach unto you? Till the Law awaken us, we
sleep securely in our sins, till the dreadful Trumpet of Mount Sinai comes with
thundering and lightning; as Ephesians. 5.14, Awake thou that sleep, etc. Unless
this awaken us, in what case are we? Sinful men are as sleepers, that are a
dreaming, as the Apostle speaks, Jude 8. A sleeping sinner will be a dreaming
sinner; he never sees things as they are in their proper shape: but he thinks
with the Church of Laodicea, That he is rich, and wants nothing; when as he is
poor, miserable, blind and naked. He thinks he shall be admitted into heaven,
as soon as the proudest: but this is a dream; Isa. 29.8. As the hungry man
dreameth, and behold he eats; but when he awakes behold he is empty: or as a
thirsty man that dreams he drinks; but awakes, and behold he is faint. Thus
it is with us, we think we are entering upon the Suburbs of heaven, and yet we
are but in a dream, and in a sleep.

Now being thus awaked, consider with thy self what thou have to do, when the
dreadful Trumpet of the Law has awakened thee, consider thy state; if thou
sleep this night in thy sins, perhaps hell fire may be thy portion before
the morning. It were better for thee therefore to awake, before the flames of
hell fire awake thee. Consider likewise that thou must not be led by thy self,
thou must renounce thine own will. Our Estates may be pleasing unto us, to
enjoy in a dream our hearts lusts here on earth; but consider, unless thou
cross thy Will here, it shall be crossed hereafter: yea it shall be the main
cross a man shall have in hell, (besides the eternal weight of Gods wrath) that
he can will or desire nothing, but he shall be crossed in it: not the least
thing he desires, but he shall have the contrary, world without end: Learn then
what a woeful thing it is to be our own Lords, to follow our own Lusts and
Pleasures, see what we shall gain by it: never shall thou enjoy the least
portion of thy will in the world to come; Note well.
if thou would have but a drop of cold water, thou shall be crossed in it.
There Is nothing thou desire but thou shall have the opposite to it.

Thus having truly and plainly showed our Sinfulness, Wretchedness, and
Cursedness by nature, I come unto the second part which I proposed to wit: Our
Remedy, Our Remedy, or our Redemption by Christ
or our Redemption by Christ. And God forbid that he should create man the best
of his visible Creatures for destruction: What gain and profit is there in our
blood? Psalm 30.9. God is full of Grace and Compassion and he considers that we
are but dust. And happy are we that we are but dust. Had we been more glorious
Creatures, as Angels, we had not had the benefit of a Savior. When they
rebelled, God considered their Metal: And as with an high hand they rebelled,
So the Lord reserved them in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great day; Jude 3. 1 These. 1.10. They fell without a Redeemer;
It is well for us, that God considers that we are but dust; For by Jesus
Christ he delivers us from the wrath to come. 1 Thessal. 1.10. It had been
better for us never to have been born, then to be born firebrarnds of Hell. But
now the point is, what we are Brands plucked out of the fire, Zach. 3, 2. It is
fit therefore we should know who is our Redeemer.

Now, as I have showed you the last day, it is Jesus Christ: And here consider,

1. That Christ Jesus was offered for us, for the satisfaction of Gods Justice,
and this is his priestly office.

2. As there was no Remission without shedding of blood, Hebr. 9.22. Therefore
after the blood is shed, and the Priest offered himself, there comes a second
thing, else we are never the better: and that is Christ offered to us: This
makes up our comfort. Many talk of the extent of Christ's Death and Passion,
saying, he dyed sufficiently for us, which is an improper speech: For what
comfort were this, that Christ was offered for us, if there were no more? A
bare sufficiency in Christ se^ves not the turn: This were a cold comfort: As if
a man that were in debt, and afraid of every Sergeant, and every Sheriff,
should be told: Sir, there is money enough in the King Exchequer to discharge
all your debts. This is very true, but what is that to him? What comfort has
he by it, unless the King make him an offer to come, and take freely for his
discharge? And a cold comfort were it to us to know Christ to be sufficient for
us, unless he invite us to take freely of the waters of life, Ho, every one of
you that thirsts, come you to the waters, etc. Isa. 55.1. Thus unless Christ
be offered to us, as well as for us, we are never the near.

Now to make this appear; Observe that in every Sacrament there are two acts of
the Minister. The one has Relation to God, a Commemoration of the Sacrifice,
in which respect the ancient Fathers called it a Sacrifice: the other, the
breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine; wherein there is a
Commemoration of the Body broken, and the Blood shed, not as they are
Concomitants, the Wine in the Bread, as the foolish Papists dream, for that
were rather a commemoration of his life than of his death, when the blood runs
in the veins. The commemoration of Christ's death is made by separation of the
blood from the body; and as there is one act of the Minister in consecrating by
breaking the body, and pouring out the blood, so there is a second Act which is
ministerial. When the Minster says, Take, eat, This is my body; as if Christ
were present; and said, Come, Take my body; thou have as free an interest to
it, as when thou art invited to thy friends table thou have right to the meat
before thee. So that as Christ was once offered for thee, so he is, in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, offered to thee: And what now should hinder
thee, unless thou art one that will obstinately oppose thy own salvation, and
say, I will not have this man to rule over me, thou can not miscarry. But if
thou will be thine own Lord, perish in thine infidelity. Here be the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven given unto God's Ministers, unless thou wilfully oppose
thine own salvation, and shut that door of salvation which Christ has opened
so wide for thee. See, the ways of God are plain. Christ has paid a great
price for thee; and then, as great as it is, he offers it to thee.

Now for the former of these, which is Christ's satisfaction made unto the
Father for us, I made choice of this place of Scripture, which sets it out
particularly. Herein two things are to be observed.

1. The person who it is that will thus humble himself. The Apostle grounds his
Exhortation on the fourth verse; where he tells us, We ought not to look every
man on his own things, but every man on the things of others, Let this mind be
in you, which also was in Christ Jesus. If Christ had looked only on his own
things, he might have saved himself a great deal of labor and pains. He being
the Son of God, might as soon as he was born have challenged a seat with God in
Glory: He need not have gone per viam: He might be Comprehensor in meta: But he
would pass on to his journey's end in a thorny and troublesome way. Let then
the same mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus; who minded not his own
things, but the good of others.

2. What it was wherein he humbled himself. He took upon him the form of a
servant, and was obedient unto the death of the Cross. The highest humiliation
that can be; that he who is above all praise, whom Angels adored, that he
should be brought from heaven to earth; and not only be a Pilgrim there, but
have a sorrowful and pitiful Pilgrimage; and at last to be cut off by a
shameful death from the land of the living. This Humiliation has no parallel.

The depth of the humiliation consists in the height of the person thus
humbled; and were not he so high, it could have done us no good. It Is no small
satisfaction that can appease God's wrath: therefore the Apostle, in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, speaking of Melchisedeck, the type of Christ,
concludes, how great this man was. Heb. 7.4.

Consider the invaluable price that was paid for thee, and how great he was who
paid it; who being in the form of God, he who was fellow, and fellow-like with
God* as good as himself, as great as himself; was thus humbled. It was the
Second Person in the sacred Trinity, he, and no other, that was thus humbled
for thee: He was weary for thee, and reviled for thee, sweated and fainted for
thee, hungered for thee, and was buffeted for thee. It was he, the Second Person
of the blessed Trinity, in proper speech, without either Trope or Figure, shed
his blood for thee, died for thee; and suffered all these things in his assumed
nature ( taking on him the form of a servant) though not in his divine. He
remaining God alone, could not die, but die fain he would for thee; therefore
he took thy nature on him, that he might die for thee in that assumed nature.
He took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. Heb. 2.16. He
being the Fountain of life, and the Prince of our life, ( and without shedding
of blood no Redemption can be wrought) having not blood to shed as God,
therefore took our nature on him; as it is, Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and offering
thou would not, but a body thou have prepared me: then said I, lo, I come; in
the volume of thy book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. As if he
should have said, Lord, I am not able to accomplish thy Will, or to be subject
to thee in thy nature; therefore thou have made me a man, that in the form of a
servant, I might show obedience, which I could not while I was in nature equal
unto thee. Now consider how great this person is that has suffered all for
thee. Rev. 1.5. Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the first begotten
of the Dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: To have a great Prince
bound like a thief, arraigned, and executed; the consideration of this state of
the person would move a stony heart. Rev. 17.14. He is the Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings.

Amongst men, the Father is more honorable than the Son, and the Son is but a
servant, until he be emancipated: but it is not so in the Divinity; but the
Father and the Son are both alike honorable.

Among men, the Son has the same specifical nature with the Father, but not
the same individual: but it is not so in the Divinity; the Father and the Son
have the self same individual nature. Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one,
therefore there must be an equality. The Pharisees themselves could draw this
conclusion; that if he were the Son of God, he was equal with God. Joh. 5.18.
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he said, God was his
Father, making himself equal with God. A man would think how could that follow?
He was but God's Son; but God's Son must be equal with the Father. In making
himself God's Son, he made himself equal with God: and therefore know, upon
this, and by this stands the point of our Redemption. If a pure and holy Angel
had suffered never so much, it would not have availed for our Redemption. It is
a Price no man, nor Angel must meddle withal; it will require a greater Price.
It was God himself that suffered in his assumed nature: He, and no other
person; (for we must understand, though Christ took on him the nature of a man,
yet not the person of a man) here stands the point, the Second Person in the
Trinity is the Suppositum of all this humiliation: and therefore observe when
the point of suffering comes, there is a remarkable speech. Zach. 13.7. The
Father seems to say concerning the Son, that it was against his heart to
smite him: The expression was a lively one; it went to his heart to smite one
that was his equal, that did him no wrong: Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd,
and against the man that is my fellow. You know of whom it is spoken by
Matthew, Mat. 26.31. I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scattered. The Lord is ready to break him. Isa. 53. The Sword was as
it were unwilling to smite. The man that is my fellow? A blow lighting on God's
fellow, equal with God, of what value is it? Consider the difference betwixt a
man and a man: The State of a Prince makes great odds between that is done to
him, and that is done to another man. When David would adventure himself into
the batttl: Thou shall, say they, go no more with us, lest thou quench the
light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17. and more ^ully, 2 Samuel 18.3. Thou art worth ten
thousand of us. They would not hazard the person of the King in the battle,
Why? because thou art worth ten thousand of us. The dignity of a Prince is so
great, that ten thousand will not countervail the loss of him. If this be the
esteem and worth of David, what is the worth of David's Prince? If thus with a
King, what with the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? This is a great ground of
the sufficiency of Christ's suffering. Heb. 9.13. If the blood of Bulls and
Goats sanctify to the purifying of the flesh; how much more, verse. 14. shall
the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without
spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works, to serve the living God?
It is not the offering of the body only, but he did it through his eternal
Spirit. When the Martyrs and Saints offered themselves a sacrifice, they
offered it through the flames of their love, and therefore embraced the stake;
and love is described as strong as death: but Christ did not offer his
Sacrifice with the flames of his love, though love was in him the greatest that
ever was; but with the everlasting flames of his Godhead and Deity; with that
fire from heaven, which is a consuming fire? He did the deed, that will purge
our Consciences from dead works. Act. 20.28. Take heed unto your selves, and to
the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseer^, to feed the
Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood: God has purchased
the Church with his own blood: whose blood? God's blood. The blood of God must
be shed. He who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, must shed his own
blood: As Zippora says to Moses, a bloody husband have thou been to me, Exodus
4.25. So may Christ say to his Church, a bloody Spouse have thou been to me,
that my blood must be shed for thee: 1 Cor. 2.8. Had they known, they would not
have crucified he Lord of Glory; that is, they would not have crucified God. He
that was crucified, was the glorious Lord God. Act. 3.15. You denied the holy
one, and killed the Prince of life. Here Is the matter, unless the Prince of
life had been killed, thou could not have life. This the Apostle sets down as
the ground of all, before he comes to the particularities of his humiliation;
and sets down who it was, who was thus humbled: He whom the Heaven of Heavens
could not contain, he must descend into the lowermost parts of the earth;
that is a descent indeed. His Humiliation appears in this, that he who was thus
high, became a man; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. In this
humiliation consider, I say, these two Points.

1. The person who was humbled.

2. The degrees of his humiliation. Christ's humiliation in iife and death
Some things have regard to the whole course of his life, others to the
conclusion or period of his life. All his life from his incarnation to his
passion, was a continual thread of humiliation from his Cradle to his Cross,
from his Womb to his Tomb: So here is set down the humbled life of our blessed
Savior. For I would not have you think his humiliation consisted only in
coming to the Cross, when they so mercilesly handled him: it cost him more then
so: as sinners have the curse of God on them in their life, as well as in their
death: So Christ must have a miserable life, as well as an accursed death.
Though the heat came at the end o the Tragedy, yet his whole life was a
continual suffering. Consider the degrees of it.

1. He made himself of no Reputation, (...) he emptied himself: It was the
second person in the Trinity that thus humbled, and emptied himself, (not in
his divine nature, but his assumed,) of all his transcendent endowments.

Consider the particulars of it, he took on him the form of a servant; Was not
this a great humiliation? That the second person in the Trinity should stoop so
low as to take on him the nature of one, who is not worth the looking on? That
he should take dust and ashes upon him. Psalm 113.5, 6. Gods greatness is thus
expressed, Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who
humbles himself to behold the things in heaven, and in the earth: What
Humiliation is that? Compare these two humiliations tonether. It is an
humiliation, to cast but his eye upon the Heavens, to look upon the most
glorious of all his works, to look upon the Angels, but what is man that thou
so regardest him? That thou should not only look upon him, but take him up,
and make him an inmate under thine own roof? This is a greater abasement, but
here is a further degree, Christ during the time of his pilgrimage was content
to deprive himself of his Glory, that he now enjoyes. By reason of his
Hypostatical Union with the Godhead, he deserves all honor and glory, When he
brought his first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels
worship him. Heb. 1.6. Every knee bows to him that is thus highly exalted. We
see Christ crowned with glory and honor, all Dominion and Power being made
subject unto him, yet he for thirty three years and an half was content to be
exiled from his Fathers court. John. 17.5. Glorify thou me with the glory I
had with thee before the world was; Which is expounded in the Proverbs, where
the Wisdom of God was shown before the world was framed. Prove. 8.30. Then I was
by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him; this was the work, before the foundation of the World, which
God was doing, the Father was glorifying the Son, and the Son was glorifying
the Father. The Father took infinite delight in the Son, and the Son took
infinite delight in the Father, and the Holy Ghost in them both. To be deprived
of such a sight, and such a glory as this, and for thy sake to be banished from
that high Court; where not to enjoy that fullness of joy, was an emptying of
himself: yet all this he did for thee.

The second degree of his humiliation, that he might he might become a servant.
2. He minded not his own things, if he had, he might have presently set at Gods
right hand, where is fullness of joy for evermore: But his bowels yearned on us,
and he took upon him the form of a servant, and was found in shape of a man,
that is, as an ordinary man: We know what the nature of servitude is. Every man
naturally desires liberty, but Christ that he might make thee free, was content
to be bound as an Apprentice, and endure a servile estate. Christ both in
respect of God and man took on him the form of a servant.

1. For him to be Gods servant was an Humiliation, though for us, it be the
greatest honor to be Gods servants. Saint Paul makes it his prime Epi^hete,
Paul a servant of Jesus christ. And David calls himself the servant of the
Lord, O Lord I am thy servant, truly I am thy servant. But it was an
Humiliation for Christ to become Gods servant. For him who thought it no
robbery to be equal with God to become Gods servant, and to take a nature on
him, that he might say, My Father is greater then I; behold my Father and I
were one, but now taking on me a humane nature, I am made inferior to my
Father, I am become his servant: Behold my servant in whom I am well pleased;
Isa. 53. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: There is
much difference in servants. A free servant and a bond servant. A very bondman
does Christ make himself, being man, and accounts it as a great honor as may
be, not only to be his Fathers servant, but his bond man. Can I show that there
is any such humiliation as this? Look on Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and burnt
offerings thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me, these words have
relation to that of the Psalmist, Psalm 40.6. Sacrifice and burnt offerings
thou did not desire, but mine ears have thou opened; it is in the margent,
mine ears have thou dug, or have thou bored. The boring of the ear was an
expression of everlasting servitude. Another servant that had not yet his ear
bored, might be free at the year of Redemption, at the seventh year: but if
not, his ear was bored that he might be a servant for ever according to that,
Exodus 21.4. He that loved his service so well as to have his ear bored, is a
servant for evermore. Mine ear Lord have thou bored, I will be thy servant for
ever. Christ took on him the form of such a servant; nay Christ was more then
an ordinary slave: He was one bound to an everlasting slavery, for he was the
Son of an handmaid: Now the Children of an handmaid were not to go forth at
the year of Jubilee. Exodus 21. The Wife and her Children shall be her Masters,
and he shall go out by himself: Meaning thus, he that was the son of an
handmaid, must be bound. Partus sequitur ventrem. Now that Christ was the son
of an handmaid, we have Mary's own confession, Behold the handmaid of the
Lord, and he has looked upon the low estate of his handmaid, Luke 1.38, 48.
Hence David says, Psalm. 116.61. O Lord I am thy servant, and the son of thine
handmaid: I am not only thy servant, but thy bond servant: I am he who was
born in thy house: and out of thy house I will never go. Thus is Christ a
servant in respect of God.

But it is not only thus, he is not only a servant in regard of God, but he
took on him the form of a servant in respect of men too. Look what relations
are between men, that have superiority, and Subjects, Christ, who was born a
free child, yet made himself a servant unto man: He had a reputed father, but a
true, and a natural mother: From the twelfth year of his age, till the
thirtieth, he went with them, and was subject unto them, Luke. 2.51. No
Apprentice was more subject to his Master in his Trade, than he was to his
reputed father; he kept him close unto his Trade. Look on him out of the
family, in the Commonwealth: He paid tribute. He might stand upon his
privilege: Of whom do the Kings of the earth exact Tribute? etc. They answer,
Of strangers: Then are the Children free. If the son of a temporary Prince be
free, how much more shall the Son of God be free? But yet it behooves us to
fulfill all righteousness. He would be a subject unto Caesar, and in recognition
of his subjection he would pay Tribute, though he fetched it out of the fishes
belly. Hence the Apostle tells us, Romans 13. For this cause pay you Tribute, to
testify your subjection. Neither was Christ only a servant to them, who were
in some Authority, but generally among men he was in the state of a servant.
Mat. 20.28. The son of m^n come not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
to give his life a ransom for many. Not to be a Master to command, and have
others to attend him; but he came to be a servant; see in what esteem he was
had. We account a servant in the next degree unto a beast; for liberty is that
whereby a man breaths, and a man were better be dead, then have his liberty
took from him; and so Christ was not only a bondman in regard of his Father,
but in regard of men. Christ accounted as a bondman.
In the estimation of men he was vilified for a bondman: and that will appear
by the price for which he was sold. It was thirty pieces of silver. To consider
what the price was, is a considerable part of his passion. There is a Prophecy
cited out of Jeremy in your books, but it is Zachary; though I have seen some
copies which mentioned neither, but only, according to the words of the
Prophet, it is Zach. 11.13. Cast it unto the Potter, a goodly piece that I was
prized at of them. He speaks it with disdain; And I took the thirty pieces of
silver, and cast them to the Potter in the house of the Lord. Exodus 21.32.
There is a place parallel to it, which will expound it clearly; If an Ox shall
push a manservant, or a maidservant that he die, the owner of the Ox shall
give to the Master of the servant thirty shekels, and the Ox shall be stoned.
It was the very price that was paid for a slave: Thirty shekels, which is 3 l.
15 s. in our money. A base estimation they had of Christ, as if he were a
bondman; the same price that was given for a slave that was killed by an Ox,
for this same price was he sold. In the twelfth book of Josephus, cap. 2. Exam.
Joseph. fot the calcu. 14400000 drachms.
When Ptolomaeus Philadelphus would redeem all the Jews which were bondmen,
it is set down what he paid for a slave. There is set down a great sum of
money, and the number of the Which were 120000.
slaves: Here stands the valuation; divide the number of Drachms by the number
of slaves, and you shall Have the quotient 120 Drachms.

Four Drachms went to a Shekel: so divide 120 by 4, your quotient is 30 shekels
for each man, which was the ordinary rate, etc.


find the quotient for every man 120 drachms; four Drachms make a shekel,
thirty shekels was the ordinary rate cried in the Market for the price of a
bondman. Thus Christ took on him the form of a bondman, not only God's
bondman, but in the estimation of men so despicable, that they valued him at
no higher rate than thirty pieces of silver. This is but the beginning and
entrance on Christ's humiliation, to be made in the similitude of sinful flesh,
and in the verity of true flesh. Christ had all infirmities, as weariness,
hunger, thirst, which follow a sinful man, which were not sinful: such a nature
he took upon him, and then he became obedient both by active and passive
obedience. That which remains of the pains of his life, to the passage of his
doleful death, we will speak of the next time.

PHIL. 2.8. And being found in fashion as a man, be humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.


IN these words and those that went before, you see there is delivered unto us
the point of the humiliation of the Son of God. It stands in this.

1. That he took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness
of man. God the Son, the second person in the blessed Trinity did assume our
dust and ashes, unto the Unity of his own sacred person.

2. This humane nature being thus assumed, he was content to deprive himself a
long time of that estate of glory, which he might have in our humane nature
always (after it is assumption) enjoyed, and in that time was as obedient, as
the meanest and poorest servant of his Father. Nor was he only actively, but
passively obedient; He was obedient unto the death: He was content to lay down
his life for our Redemption. And it was not every death that would serve the
turn, but it must be the death of the Cross, the most accursed shameful and
painful death, that death which was most suitable, and best able to answer the
wrath of God.

First, He humbled himself by taking our nature upon him: He that thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, took upon him the form of a man. If it were an
abasement for God to look upon heaven the most glorious of his works, how much
more to take upon him a clod, or piece of this earth, and unite it to his own
sacred person for ever. This was a descending indeed, he descended first that
he might ascend. Ephesians. 4.9. Now that he ascended, what is it, but tha^ he
descended first into the lower parts of the earth? That is, he descended into
the womb of the Virgin; and it was a great abasement indeed for him thus to
descend: Wherefore the Psalmist speaking of the wonderful framing of the Babe
in the womb, says, Psalm, 139.15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I
was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lower parts of the earth. So
that we see God descended into the lowermost parts of the earth, and there was
he fashioned. A great humiliation it was for him to be thus enclosed. Thus did
he humble himself in taking our nature. Had he taken the form of a King upon
him, it had been a great humiliation; how much more, when he took on him the
form of a servant? He came not in state to be ministered unto, but to minister.
Mat. 20.28. As we showed the last day. Nor was he only his Fathers servant, but
a servant of servants, and therein underwent Canaans curse: A servant of
servants shall thou be. Gen, 9.25. Our Savior became such a servant. He which
was the Author of freedom. John 8.26. If the Son make you free then are you
free ind^ed. He, I say, who was the Kings son and so the most free, the Author
of it to all that enjoy any spiritual freedom, became a servant, that we which
were servants might be made free.

But besides this, its added here, that he humbled himself. Having taken on him
the form of a servant, he humbled himself. Where we may observe what made the
suffering of our Savior so meritorious: It was because it was active, free,
and voluntary. Our Passions are contrary to our Will: We are drawn to it, as it
is said of Peter, When thou art old, they shall lead thee whither thou would
not, Joh. 21.18. Peter dyed the same death our Savior did, according to the
external passion; but they led him, whither he would not. Our Savior was an
Actor in it; Humbled himself. A bare suffering God regards not so much; but
when it is done willingly, and in obedience to God. And as he was obedient in
his death, so also in his other passions. In the Gospel according to St. John,
Joh. 11.33. whereas the Text reads, he was troubled; the marginal note has it,
according to the original Greek, (...), he troubled himself: he was the Author
of his own sufferings, Joh. 10.17. He was not humbled as a mere patient; but he
humbled himself: and so it is said in Scripture often, He gave himself for us,
and in all his passive obedience he had an eye to do the Will of God. The merit
of his passive obedience arises from a mixture with his active. This was a
great part of his Priesthood, his humbling. And how does he take his
Priesthood upon him? it was by his Father's call. He was called unto it as was
Aaron. Heb. 5.4. No man, says the Apostle, takes this honor upon him, but he
that is called. Now Christ being called to it, he did it to follow his call.
And thus he did it actively: it was not a bare suffering as those in hell
suffer, but according to his Father's call. Observe, Heb. 10.9. That place
taken out of the Psalm, I am come to do thy Will, O God, etc. What, was it only
in its active obedience? No, it was thy Will that he should suffer; as the
words following in the tenth verse import, By the which Will we are sanctified,
and by the body of Jesus Christ once offered: So that Christ offered up himself
to do his Father's Will; so that his passive obedience was in his active. So
Joh. 10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that
I may take it up again; no man takes it from me, but I lay it down. Our
Savior, when he laid down his life, put it off, as a man that puts off his
cloak, and lays it from him. They wondered that he was dead so soon, it 'was
because himself laid down his life. His soul then was not dragged or forced out
of his body. It was not only passive, but active obedience. No man takes it
from me; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up. This had
I from my Father. They are grossly deceived then, that say Christ's active
obedience was not free and voluntary, because he was commanded: for as well may
they say, his passive was not voluntary, and so not meritorious, because it
likewise was commanded, which none can deny. Thus Christ's offering was a
free-will-offering, though it was a most bitter one; yet, this being a part of
his Father's Will, he went as voluntarily to the pains of the Cross, as thou
do to thy dinner, when thou art throughl^ hungry. For his meat and his drink
was to do his Father's Will, Joh. 4.34. And this makes it of such worth and
efficacy, that he did it willingly: See it in the type that went before him, in
Isaac; Isaac was grown up, he was no Babe, he was able to carry wood enough to
burn himself when he went to be sacrificed; and therefore, sure he had
strength: If Isaac had pleased, he might have ran away from the old man his
Father; yet he suffers himself to be bound, and to be laid upon the wood. A
true type of our Savior: His also was a free will offering, and so a
sweet smelling sacri^^ce unto God. It being the highest active obedience, it
presently pacifieth the w^^th of his Father. He humbled himself, and became
obedient. This obedience of our Savior is the matter and ground of our
Justification. Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one, Judgment came on all unto
condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came on all to
Justification of life. By the obedience of this blessed Savior many are made
righteous; so that now our Savior's obedience follows next.

Now this Obedience is twofold, 1. Active, 2. Passive.
Now this obedience is double. Active or Passive.

1. Active, And this was that whereby he did all the Will of his Father. The
reason why he came into the world, if we look the place before alleged, will
appear, Heb. 10.5. Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice
and burnt-offering thou would not have, but a body have thou prepared me. In
burnt offerings and Sacrifice for sin thou have no pleasure; then said I,
Behold I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me, that I should do
thy Will, O God. When he comes into the world, says he, Lo, I come: For what?
to do thy Will, O God. The reason why he came into the world, was, that he
might be obedient unto his Father: Thus it behooves us (says he to John) to
fulfill all Righteousness. John wondered that he that was pure and spotless,
should come to him to be baptized. He knew Baptism presupposed some sin or
blot, some stain or corruption to be washed off; and therefore it is said, Mark
1.5. That there came unto him all the Land of Judaea to be baptized, confessing
their sins. And sure if one who had been but a bare man should have come to
John, and say, he had no sin, and yet desired to have been baptized by him, he
had had no right to Baptism: yet our Savior says, Let alone, let it be so,
that we may fulfill all Righteousness. I have no need indeed in regard of my
self: but I have taken upon me the form of a servant; and therefore, what the
lowest of them must do, that must I do: therefore was I circumcised, and
therefore am I baptized. I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. And
he fulfilled it to the utmost, both in his active and passive obedience.

Now for his active Obedience, it had a double (...), or consummatum est. 1.
For his active obedience in the whole course of his Life.
First, For his active Obedience in the whole course of his life.

I h^ve glorified thy name, and finished the work which thou gave me to do.
Would you know what it is to glorify God in this world? It is to finish the
work which he gives us to do. Art thou a Minister? if thou would glorify
God, finish the work he gave thee to do; then may thou say, Glorify thou me
with thy Glory, 2. For his active obedience after his Death.
etc. But now Christ's work was not all ended, when he said, he had finished
it; the greatest part was behind, to wit, his Passive obedience: All the works
of his life were done; of which actions, there Christ is to be understood: but
then comes his Passion, and that being finished, there is something to do yet
after that; for he was to rise again to our Justification: but for the oblation
of the sacrifice, it was fully finished. If we look upon our blessed Savior in
the whole course of his life. For,

1. Though he lived in a whole world of sin, yet he was free from all manner of
sin.

2. He was enriched with all manner of good works, graces and virtue. Christ
had both of these. He was free from any spot of sin, though in the midst of a
wicked world; and there was nothing ^n him which could expose him to any
temptations. He was continually assaulted, and yet he was spotless. The Prince
of the world came, and yet he found nothing in him. Satan could find nothing in
him, whereon to fasten any temptation. Such a Priest it became us to have, who
was holy and harmless. Heb. 7.16. Undefiled, separate from Sinners.

There is the purity of his nature, he is holy, and in his carriage, harmless;
he did no man hurt. Undefiled, a pure and innocent Lamb, a lamb without
blemish, separate from sinners, and could not contract any guilt of sin. Though
he conversed with Publicans and sinners at the Table, yet they could not infect
him. He knew no sin, neither was there guile found in him, 1 Pet. 1.19.
Therefore we see when it comes to the point that the Devil would tempt him, yet
he himself must needs say, What have I to do with thee thou holy one of God? He
is forced to acknowledge him to be so. And so if we look on the place, where he
says, I do the Will of my Father always, Joh. 8.2^. there likewise he shows
himself the holy one of God. In a word, as he was thus obedient unto God, so
was he subject to men too; to his Father in the family, and to Caesar in the
Commonwealth: As he taught, he did: Subjection toward Governors was his
Doctrine, and rather than he would not pay Tribute, he would have it out of the
fishes belly: To show a Recognition of his subjection unto higher powers, the
text tells us, He went about doing good. This man, say they, has done all
things well: And at the last cast, when all the quarrels and Accusations were
brought against him, they could bring nothing that could hold water; that he
could boldly challenge them all, as it were, Which of you can accuse me of sin?
You that pick so many holes in my coat, come forth, spare me not, accuse me;
yet at the last he is accounted a just man. Judas himself could acknowledge him
to be blameless, and that he had sinned in betraying his innocent blood.
Pilate's Wife could say to her Husband, Have thou nothing to do with that just
man: And Pilate himself washed his hands, and would be free from the blood of
that innocent person. The Thief crucified with him, acquits him; his whole life
was a perfect obedience to the Law of God. Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the
Law; Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; not
by us, we are not able to fulfill the Law; but in us, Christ did it for us: And
the Father is better pleased with the thirty three years hearty obedience of
his Son, than if Adam, and all his posterity had been obedient throughout the
whole course of the world: So acceptable was this obedience to God. And thus
much of his active Obedience.

2. Now for his passive obedience, his suffering. If our Savior will be a
sacrifice, he must be used like one; he must be slain, if he will make
satisfaction to his Father for us. He must for our eating sower grapes, have
his own teeth set on edge. Consider his humiliation both in life and death; if
we look on the service of Jacob, under his Uncle Laban, his service was an hard
service, twice seven years did he serve: The drought consumed him by day, and
the Frost by night, and the sleep departed from his eyes; Twenty Years hard
service; Fourteen Years for his two Wives, and six Years for his Cattle, Genesis
31.41. Our Savior spent thirty three years in his hard service; and often did
the sleep depart from his eyes. When Israel came to appear before Pharaoh, My
days, says he, have been 130 years: few and evil have the days of thy
servant been. Genesis 47.9. The true Israelite might say more. Jacobs days were
few; but as few as they were, they were 130 years; but if we look upon our
Saviors days, they were scarce a quarter so many.

And that is our Saviors humiliation, that he was cut off in the midst of his
days. If we look into the Psalm, we shall find it a curse on the bloody and
deceitful man, that he shall not live out half his days. The livelie part of a
man's age, (from Moses his time to this day, in that Psalm of Moses, Psalm. 90.)
is threescore years and ten; Half this is thirty five years; and our Savior is
taken off, before this thirty five is expired. He was to take on him all the
curses due to sinners, to the bloody and deceitful man: He is cut off and cropped
off in the midst of his vigor: He that is that Melchisedeck, that has neither
beginning, nor end of days, was cut off as a branch, lopt off as a twig from
the land of the living, Isa. 53. ver. 8. He Is pulled out, so his days were few,
far fewer then Jacobs: He was not suffered to live out half his days: Yet if
we look upon his days they were evil too: evil enough as few as they were: Full
of trouble, and full of misery: From his first coming into the World to his
last going out.

1. When he did descend into the lowermost part of the earth, He was nine
months in the womb of his Mother: And if we take the opinion of the Schoolmen,
he had his full Understanding and Judgment all that time, the free use of sense
and reason, though I do not aver it to be a truth; only* say, if it be so, it
makes his humiliation insupportable. What an extrea^ burden would it be to us
to be so long in the womb, and in ripe understanding; therefore there was
somewhat in that: But now:

2. Look at his coming forth into the World: Though his mother were in her own
City, yet he was so despicable, that there was nor room for them in the Inn.
Luke 2.7. Our Savior, that should, one would think, have been brought into a
stately Palace, was fain to have his lodging among the beasts, and a Cratch for
his Cradle. The wise men when they came to worship him, found him in no better
case: and what a disgrace was it, instead of a Palace, the King of the East
should find our Savior in a Cratch.

3. And now when eight days are over, he must have his skin cut off, he must
be circumcised, and give the first payment or earnest of his blood. How painful
and irksom a thing Circumcision was, appears by that story in Genesis 34, Where
the sons of Jacob offering the Shechemites the condition of Circumcision, and
they accepting it, it was so troublesome a thing, that by reason of their
soreness and weakness by it, two of the Sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, slew a
whole City. The pain was so great that they could not manage there weapons,
therefore two men slew thousands of them. Our blessed Savior was thus served,
when the eight days were over he was thus made sore, and this was the first
effusion of his blood.

4. After the eight days are over, then come the forty days, and then he must
be carried a long journey to be offered up to the Lord, and his Mother, as if
she had brought an unclean and impure thing into the World, must be cleansed
and purified. And then she came to offer a sacrifice according to the Law of
the Lord. Luke 2.24. A pair of Turtle Doves or two young Pigeons: But was this
the Law? It were good if the Law were looked into. See Levit. 12.8. The Law is
this, She shall bring a Lamb, or if she be not able to bring a Lamb, then two
Turtles, or two young Pigeons. If she be not able; but the margin has it, If
her hand cannot reach to a Lamb, if she be so poor that she cannot offer a
Lamb. As if the Text should have said, Alas poor woman, poor Lady, all she had
was not able to reach to a Lamb, so poor was she: Doubtless her heart was as
large as another but she was not able to offer a Lamb, and is therefore
content with two Turtles.

5. Hence we may conceive in what state our Savior lived, till he came into
the Ministry: questionless in a poor house: and he made many a hungry meal,
when his Mother was not worth a Lamb. All that they had, must be by hard labor.

9. Now our Savior, notwithstanding after he had traveled that weary journey
to Jerusalem* must return again, and be subject to his Parents: but how? Even
as a servant in his Trade. They had not bread to spare, but what was gotten by
hard laborious work. At his Fathers Trade, I say, for so its said of him, Is
not this the Carpenter? Its put in the nominative case, The Carpenter. M^rk. 6.
ver. 3. And whereas this is cast as a curse on our first parents, and their
seed. Genesis 3.49. That in the sweat of their brows they should eat their bread.
Our Savior must undergo this curse too: He must work hard for his living: With
his own hands he must get a living for himself, and his poor Mother by a
laborious Trade No wonder if he went many a morning without his breakfast, and
made many a hungry meal, that lived in so poor a house, and by so poor a Trade.

7. If we come now to the time he lived after he came from his Father and
Mother, that same three years when he showed himself more publicly in the
World, and you shall find him subject to those dangers, difficulties, and
distresses which accompany evil days. He was a Pilgrim; and had no abode. The
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air, nests, but the Son of man had not
where to lay his head. Luke 9.58. He was a diligent Preacher of the Gospel,
although he had neither Prebend, nor Personage; he had nothing of his own, but
was relieved often by the Charity of certain devout and religious Women.

2. Besides all the reproaches that could be cast on a man, were laid on him;
This man is a Wine-bibber, and a Glutton; a friend of Publicans and Sinners.
Mat. 11.19. And again, Do we not say well, thou art a Samaritan, that is, a
Heretic? He was a caster out of Devils; John. 8.48. And therein they denied
not, but he did good, but see the villainy of it: he was a good witch, as we
call them, and though he did good, yet it was by the help of Beelzebub: When he
drew near his death; see Mark. 15.3. The Text says, They accuse him of many
things. Few things are expressed, yet a great many comprehended in these words;
Those that are expressed, are heinous and notorious crimes. First, Against the
first Table, they accuse him of Blasphemy, and therefore condemn him in the
Ecclesiastical Court: Do you bear his Blasphemy? Mat. 4.64. say they. Then
against the second Table, they post him to the civil Court, and there they lay
to his charge high Treason against Caesar: for he, say they, that makes
himself a King, is an enemy unto Caesar: John. 19.12. And yet the innocent Lamb
Mat. 27.12. For all this opened not his mouth. verse. 14. Insomuch that Pilate
wondered he spoke not a word in his own defense; and the reason was, because he
came to suffer, and to have all these slanders and reproaches put upon him, not
to excuse himself.

3. He led a life subject to dangers, when he went amongst his own people, to
preach the acceptable Year of the Lord, Luke 4.19.29. They bring him upon an
high hill, to the brow thereof, with a purpose to cast him down, and break his
neck. Others threaten to kill him too. The Devil here follows him with
temptations: Even to Idolatry it self. Mat. 4.6. The Devil himself tempts him
forty days, and then left him: Not as if he would not return and tempt him no
more, but as St. Luke renders it, The Devil left him for a season, Luke 4. ver.
13. Not as if he intended to leave him quite, but to come and try him again.
The Scribes and Pharisees they tempt him too, and prove him with hard
questions, which if he could not answer, they would proclaim him an
insufficient man, and all the people would have laughed him to scorn. Nor was
this all only in the exercise of his Ministry. All his life was as it were
paved with temptations, every step was as it were a gin and trap to ensnare him.

4. Add to all this, that he was not like us, He knew when, and by what death
he should die: He knew in all the time of his suffering what he should suffer,
and what should come upon him at his death. If any of us should know that he
must die a cursed, shameful, and painful death, and knew when it should be, it
would mar all our mirth, and put us to our dumps in the midst of our jollity.
Our Savior in the midst of all his joy on earth, says, I have a Baptism to be
baptized with: Luke 12.50. He knew the cruel death, which he should suffer on
the Cross. And how is he pained, till it be accomplished. The pains of it run
through all his life, and might well make his whole life uncomfortable unto
him. In the twelfth of John 23. A little before the Passover, says he, The
hour is come that the Son of man shall be glorified: and then verse 27. Now is,
my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. When
the time was drawing nigh, some five or six days before, the consideration of
it troubled him, though he knew he should be glorified, yet the fright of it
enwrapt him with fear. Now is my soul troubled; what shall I say, Father, save
me from this hour. Such a kind of life did our Savior lead: Few, but evil were
his days. As evil, as few, he had no comfort in them.

Come we now to the point of his death, the last thing; and those things that
did touch him therein, are the Curse, Shame, and pain of it. If there were any
death more accursed, he must die that death: If any death more shameful, or
more painful then other, he must die that. All these do concur in the death of
our Savior, which he suffered, in that death of the Cross. It was the most
accursed, most shameful, and most painful death as could be devised.

First, For the Accursedness of it, there was no death that had a more peculiar
curse on it then this. Howsoever all deaths are accursed, when they light on
one that is without Christ; but his death had a legal Curse: and this was the
curse annexed to the Cross; a type of that real Curse. Now the type of a real
Curse, Was hanging on the tree: Thou shall bury him that day, for he that is
hanged on a tree is accursed by God, Deuteronomy. 21.23. So the Son of God was made a
Curse for us, alluding unto this, Galat. 3.12. And here we see the blessed Son
of God, he in whom all the Nations of the earth are blessed: The Fountain of
all blessedness: We see him stand in so cursed a condition, to be made as it
were as an Anathema, the highest degree of cursing that may be.

Secondly, Consider the shame of it. There is a place in the best of Orators
that expresses the detestableness and shame of this death of the Cross.
Facinus, etc. Cicero Lib. 5. in Verrem. See what a gradation there is, it is
hardly to be expressed in English. Its a great fault to bind a Citizen of Rome
and a Gentleman, what is it to beat him? What to crucify him? His Eloquence
failed him there, as being not able to express the detestableness of it, and
therefore the chief Captain was afraid because he had bound Paul, after he had
heard he was a freeman of Rome, Act. 22.29. but then it is worse to beat him;
but what was it to crucify him? Our blessed Savior went through all these
indignities. First they come against him with swords and with staves, as
against a Thief. They sold him for a base price. They beat him with rods,
pricked him, and after all they crucified him. Consider then the shame of it:
he that was to be crucified, was stripped naked, as naked as ever he came out
of his mothers Womb: However the Painters may lie in it. And was not this a
shame thus to be stripped before thousands? Wherefore it was a custom among
the Romans, that the greatest King, if he were baptized, was to be stripped
naked, which they did as a memorial of the shame of our Savior. So shameful a
thing it was, that they thought him unworthy to suffer within the walls. Christ
that he might sanctify the people, suffered without the walls. Hebr. 13.13.
Let us go with him out of the Camp bearing his reproach. He was a man unfit to
suffer within the walls. Pilat^ thought he would meet with them, when they were
so violent to have him crucified, and therefore he joins Barabbas with him, the
vilest Thief in the Country, and a Murderer: So that Peter cast this in their
teeth, That they preferred a Murderer before him. He was reckoned with the
Transgressors, as it was prophesied of him before. Isa. 53.12. They crucify
him between two Thieves, as if he had been the Captain of them. Pilate thought
by naming of Barabbas, to have saved Christ; but so enraged was their blind
malice, that they preferred the release of Barabbas, before the exemption of
Christ. Wherefore (as St. Luke says) Pilate released unto them him, that for
sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired; but he
delivered Jesus to their will. Luke 23.25.

Thirdly, Consider the Pain of the Cross, whom God raised up, having loosed the
sorrows of death: Act. 2.24. Not meaning there were sorrows that Christ endured
after his death, but its meant of the sorrows that accompanied his death. It
was the most dolorous death that ever could be endured. We scarce know what
Crucifying is. The Christian Emperors in honor of our Savior banished that
kind of suffering, that none after him might suffer it: But yet it is fit we
should know what it was, since it was so terrible a thing. And here, as the
Apostle said to the Galathians, Suppose you see Christ crucified before your
face at present. The manner of it was thus.

First there was a long beam, on which the party was to be stretched, and there
was a cross-beam on which the hands were to be stretched: they pulled them up
upon the Cross before they fastened them; they pulled him to his utmost length.
And this is that the Psalmist speaks of, Psalm. 22.17. You might tell all my
bones. His ribs were so stretched, as that they even pierced the flesh:
Conceive him now thus stretched with his hands and feet nailed to the wood: the
stretching of Christ on the Cross, was such a thing as the working of the rack.
Imagine him before your eyes thus represented. Your sins crucicified him: being
thus stretched upon the Cross to his full length, the hands and the feet were
fastened, and nailed to the wood. It Is no small torment to have the hands bored,
especially if we behold the place, it was through the lower part of the hand
where the veins and sinnews all met together: It Is a place that is full of
sense, consider withal the bigness of the nails: Psalm. 22.16. They have dug
my hands, to show the bigness of the spikes: for the original bears it, They
dug him. Believe not the painters: Our Savior had four nails: Not one
through both feet, as they describe it, but two through his hands, and two
through his feet: And that you may the better comprehend it, you must know that
toward the lower part of the cross, there went along a ledge or threshold
whereto his feet were nailed, otherwise the flesh would have rent by reason of
the nails, if he had hung by the hands alone.

Then comes the lifting up; as the serpent was lift up, so must Christ be lift.
As when a man is stretched to the full length, and should be with a girk put
up; it is like a strapado, as it were the unjoynting of a man; and this is that
the Psalmist speaks of, All my bones are out of joint. Consider withal the time
how long it was. St. Mark says, cap. 15.25. It was the third hour, and they
crucified him. In St. John it is the sixth hour, but the ancient and best
Copies have the third hour, and so has Nonnus. The ninth hour he gave up the
Ghost: so that it was six long hours by the clock that our Savior did hang
upon the Cross. And it was not with him as with other men, in whom extremity of
pains disannul sense, and blunt pains, because they have not a perfect
apprehension; but Christ was in his perfect sense all the while. All that the
Jews could do, could not take away his life from him, till he would himself:
and therefore it is said in Mark 15.37. That immediately before he gave up the
Ghost, he cried with a loud voice, whereas others are wont at that time to be
so weak, that they can scarce be heard to groan: but never was Christ stronger,
nor never cried louder, than when he gave up the Ghost, Mark. 15.39. this of it
self made the Centurion as soon as he heard it, conclude, certainly this man was
the Son of God. How does he gather this from his crying? thus, For a man to be
in his full strength, and cry out so strongly, and immediately to give up the
Ghost, this is a great Miracle: Truly this man was the Son of God. This adds
unto the greatness of his torment, that he had his full and perfect sense: that
he was six full hours thus on the Rack, and the extremity of pain took not away
his sense. He was as strong at the last, as at the first.

These things seriously weighed, Oh! how do they aggravate the depth of his
Humiliation? Seriously weigh them: they are miserable and lamentable matters;
yet in these lie our comfort. Through these words is there a passage open for
us into the Kingdom of Heaven: When he had overcome the terrors of death, he
opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers: these were now but the outside
of his sufferings, which did belong to man for his sins. He suffered not only
bodily sufferings, but sufferings in soul, and and that he did in a most
unknown, and incomprehensible manner; But now may some say,

Object. Did Christ suffer the pains and torments of Hell?

Sol. No, he suffered those things that such an innocent Lamb might suffer, but
he could not suffer the pains of Hell. The reason is, because, one thing which
makes Hell to be Hell, is the gnawing worm of an accusing conscience. Now
Christ had no such worm. He had so clear a conscience, as that he could not be
stung with any such evil.

Another great torment in Hell is Desperation, arising from the apprehension of
the perpetuity of their torments, which makes them curse and blaspheme God, and
carry an inexpressible hatred against him; but Christ could not do so; he could
not hate God: God forbid that Christ should be liable to these Passions.

But it is certain God the Father made an immediate impression of pains upon
his soul; his soul did immediately suffer: Look on him in the Garden, he was
not yet touched, nor troubled by men, and yet he fell in a sweat: Consider the
season of the year; this was then, when they that were within doors were glad
to keep close by the fire* he thus did sweat in the Garden, when others freez'd
within; this was much: but to sweat blood, thick blood, clotted, congealed
blood (for so the word will bear it) not like that in his veins: and yet it
came through his garments, and fell to the ground: this is a thing not to be
comprehended. Our blessed Saviors encountering with his Father* he falls a
trembling, and is overwhelmed, as it were, with the wrath, beseeching God
intensively, saying, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; Mat.
^7.39. thou may give free pardon: which affections in Christ are such a
thing, as pus^els us all: we must not say Christ did forget for what he came:
but he did not remember: these words proceeded from the seat of passion, which
while it is disturbed, reason suspends its Acts. Christ had Passions, though no
impurity in them. As take a clear Vial full of water from the fountain, and
shake it, it may be frothy, yet it will be clean water still. Christ did not
forget, only he had the suspension of his faculties for a time. As a man in a
sleep, thinks not what he is to do in the morning, and yet he is said properly
to forget. He cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.40.
He was contented to be forsaken for a time, that thou mighst not be forsaken
everlastingly, and this was no faint prayer: if you will read the place in the
Psalm. He cried out unto God: And Heb. 5.7. It Is said, Who in the days of his
flesh when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong cries and
tears. He cried to the Almighty: he made Gods own heart to pity: He would
break, Isa. 53. yet his heart is repenting, and rolled together, so that he
sent an Angel to support and comfort him, Psalm. 27. those strong cries are
expressed with a more forcible word, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me,
why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? Consider
how it was with Christ before any earthly hand had touched him, when he
beseeched God for his life: this shows the wonderful suffering of Christ; and
for that point, Why have thou forsaken me? Consider it was not with Christ as
with the Fathers, they suffered a great deal of punishment and taches, and
would not be delivered, yet Christ was more courageous than they all. He had a
spirit of fortitude, he was anointed abve his fellows, and yet he quivers. Our
Fathers cried unto thee, they trusted in thee, and were not consumed; they were
delivered: but I am a worm, and no man. I can find no shadow of comfort. Lord,
Why art thou so angry with me? this speech came not from the upper part of the
soul, the seat of reason, but from the lower part, the seat of Passion: My God,
my God, these were not words of desperation. He held fast to God; Why have thou
forsaken me? these are words of sense: thus you see the price is paid, and what
a bitter thing sin is. God will not suffer his Justice to be swallowed up by
Mercy. It must be satisfied; and our Savior, if he will be a Mediator, must
make payment to the uttermost farthing: Consider what a time this was, when our
Savior suffered: The Sun with-draws his beams, the earth shakes and trembles:
What aileth thee, O thou Sun to be darkened, and thou earth to tremble? was it
not to show his mourning for the death of its Maker? The soul of Christ was
dark within, and it is fit that all the world should be hung in black for the
death of the King of Kings. But mark, when he comes to deliver up his life, and
to give up the Ghost, the vail of the Temple rent in twain, and that was the
ninth hour, which in the Acts is called the hour of prayer; it was at three a
Clock in the afternoon. Hence it is said, Let the lifting up of my hands be as
the evening sacrifice. The Priest was killing the Lamb at that time, there was
a vail that severed the Holy of Holies, it was between the place of oblations,
and the Holy of holies, which signifies the Kingdom of Heaven. As Soon as Christ
died, the vail rent, and Heaven was open, the Priest saw that which was before
hidden. Our Savior, says the Apostle, entered through the vail of his flesh
unto his Father, and fit it was, that the vail should give place when Christ
comes to enter: but what becomes of Christ's soul now? his soul and body were
pulled asunder, and through the vail of his flesh, as it were with blood about
his ears he entered the Holy of Holies unto God, saying, Lord, here am I in my
blood; and here is blood that speaks better things than the blood of Abel, that
cries for vengeance, this for blessing and expiation of our sins.

JOHN 1.12. But to as many as received him, to them gave he Power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name.


HAving heretofore declared unto you the woeful estate and condion wherein we
stand by nature, I proceeded to the Remedy, that God of his infinite Mercy has
provided for the recovery of miserable sinners from the wrath to come. And
therein I proposed two things, that our Savior, that was to advance us, and
raise us out of this condition, when we had lost our selves in Adam, did both
deliver us from the punishment, which we had deserved, and also translate it
upon his own person. He did his own self bear our sins in his own body on the
tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. We having eaten sour grapes, he was to have his teeth set on
edge; we accounted him smitten of God, and buffeted; but we had sinned, and he
was beaten. That when the Lord in his wrath was ready to smite us, he underwent
the dint of God's sword, and stood betwixt the blow and us; the blow lighted on
him that was equal with God, and deserved not to be beaten. Awake O sword
against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow. The sword was
unwilling to strike him; and thus being smitten he became a propitiation for
our sins: The chastisement of our peace was on him. He offered himself a
sacrifice: Here are two things considerable; 1. How Christ was offered for us.
2. How he is offered to us.


First, For us, and so he offered up himself a Sacrifice, a sweet smelling
Sacrifice unto God, Ephesians. 5.2. Mark the point is, he is not only the Sacrifice,
but the Sacrificer. He offered up himself, says the Apostle; He was the
Priest, and it was part of his Priesthood to offer up himself. The Sacrifices
in the old Law that typified him, were only sufferers. The poor beasts were
only passive: but our Savior he must be an Actor in the business. He was
active in all that he suffered. He did it in obedience to his Fathers Will, yet
he was an Agent in all his Passions, John 11.43. He groaned in Spirit, and was
troubled; the Greek is (...), or (as it is in the Margent) He troubled himself.
With us in our Passions it is otherwise: we are mere sufferers. Our Savior was
a Conqueror over all his passions, and therefore unless he would trouble
himself, none else could trouble him: unless he would lay down his life, none
could take it from him; unless he would give his cheek to be smitten, the Jews
had no power to smite it. Isa. 50.6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, and hid not my face from shame and
spitting. In all these we should consider our Savior, not as a Sacrifice only,
but a Sacrificer also; an Actor in all this business: their wicked hands were
not more ready to smite, then he was to give his face to be smitten, and all to
show that it was a voluntary Sacrifice. He did all himself; He humbled himself
unto the death, Phil. 2.8. And now by all this we see what we have gotten: we
have gotten a remedy and satisfaction for sins. That precious blood of that
immaculate Lamb takes away the sins of the world, because it is the Lamb of
God, under which else the World would have eternally groaned.

Object. But does this Lamb of God take away all the sins of the world?

Sol. It does not actually take away all the sins of the world, but virtually,
It has power to do it, if it be rightly applied, the Sacrifice has such
virtue in it, that if all the World would take it, and apply it, it would
expiate, and remove the sins of the whole World: but it is here, as with
medicines, they do not help, being prepared, but being applied; Rhubarb purges
choler, yet not unless applied, etc. Exodus 39.38. there is mention made of a
Golden Altar. Christ is this Golden Altar, to show that his blood is most
precious: We are not redeemed with silver and gold, but with the precious blood
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Rev. 8.3. and 9.13. He is that golden Alter
mentioned in the Revelation, which stands before the Throne. He was likewise to
be a brazen altar; for so much was to be put upon him, that unless he were of
brass, and had infinite strength, he would have sunk under the burden. Its Jobs
Metaphor: Job in his passion says, Is my strength the strength of stones? or
is my flesh brass? Job 6.12. If Christ's flesh had not been brass: if he had not
been this brazen Altar, he could never have gone through these: now he is
prepared for us a sacrifice for sin. Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do,
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin, (for sin) make a stop there, condemned sin in the
flesh. This same ( for sin) has not reference to ( condemned) To condemn sin
for sin is not good sense; but the words depend on this ( God sent his Son)
that is, God sent his Son to be a Sacrifice for sin, (...), as the word is
translated. Heb. 10.6. a sacrifice for sin. It was impossible the Law should
save us: not because of any imperfection, or failing in the Law, but because
our weakness is such, as that we could not perform the conditions: therefore
God was not tied to promises; by reason then of the weakness of our flesh,
rather than we should perish, God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and in that flesh of his condemned all our sins; we need not look that
sin should be condemned in us, when he bare our sins on the tree, then were our
sins condemned; therefore it is said, Isai. 53. When he had made his soul an
offering for sin: that is in the Original (when he had made his soul, sin) then
he saw his seed, Isa. 57.

We come now to the second thing, if Christ be offered for us, yet unless he
offer him to us: unless any man may have interest in him, it is nothing worth.
Here then stands the Mystery of the Gospel; Christ, when he comes to offer
himself to us, he finds not a whit in us that is to be respected; nothing. And
that is the ground of all disturbance to ignorant consciences; for there is
naturally in men pride and ignorance, they think they may not meddle with
Christ, through Gods Mercy; unless they bring something, unless they have
something of their own to lay down. This is to buy Christ, to barter betwixt
Christ and the soul: but salvation is a free gift of God. As the Apostle
speaks, Christ is freely given unto thee, when thou had nothing of worth in
thee. Faith, when it comes, empties thee of all that is in thee: To whom is the
Gospel preached? to the dead. Now before Christ quicken thee, thou art stark
dead, rotting in thy sins. Here Is the point then, when there is no manner of
goodness in thee, in the world. In me, says St. Paul, that is, in my flesh
there is no good thing. When I have been the most outrageous sinner, I may lay
hold on Christ. Christ comes and offers himself to thee.

Now when Christ offers, the other part of the relation holds, we may take. We
have an interest to accept what he proffers. Consider it by an example: If one
give me a million, and I receive it not, I am never the richer: and so if God
offer me his Son, and with him all things, I am nothing the better, if I
receive him not. That he is born and given, what is that to us? unless we can
say, To us a child is born, to us a Son is given, Isa. 9.6. Faith comes with a
naked hand to receive that which is given; we must empty our selves of what is
in us. Consider thy estate, the Lord sets dow^ how it is with us, when he comes
to look upon us; Ezekiel. 16.6. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted
in thy blood, I said unto thee, when thou w^rt in thy blood, live. Why is this
^et down? It Is to show how God finds nothing in us, when he comes to show
Mercy. He finds nothing in us that is lovely, when he comes to bestow his Son
upon us. For it is said, Rev 1.5. That Christ loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood. He does first cast his eyes upon us, when we are
unwashed; as I may say, unwashed* and unblessed: When no eye pitied thee, and
thou wast cast out in the open fi^ld; when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto
thee, live: when he comes to making up of the match, verse. 9. Then I washed
thee with water; yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I
anointed thee with oil: I clothed thee also with embroidered work, and shod
thee with badgers skins* etc. That is, when Christ comes to cast his affections
on us, and to wed us unto himself, he finds us polluted, and naked, not with a
rag on us. Full of filth, just nothing have we, he takes us with nothing; nay,
we are worse than nothing: So that here is the point; what ground is there
whereby a man that is dead, and has no goodness in him, (m^ke him as ill as
can be imagined,) what ground has he to receive Christ? Yes, To as many as
received him, to them he gave the power to become the sons of God. First, The
receiving of Christ, and then comes Believing. It is the receiving of this
gift, that is the means, whereby Christ is offered to us. The Apostle joining
the first and second Adam together, makes the benefit we have by the second to
lie in the point of receiving; Romans 5.17.

Object. If it be a free gift, why is faith required?

Sol. Because faith takes away nothing from the gift. If a man give a beggar an
Alms, and he reach out his hand to receive it, his reaching out the hand makes
the gift never the less, because the hand is not a worker, but an instrument in
receiving the free gift. Romans 5.15. If through the offense of one many be dead,
much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace has abounded unto many in
Jesus Christ. And verse. 17. If by one man's offense death reigned by one, much
more they that receive abundance of grace shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ: Here Is the point then, God is well pleased, and therefore sends to us.
Will thou have my Son? with him thou shall have abundance of Grace, and
everlasting life, and my love too. There Is no Creature in this place, but this
shall be made good unto, if he can find in his heart to take Christ; thou shall
have a warrant to receive him. Now to receive Christ, is to believe in his
name, and to draw near unto him. (The word Receiving) is a taking with the
hand, with free entertainment; as verse. 11. immediately before the Text. It Is
not so properly Receiving, as Entertaining. He came to his own, and his own
received him not; they were like the foolish Gaderens, that preferred their
pigs before Christ; they would rather have his room, than his company: and so,
when Christ comes, and thou have rather be a free man, as thou think, and
wilt not have him to reign over thee, then thy case is lamentable: Then
self-will, self-have. The only point is, whether we come to Christ, or he come
to us, there is a drawing near. If thou come to Christ he will not put thee
back; if Christ come to thee by any good motion, if thou shut not the door
against him thou sh^lt (...) him; R^v. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and
knock: i^ a^^ man hea^ m^ v^ice, and open the door, I will come in unto him,
and ^up wi^h him, and he wi^h me. Rev. 1.16. The Lord by the knock of his
mouth, by the sword that comes out of his mouth, would fain come in, and be
familiar with thee. If thou will not let him in, is it not good reason that (as
in the Canticles, Cant. 5.6.) he withdraw himself? If he see thy sins, and
would fain come in, what an encouragement have thou to open? Joh. 6.37. He that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, Can thou have a better word from
thy Prince than this? When he holds out his golden Scepter, if thou take
hold on it, thou art safe; otherwise thou art a dead man: thou can not have a
greater security; all the point is, Faith is a drawing near unto Christ, and
Unbelief is a going from him; The Gospel is preached to those that are afar
off, and to those that are near. Ephesians. 2.17. He came to preach peace to you that
are afar off, and to them that are nigh. Who were they that were afar off? they
were those that had uncircumcision in the flesh, without Christ, Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, (...), those that had no hope; to these Christ came;
these that were afar off, by faith drew near: that expression is a singular
one, Heb. 10.38. Now the just shall live by faith; What is that? but if any man
draw back, that is, if any man be an Unbeli^ver, my soul shall have no pleasure
in him. Faith makes a man come, and draw near to Christ. It Is a shame-faced
bashfulness, that makes a man draw back; its unbelief, if any draw back, and to
believe, is to go on with boldness; We are not of them which draw back unto
perdition, but of them, etc. What an excellent encouragement is this, to come
with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, that we may find help in time of need?
So that now let thy estate be what it will; if thou will not hold off, but do
entertain Christ, though thy sins be as red as scarlet, be not discouraged,
they shall be made as white as wool, Isa. 1.18. The very sinner against the
Holy Ghost is invited; and why is that unpardonable? Can any sin be so great,
as to overtop the value of Christ's blood? There is not so much wretchedness
in the heart of man, as there is Grace, Goodness and Mercy in Christ: But then
it is unpardonable; Why? Because it is the nature of the disease, that will not
suffer the plaster to stick on. It counts the blood of the Covenant, wherewith
we should be sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29. If this sinner would not
pluck off the plaster, and tread it under foot, he should be saved: but this
is it, when God is liberal, and Christ is free, we have not the heart to take
him at his word, and come. To open this Word, this is the point of all, this is
the free preaching of the Gospel indeed; when a man has nothing desirable in
him, but is stark naught, and stark dead, and is not worth the taking up; that
yet he may challenge Christ, and be sure of all. Unless thou have Christ thou
have nothing by Promise, not so much as a bit of bread by Promise; if thou have
it, it is by Providence; All the Promises of God are in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. that
is, Christ, yea, and Amen: Ye are the Children of the Promise in Christ, Gal
3.29. and 4.28. but you have nothing till you be in Christ.

The Question is, What must I do in this case? What encouragement shall I have
in my rags, when I am abominable, worth nothing?

There are certain things that are preparations to a Promise; such as are
Commands, Precepts, Entreaties, which encourage them to it; and then comes a
proposition: I being a Believer, shall have eternal life; If Christ be mine, I
may challenge forgiveness of sins, the favor of God, and everlasting life: But
how is Faith wrought? believe not that foolish conceit that is too common in
the world; that faith is only, a strong persuasion that God is my God, and my
sins are forgiven; this is a foolish thing, a fancy, a dream, unless it be
grounded on the Word of God. Its but a dream, else that will lead thee unto a
fool's Paradise. Nothing can uphold faith, but the Word of God: here is the
point; I being as bad as bad can be, what ground have I out of the Word of God,
of an Unbeliever to be made a Believer? Now we must not take every Text, but
such only as may be appliable to a dead man, one that has no goodness in him,
that is yet out of Christ; we were all swimming at liberty till this Word
catched us in; we never thought of the business before, till we were thus
taken. Now there are certain degrees to get faith in us.

1. The first word is a general proclamation, whereby Christ gives any one
leave to come and take him. Christ is not only a Fountain sealed, as in the
Canticles, but a Fountain open for sin and for uncleanness, as in Zachary: So
that now, when he keeps open house, he makes proclamation that none shall be
shut out. He puts none back; sins, not the greatest that can be, can keep thee
back: This is the first thing; and to confirm it, we have our Savior's own
proclamation; Isa. 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsts, come you to the waters;
and he that has no money, come, buy, and eat: yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money, and without price. A strange contradiction, one would thing;
What! buy, and yet without money, and without price. The reason is, because
there is a certain thing which fools esteem a price, which is none; Rev. 3.18.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold which is tried in the fire: Why? How must this
be done? Truly thus; whenever a sinner comes to Christ to have his sins
pardoned, and to be a Subject of Christ's Kingdom, thou must not then be as
thou wast, but thou must be changed. Thou must not live as thou did before,
in the state of rebellion. Now to leave sin is not worth a rush, it is not a
sufficient price; but yet we see a fool will esteem his own bables: I must lay
down my lusts, I must lay down my covetousness, intemperance, etc. and a man
thinks it a great matter thus to do; and to leave the freedom that he had
before, though it be a matter of nothing. When a rebel receives his pardon, is
the King's pardon abridged, because he must live like a Subject hereafter? Why
should he also seek for the benefit of a Subject? This is said in respect of
the foolish conceit of man, who thinks it a great price to forsake his
corruptions. Again, Joh. 7.37. with the same loud voice, Christ cried when he
offered himself a Sacrifice for sin: he cried at the time of the great feast,
that all should come. In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood,
and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. In ult.
Rev. there is a quicunque vult; that is it I pressed: It is a place worth gold.
And these are the places which being applied, make you of strangers, to draw
near: but now these are not appliable to a man before he has grace; every one
cannot apply them. Never forget that place while you live; it is the close of
God's Holy Book, and the sealing up of his Holy Book: What Is that? It is in
Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, come, and let him that is a
thirsty come, and drink of the water of life freely. Whosoever will, let him
come: what would thou have more? Have thou no Will to Christ? No Will to
salvation? then it is pity thou should be saved. No man can be saved against
his Will, nor blessed against his Will: If thou will not have Christ, if thou will try conclusions with God, then go further, and fare worse; but whosoever
will, let him come. Oh! but I have a Will: Why, then thou have a warrant; take
Christ.

Object. But, O Sir, you are a great Patron of Free will: What? does it all lie
in a man's Will? Will you make the matter of taking Christ lie there?

Sol. I say, if thou see thou have a Will, then thou have a warrant; I say
not that this Will comes from thy self. It is not a blind faith will do thee
good; the Word of God works faith in thee, thou have not a Will to it born in
thee. It is not a flower that grows in thine own Garden, but is planted by God;
Joh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw
him. What? Will Christ offer violence to the Will, and draw a man against his
Will? No, there is no such meaning. It is expounded in the 65th. verse. No man
can come unto me, except it were given him of my Father. By this Christ shows
what he meant. If thou have a Will to come, thank the Father for it; for of
Him, as in the Philippians, we have both the Will and the Deed. Take for
example that general Proclamation in the book of Ezra, Whatever Jew would,
might be free, Ezra 1.3. So said the King that had power to make them free; Who
is there among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build the house of the God of Israel. Then we
read, verse. 5. Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and
the Priest, and the Levites, with all them whose Spirit God had raised up to go
up. Observe here, though the proclamation were general, yet the raising up of
the Will was from the Spirit of the Lord. We must not by any means take our
Will for a ground: the Will comes from God; but if thou have the Will, thou
have a warrant. Whoever will, let him take the water of life freely without
covenanting: say not if thou had but a measure of faith, and such a measure
of humiliation; for that were to compound with Christ: away with that;
whosoever will, let him come. Christ keeps open house; Whosoever will, let him
come: whosoever comes to him, he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. If thou
have a heart to come to him, he has a willing heart to receive thee; as it was
with the Prodigal Son, the Father stays not till he comes to him, but runs to
meet him: he is swift to show Mercy, and to meet us, though we come slowly on
toward him. But this is not all, there is a second gracious Word that is
preached to a man, not yet in the state of Grace. A man that keeps open house,
he seldom invites any particularly; but if he come, he shall be welcome.
Christ, he keeps open house; but some are so fearful, and so modest, that
unless they have a special invitation, they are ashamed to come to Christ; they
reason thus, if my case were an ordinary man's, I should come; but I am so vile
and wretched, that I am ashamed to come; my sins have been so many, and so
heavy, that I am not able to bear so great a weight; they are more in number
than the hairs of my head; and yet farther, alas they are crying ones to. But
hearken, here is a second word; Do thou think thy case more heavy, because
thou art out of measure sinful. Lo, it pleases God to send thee a special
invitation, who find thy self discouraged with the great bulk and burden of
thy sins. See Mat. 11.28. Though all apply it not to this use, Come unto me all
you that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. You, of all
others, are they that Christ looks for. Those that can walk bolt upright in
their sins, that desire to live and die in them, they will not look upon me,
and I will not look upon them; they scorn me, and I scorn them: but you, that
are heavy laden, and feel the burden of your sins, are invited by Christ. Let
not Satan then cousen you of the comfort of this word; that which Christ makes
the latch to open the door to let himself in, we do usually (by our
foolishness) make the bolt to shut him out. Let thy wound be never so great,
thou have a warrant to come, and be cured: be of good comfort then, as it was
said to blind Bartimeus, Mar. 10.49. So it is to thee; Lo, he calls thee.
When Christ bids thee come, and gives thee his Word, that he will heal thee,
Come, let not the Devil, or thy corruptions hinder thee, or make thee stay
back; haste thee to this City of Refuge, he has engaged his Word for thee, and
he will ease thee. But now, after all these there is a

Third Word, that though Christ keeps open house, so that who will, may freely
come; and though he sends special invitations to them, that are most bashful,
because their case is extraordinary: What do you think now, that Christ will
come with his Soldiers, and destroy those that do not come in? He might do it,
when he is so free, and invites thee, and thou turnest it back again into his
hand: But yet here is another word of comfort, Christ does not only send a
Messenger to invite thee, who have no goodness in thee, but he falls to
beseeching and entreating thee; and that is a third word, whereby faith is
wrought in an Unbeliever; 2 Cor 5.10. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us; observe the place, We pray you in Christ's
stead be reconciled unto God. This is the most admirable word that ever could
be spoken unto a sinner. Alas! thou may say, I am afraid that God will not
be friends with me; why? he would have thee to be friends with him: do not
then, with the Papists, m^ke such an austere God, as though he might not be
spoken unto, as though thou might not presume thy self, but must make
friends unto him; W^ have not an High Priest that is not touched with our
infirmities, Heb. 4.15. Will the Papists tell me, I am bold if I go to God, or
lay hands on Christ? I am not more bold than welcome; Let us go with boldness
to the Throne of grace, verse. 16. We are commanded to it. Do not think but that
he had bowels to weep over Jerusalem, and he carried the same into heaven; when
thou lie groaning before him, he will not spurn thee. We pray you, and
beseech you to be friends; therefore in this case make no doubt, it is God's
good pleasure to entreat thee, and therefore thou have warrant enough. Christ
wept over Jerusalem, and he is as ready to embrace thee. You have now three
words to make a man of an Unbeliever, a Believer: Is there, or can there be
more than these; Open Housekeeping, Special Invitations, Entreaties and
Beseechings? Yet there is more than all this; which if thou have not a heart of
stone, it will make thee believe, or make thee rue it. And that is,

4. When God sees all these things will not work with us, but we are slow of
heart to believe, then he quickens us; and there comes a word of Command. God
charge, and commands thee to come; and then if thou breakest his Command, be
it to thy peril: It is the greatest sin, that can be committed. Thou will not
draw near to God, because thou art a sinner; thou now committest a greater sin,
than before, thou returnest back Christ unto God, thou bidest him take his
commodity into his hand again, thou will not believe: and this is an heinous
crime; Joh. 16.8, 9. And when the Spirit shall come, it shall reprove the world
of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; of sin, because they believe not in
me. This is that great sin he shall convince the world of, because they believe
not in him. Of all sins, this was the most notorious; this makes us keep all
other sins in possession: It is not only one particular sin, but it fastens all
other sins upon us, be they never so many. When faith comes, it will out them,
but till then they remain in thee; where there is no Commandment, there is no
sin. How could it be a sin in not believing, if I were not commanded so to do:
But you shall hear more than so. When the Apostle speaks of excluding Rejoicing
under the Law; Romans 3.37. Where is boasting, then, says he? it is excluded: By
what Law, by the Law of works? No, but by the Law of faith: there is a Law of
works, and a Law of faith. God does not only give thee leave to come, and take
him, and draw near unto him, but he commands thee; there is a Law: by the breach
of that Law of faith thou art made guilty of a a high sin. There is a full
testimony of this; 1 John 3.23. And this is the Commandment, that we should
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. If a man should ask, may I love my
Neighbor? would you not think him a fool? because he must do it, he is
commanded. So should a poor soul come, and say to me, may I believe? thou fool,
thou must believe. God has laid a Command upon thee, it is not left to thy
choice: The same Commandment that bids thee love thy brother, bids thee to
believe on Christ. To Entreaty is added God's Command; and therefore, if thou
shall argue, what warrant have I to believe? Why, God enjoins it thee, and
commands it. As the impotent man said, so may thou; He that healed me, said
unto me, take up thy bed, and walk. This is the very Key of the Gospel, and
this is the way to turn it right. When being thus clean naked, we have as it
were a Cable put in our hands, to draw our selves out of this flesh and blood.

5. The last thing is, if keeping Open House, Special Invitations, Entreaties
and Commands will not serve the turn, then Christ waxes angry: What, to be
scorned, wheh he proffered Mercy, and as it were, invite all sorts, and compel
them to come in by his Preachers, and by a peremptory Command? Then he falls a
threatening, We are not of those which draw back unto perdition; if thou will
not come upon this Command, thou shall be damned; Mar. 16.16. He that believes
not, shall be damned. Christ commands them to go into the world, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature, unto every soul this Gospel which I speak. If you
will not hear, and believe; if you will not take God at his Word, you shall be
damned; Joh. 3.36. He that believes not, shall not see life; but the wrath of
God abides on him. Here is an iron scourge to drive thee, thou that art so
slow of heart to believe. In Psalm. 78. where is set down God's mercy unto the
Israelites: afterward comes one plague upon another; verse. 22. it is said They
believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation. A like passage to this
out of the 95th. Psalm, is applied, in Heb. 3.2. to Unbelievers. And the reason
of God's wrath mentioned in the 78th. Psalm, is said to have been the unbelief
of the people; The Lord heard this, and was wrath; a fire was kindled against
Jacob, and against Israel. Why was this? because they believed not in him,
because they trusted not in his salvation. Nothing will more provoke God to
anger, than when he is liberal and gracious, and we are straightened in our
selves, harden our hearts, and not trust him: never forget this Sermon, while
you live; this is the net that Christ has to draw you out of the world. I
shall hereafter tell you what faith is, which is to receive Christ, and to
believe in his name: but that will require a more particular explication. And
on that I shall enter the next time.

EPHESIANS. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of truth, the
Gospel of your salvation, In whom also after you believed, you were sealed with
the Holy Spirit of Promise.


THE last time I entered on the declaration of that main point, and part of
Religion, which is the foundation of all our hopes and comfort, namely, the
offering of Christ unto us; that as he did offer himself a Sacrifice to his
Father for us upon the Cross, so that which is the basis, ground and foundation
of our comfort is, that he offers himself unto us. And here comes in that
gracious gift of the Father which closes in with God: That as God says, To us
a child is born, to us a Son is given, etc. So there is grace given us to
receive him. And as the greatest gift does not enrich a man, unless he accept
it, and receive it; so this is our case, God offers his Son unto us, as an
earnest of his love; if we will not receive him, we cannot be the better for
him: If we refuse him, and turn Gods Commodity, which he offers us, back upon
his hand, then Gods storms, and his wrath abides on us for evermore. That it is
his good pleasure that we should receive Christ, it is no doubt, we have his
word for it: All the point is, how we may receive him, and that is by Faith.

And in this Text is declared, how Faith is wrought, and that is by the Word of
truth; In whom also you trusted, after you had heard the Word of Truth. Now
after this Faith, there comes a sealing by the Spirit of God; In whom also,
after you believed, you were sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. Now lest a
man should through ignorance, and indiscretion, be misled and deceived, there
is faith, and there is feeling. Where this is not feeling I mean, I say not,
that there is no faith; No: For feeling is an after thing, and comes after
Faith. If we have Faith, we live by it; But after you believed, you were
sealed. You see then Faith is that, whereby we receive Jesus Christ, and to as
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, to as
many as believe on his name. The blood of Christ is that which cures our
souls, but (as I told you) it is by application. A Medicine heals not by being
prepared, but being applied: So the blood of Christ shed for us, unless applied
to us, does us no good. In Heb. 12. Its called the blood of sprinkling: and
that in the 51. Psalm, has relation to it, where he says, Purge me with
hysop. In the Passover there was blood to be shed, not to be spilt, but to be
shed: And then to be gathered up again, and put into a Basin, and when they had
so done, they were to take a bunch of Hysop and dip and sprinkle, etc. Faith is
this bunch of Hysop that dips it self as it were into the Basin of Christ's
blood, and our souls are purged by being sprinkled with it. In Levit. 14.6.
There was a bird to escape alive; but see the preparation for it, You shall
take it, and the scarlet, and the Cedar wood, and the Hysop, and shall dip
them, and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed, etc. And
then you shall sprinkle on him, that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven
times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose into
the open field. We are thus let loose, cleansed and freed; but how? Not unless
we are dipped, as the living bird was in the blood of the dead bird, there is no
escaping, unless we are dipped in the blood of Christ Jesus, this dead bird, and
sprinkled with this Hysop, we cannot be freed.

So that now to come to that great matter, without which Christ profits us
nothing, which is Faith. The Well is deep, and this is the Bucket with which we
must draw. This is the hand by which we must put on Christ; As many as are
baptized put on Christ: Galat. 3.27. Thus must we be made ready: We must be
thus clothed upon, and by this hand attire our selves with the Sun of
Righteousness. Malac. 4.2. Wherefore I declared unto you that this Faith must
not be a bare conceit, floating in the brain; not a device of our own. The
Devil taking hold on this, would soon lead a man into a fools Paradise. To say
I am Gods Child, and sure I shall be saved, I am persuaded so: this the Devil
would say Amen to, and would be glad to rock men asleep in such conceits. Such
are like the foolish Virgins, That went to buy oil for their Lamps; And were
persuaded they should come soon enouoh to enter with the Bridegroom; but their
persuasion was groundless, and they were shut out. So such groundless
persuasions and assurances in a man's soul, that he is the child of God, and
shall go to Heaven, is not Faith; thou may carry this assurance to Hell with
thee: This Faith is not Faith; For faith comes by hearing, and that not of
every word or fancy, but by hearing the Word of Truth. Faith must not go a jot
further then the Word of God goes. If thou have an apprehension, but no
warrant for it out of the Word of God, it is not faith, for its said, After you
heard the Word of Truth you believed. So that we must have some ground for it
out of the Word of Truth, otherwise it is presumption, mere conceits, fancy,
and not Faith.

Now I showed unto you the last time how this might be; for while a man is an
Unbeliever, he is wholly defiled with sin, he is in a most loathsome condition;
he is in his blood, filthy, and no eye pities him. And may one fasten comfort
on one in such a condition, on a dead man? And this I showed you was our case:
When Faith comes to us, it finds no good thing in us it finds us stark naked,
and stark naught: yet there is a Word for all this to draw us unto Christ, from
that miserable Ocean in which we are swimming unto perdition, if God catch us
not in his Net. Hearken we therefore to Gods Call: There is such a thing as
this Calling. God calls thee and would change thy condition, and therefore
offers thee his Son. Will thou have my Son? Will thou yield unto me? Will thou
be reconciled unto me? Will thou come unto me? And this may be preached to the
veriest Rebel that is. It is the only Word whereby faith is wrought. It is not
by finding such and such things in us before hand, No, God finds us as bad as
bad may be, when he proffers Christ unto us. He finds us ugly and filthy, and
afterward washes us, and makes us good. It is not because I found this or that
good thing in thee, that I give thee interest in my Son, take it not on this
ground. No he loved us first, and when we were defiled, he washed us from our
sins in his own blood, R^v. 1.5. Now there is a double love of God toward his
Creatures.

1. Of Commiseration. 2. Of Complacency.
That of Commiseration, is a fruit of love which tenders and pities the
miserable estate of another.

But now there is another love of Complacency, which arises from a likeness
between the qualities and manners of persons: for like will to like: and this
love God never has but to his Saints after Conversion, when they have his
Image enstamped in them, and are reformed in their Understandings, and Wills,
resembling him in both, then, and not till then bears he this love toward
them. Before, he loves them with the love of pity: and so God loved the World,
that is, with the love of Commiseration, that he sent his only Son, that
whosoever believed in him might not perish, but have everlasting life. And
therefore he said in the Prophet Isaiah. In his Love and in his pity he
redeemed them. chap. 63. ver. 9.

Now we come to the point of Acceptance: The Word is free, and it requires
nothing but what may consist with the freest gift that may be given. Although
here be something that a man may startle at.

Object. Is there not required a condition of faith, and a condition of
obedience?

Sol. Neither of these according to our common Understanding, do hinder the
fullness and freedom of the Grace of the Gospel.

1. Not Faith, because Faith is such a condition, as requires only an empty
hand to receive a gift freely given. Now does that hinder the freeness of the
gift, to say, you must take it? Why, this is requisite to the freest gift that
can be given. If a man would give something to a Beggar, if he would not reach
out his hand and take it, let him go without it, its a free gift still; so that
the condition of Faith is such a condition as requires nothing, but an empty
hand, to receive Christ.

2. Obedience hinders it not. I am required, may some say, to be a new man, a
new Creature, to lead a new life: I must alter my course: And is not this a
great clog and burden? And do you account this free? When I must crucify
lusts, mortify Passions, etc. Is this free, when a man must renounce his own
Will? Yes; It is as free, as free may be; as a I showed you the last time. The
very touching, and accepting of Christ implies an abnegation of former
sinfulness, and a going off from other courses that are contrary to him. If the
King give a pardon to a notorious Rebel for Treason, so that now he must live
obedient as a Subject, the King need not in regard of himself to have given the
pardon; if he give it, it takes not from its freeness, that he must live like a
Subject afterward; the very acceptance of the pardon implies it.

But now to declare Faith, and to open the Mystery thereof. Faith is a great
thing: It is our life; our life stands in the practice of it: That as in the
offering of Christ for us, there is given him a name above every name, That at
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: As, I say, in the purchasing of
Redemption, so in the point of acceptance; God has given unto this poor
virtue of faith a name above all names. Faith indeed, as it is a virtue, is
poor and mean, and comes far short of love: and therefore by the Apostle, love
is many degrees preferred before faith, because love fills the heart, and faith
is but a bare hand, it lets all things fall, that it may fill it self with
Christ. Its said of the Virgin Mary, That God did respect the low estate of his
handmaid: So God respects the low estate of Faith, that nothing is required,
but a bare empty hand, which has nothing to bring with it, though it be never
so weak, yet if it have a hand to receive, it is (...), a like precious faith,
2 Pet. 1.1. that of the poorest Believer, and the greatest Saint.

Now that we may come unto the point, without any more going backwards. In the
words read, there is the point of faith, and a thing God confirms it withal, a
seal: In whom also after that you believed, you were sealed. Faith is of it a
self a thing unsealed: The sealing with the holy Spirit of Promise is a point
beyond faith; its a point of feeling, and not only of believing of Gods Word,
but a sensible feeling of the Spirit: A believing in my soul, accompanied with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory: of which sealing we shall speak more
hereafter. Observe for the first.

1. The Object of it, In whom you trusted. We speak of Faith now as it
justifies, as it apprehends Christ for its Object: for otherwise Faith has as
large an Extent as all Gods Word. Faith has a hand to receive, whatsoever God
has a mouth to speak. What is the Object? He in whom you trusted. It is a
wonder to see how many are deceived, who make the forgiveness of sins to be the
proper Object of faith. A man may call, as long as he lives, for forgiveness of
sins, yet, unless there be the first Act, to lay hold on Christ, in vain does
he expect forgiveness of sins. Until thou do accept Christ for thy King and
Savior, thou have no promise. We are never Children of the Promise, till we
are found in him. The proper and immediate Object of Faith is, first Christ,
and then God the Father by him: For Faith must have Christ for its Object. I
must believe in none else but God, in, and through Christ. Now that this is so,
we may see in that famous place. 1 Pet. 1.21. When he had spoken of the
precious blood of Christ, the Lamb without blemish, he goes on, and shows, that
he was manifested in those last times, for you, who by him do believe in God,
that raised up Christ from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and
hope might be in God. There is no true believing in God the Father, but by the
Son. The proper Object of Hope, and Faith, is God, and he that does believe or
hope, or trust in any thing else, there is Idolatry in it; we believe in God by
him: so that the primary Object of Faith is Christ. Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the
Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ. What Is my Faith then? If thou will be
the Child of God, receive, hold Christ Jesus, accept him for thy Savior, and
for thy Lord: He is the proper Object of thy Faith. Again, you must have Christ
Jesus, and him crucified, that should be the highest knowledge in our account.
To know Christ, and him crucified, and by it to accept him. Hereupon the
Apostle to the Romans, when he speaks of faith, makes the Object of it Christ,
and Christ crucified. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood; to declare his Righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past through the forbearance of God. Whatsoever then thou find
in Christ, is an Object of thy Faith. John 6. The point is, He who eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, that is, he who receives me, and makes me as his
meat and drink dwells in me and I in him. ver. 56. Compare this, Romans 3.2^
with Romans 5.9. for its worth comparing. We are said to be justified by his
blood, Romans 5.9. By faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. Now both these come to one,
and they resolve the point, and clear the Question, whether Faith in it self,
as a Virtue does justify, or in respect of its Object? surely its in respect
of the Object. You that have skill in Philosophy, know, that heat, if
considered as a quality, its effects are not so great; but considered as an
instrument, it transcends the sphere of its own activity; it does wonders; for
its the principle of generation, and many other strange effects. So here, take
faith as a Virtue, and its far short of love: but consider it as an instrument,
whereby Christ is applied, and it transcends, it works wonders, beyond its
proper sphere: for the meanest thing it lays hold on, is the Son of God. He
that has the Son, has life, etc. Some would think this an hard kind of
speech, when we are justified by faith, we are justified by Christ, apprehended
by faith: and yet that place is clear, to be justified by his blood: And faith
in his blood becomes one faith. As if a man should say, I was cured by going to
the Bath: So faith comes unto Christ; faith is the legs. A man is not said
properly to be cured, by going to the Bath, nor justified by coming to Christ
by the legs of faith: but the applying of the Bath, the coming to Christ, and
applying of his virtue, to make him the Object of my faith, this is the way to
be justified. As it is not the making and preparing of a plaster, that cures,
but the applying it; so that this concludes this point, that the true Object of
faith is Christ crucified, and God the Father in, and by him. Here then is the
point, thou must not look for any comfort in faith, till thou have Christ; and
to think thou shall ever have any benefit by God, till thou Christ, thou
deceivest thy self. It is impossible for a man to receive nourishment by his
beead and drink, till he partake of it in the substance: so thou must partake
of Christ, before thou can receive any nourishment by him. Christ says not
thou must have forgiveness of sins, or thou must have my Fathers favor, but
take my body and blood, take me crucified. Buy the field, and the treasure is
thine: but thou have nothing to do with the treasure, till thou gettest the
field. This is preferment enough, to have the Lords Promise to Abraham, I am
thy exceeding great reward: I am my well-beloveds, and my well-beloved is mine.
There is a spiritual match betwixt Christ and thee: There are many, who are
matched with Christ, and yet know not how rich they are: When a man reckons of
what he shall get by Christ only, when all his thoughts are on that, he
marries the portion, and not the person: thou must set thy love on Christ's
person, and then having him, all that he has is thine: How rich Christ is, so
rich art thou: he must first be thine. He that has the Son, has life, but the
Son must first be had. Is there any now in this congregation, who is so
hardhearted, as to refuse such a gift as this? When God shall give thee his
Son, if thou will take him, is there any so profane, as with Esau to sell his
birthright, etc. To pursue the poor pedling things of this life, and refuse
salvation, so high a gift? A gift which is not given to Angels, they think it
an honor, to wait at the Lords Table: They have not this precious food given
to them; they never taste it: and therefore many Christians, on serious
consideration would not change their estate for the estate of Angels. Why?
Because hereby Christ is my Husband, I am wedded to him, he is bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh which privilege the Angels are not capable of. Our
nature is advanced above the Angelical nature: for we shall sit and judge the
world with Christ, judge the twelve Tribes of Israel: And what an high
preferment is this? Nay, observe this, and take it for a Rule. Never beg of God
pardon for thy sins, till thou have done this one thing, namely, accepted of
Christ from Gods hands. For thou never can confidently ask any thing till
thou have him: For all the Promises of God are in him, yea, and Amen. This may
serve for the Object of faith: to show that the primary Object, is Christ
crucified, and God by him. We come now to declare;

2. The Acts of faith what they are, and there is some intricacy in that too:
There is much ado made in what part, and power of the soul faith is: We must
not proportionate the Act of faith according to our own fancy. For it is no
faith, but as it has relation to the Word: now look, how is the Word
presented: After you heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your salvation. Now
the word is presented under a double respect.

1. Its presented Sub ratione very; After you had heard the Word of Truth; and
there comes in the Understanding.

2. Then Sub ratione boni, as a good word, that so we should lay hold on it,
and here comes in the Will. For the Will, we say, challenges that which is
good, for its Object: Now the Gospel of salvation is a good Word; its glad
tidings worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to
save sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15. And now as the Word is presented, as a good Word, so
must my Act of faith be answerable unto it. See in Heb. 11.13. The act of faith
answering hereto, These all dyed in faith, not having received the Promises.
What did their faith to them? It made them see the Promises afar off, and they
were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were
strangers and pilgrims in the earth. So that by comparing place with place, it
appears that first this Gospel was presented as the word of Truth, they were
persuaded of it. It is the first Act of Faith, to persuade men of the truth of
the Word: and then, as it is a good word, they embraced it: These are the two
arms of faith; as true, it persuades me; as good, I embrace it. We must not now
be too curious in bringing in Philosophical Disputes, whether one Virtue may
reside in two Faculties; whether Faith may reside in the Understanding, and the
Will. The truth is, these things are not yet agreed upon; and shall we trouble
our selves with things not yet decided in the Schools, as, whether the
practical Understanding and the Will be distinct faculties or no? The Word of
God requires that I should believe with my whole heart; Act. 8.37. As Philip
told the Eunuch, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may. If with the
heart; but with what faculties may you say? Why, I tell thee, believe with thy
whole heart: And what! shall I piece and divide the heart, when the whole is
required? Now, to come to those two: The Word is presented, 1. As a true Word.
2. Then as a good Word; a word like Gospel, like salvation.


1. As a true Word. And the Act of faith answering thereto, is called in
Scripture (...), and (...), Knowledge and Acknowledgement, Tit. 1.1. 2 Pet.
1.3. and 2.18.

1. Knowledge, that is a thing requisite: Why? because, if there be a Remedy
able to cure a man's disease, if he do not know it, what is he the better for
it? Knowledge is so essential unto Faith, that without it there can be no
faith. In Joh. 17.3. the terms are confounded, the one put for the other: This
is life eternal, to know thee to be the true God; and whom, etc. to know thee,
that is, to believe in thee; because knowledge is so essential to belief, as
one cannot be without the other; thou can not believe what thou have never
heard of: I know, says Job, that my Redeemer lives; that is, I believe he
lives, Job 19 25. And hereupon it is said in Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many. Knowledge is an Act, primarily
requisite to Faith; to be justified by his knowledge, is to be justified by
faith in his blood. This then is the first thing, that I know it to be as true
as Gospel; then comes the acknowledgement.

2. The Acknowledgment. Joh. 6.69. We know, and are assured that thou art that
Christ. This is an assurance; I say not the assurance of my salvation, for that
is another kind of thing: But an assurance that God will keep touch with etc.
will not delude me, but that if I take his Son, I shall have life, I shall have
his favor. When God illuminates me, I find all things in him; when I have him,
I am made. When the Understanding clearly apprehends this, then comes the next
word, it is the Gospel of salvation, there being a knowing, and acknowledging,
the Act of the Understanding: then comes the Will, and it being,

2. Propounded as a good word; then follows, 1. Acceptance. 2. Affiance.


1. Acceptance, which receives Christ; Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to
them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
name. Then a man resolves, I will take God on his word: and thereupon follows

A resting or relying on God, which is a proper act of faith. I need no other
place than Romans 10.13. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
saved: But how shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? that is,
on whom they have not reposed their confidence. Mark the Apostle, How shall
they call on him, on whom they have not believed? That Faith which was the
Antecedent, must be in the conclusion; therefore our faith is a relying on God:
and so in this place this trust is made the same with faith, as it is in the
Text, in whom you trusted, after you had received the word of Truth: for our
trust and belief there is the self same word, -- Nimium ne creed colori: this (
Credo) is to have a great confidence in fleeting and fading things; and so it
is in justifying faith, With respect to the unshaken truths of the
incorruptible and unchangeable Word of his, which lives and abides for ever,
1 Pet. 1.23. If I have a knowledge of God, and acknowledgment of him, and from
my knowing, my will is conformed to accept Christ; and if when I have accepted
him, I will not part from him: this is faith, and if thou have this faith, thou will never perish. Suppose thou never had one day of comfort all thy life
long, yet my life for thine thou art saved. Perhaps by reason of thy ignorance
thou have no feeling, yet if thou consent, thou art justified; it is the
consent makes the match. If thou consent to the Father, and take Christ the
Son, know it, or know it not, thou have him: though thou know not, whether
thy sins are forgiven; yet as long as thou keep thy hold, all the Devil's
temptations shall never drive thee from him; thou art justified, and in a safe
case, though ignorance and other things in thee cause thee not to feel it, if
thou layest hold on him for his sake, thou art apprehended.

Object. Now then this is an easy matter, you will say.

Sol. Not so easy a matter as you guess it to be. It were easy indeed, were
there nothing but saying the word to make man and Wife; there are terms and
conditions to be agreed upon. God casts not his Son away, he looks there shall
be conditions on thy side; he must be thy King, and Head, if thou will have him
to be thy husband. But what shall I get by him then, says the wife? Get? there
is no end of thy getting. All is thine, Paul, Apollos, Cephas, Life. etc. Thou
art Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Every man will take Christ
thus for the better; but there is somewhat else in the match. If thou will have
him, thou must take him for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer. Indeed
there are precious things provided for you; It is your Father's good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Romans 8.17. You shall be Heirs with Christ,
but for the present, while you are in the Church Militant, you must take up
your Cross; you must not look for great things in this world: In this world you
must have tribulation, you must deny your selves, and your own Wills. What?
would you have Christ the wife, and you the husband? No, if you think so, you
mistake the match. Christ must be the Husband and the Head; and as the wife
promises to obey her husband, to stick to her husband in sickness and in
health, and to forsake all others; so Christ asks, will thou have me? if thou will, thou must take me on these terms, thou must take my Cross with me, thou
must deny thine own Will; yea, it may be thine own life also. Let a Christian
consider all these things, these are the words, and these are the benefits, and
then compare them together; and then if he can say, I will have Christ however,
for I shall be a saver by him: I will take him with all faults, and I know I
shall make a good bargain, therefore I will have him on any terms, come what
will; when a man can have his will so perpendicularly bent on Christ, that he
will have him, though he leave his skin behind him: there is a true acceptance
of him. We must not here distinguish with the Schools about Velleities, a
general wishing and woulding, and true desires after Christ: Wishers and
Woulders never thrive; but there must be resolution to follow Christ through
thick and thin, never to part with him: a direct Will is here required. And
therefore Christ bids us consider beforehand what it will cost us. If any man
come to me, and hate not Father and mother, Wife and Children, and his own life
also, he cannot be my Disciple. Luke 24.26. Do not think that our Savior here
would discourage men from love. Does the (...) love teach us hatred? The phrase
in the Hebrew is loving less, as it is said; Jacob have I loved, and Esau have
I hated, Deuteronomy. 21.15. that is, loved less. If a man has two wives, one
beloved, and the other hated, and they have born Children, both the beloved and
the hated: By hated is not meant, that the man hated one wife, but less loved
her, than the other. So if any man come to me, and hate not father and mother;
that is, if he love not all less than me; and that it is so, we may see it
expounded by our Savior. Mat 10.37. He that loves father and mother more than
me, is not worthy of me. There Christ expounds it. He that will follow Christ
in calm weather and not in a storm, is not worthy of him; Luke 14.28. Which of
you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost,
whether he have sufficient to finish it? What is that to the purpose? See verse.
33. So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
cannot be my Disciple. It is a small matter to begin to be a Christian, unless
you consider what it will cost you; Do you think it a small matter to be a
King's Son? 1 Samuel 18.23. think not on so great a business without
consideration what it will cost you. It will be the denying of your own wills.
You must be content to follow naked Christ nakedly; follow him in his
persecution and tribulation, in his death and suffering, if thou will be
conformable to him in glory. When this case comes, it makes many draw back, as
the rich man in the Gospel, when he must forsake all, he drew back. When
troubles arise, many are offended; so when it comes to a point of parting, they
go back.

Now we come to speak one word of the sealing of the Text. After that ye
believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise. This sealing, which
is a point of feeling, is a distinct thing of it self from faith; no part of
faith. If I have faith, I am sure of life, though I never have the other: these
are two seals. We put to our seals to the counter-part that is drawn betwixt
God and us.

The first seal is our faith. I have nothing but God's Word, and indeed I have
no feeling, yet I venture my salvation, and trust God upon his bare Word. I
will pawn all upon it; He that has received his testimony; that is, (in
effect) he that believes, says John, has set to his seal that God is true,
Joh. 3.33. If men doubt, and trust God no further than they see him, it is not
faith. But when God gives me a good word, though I am in as much distress as
ever, yet I trust, though it be contrary to all sense, or outward seeming, yet
I put to my seal, and trust him still.

Then comes God's counter-part. God being thus honored, that I believe his
Word, though contrary to all sense and feeling, even his bare Word; then God
sets to his seal, and now the Word comes to particularizing. Before it was in
general, now it comes and singles out a man, Say thou unto my soul, that I am
thy salvation, Psalm. 35.3. that is, as I did apply the generality of God's Word
unto mine own case to bear me up against sense, and feeling: then comes the
Spirit of God, and not only delivers generalities, but says unto my soul, I am
thy salvation. This is called in Scripture a manifestation, when God manifests
himself unto us; as in Isa. 60.16. Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles,
and shall suck the breast of Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy
Savior and thy Redeemer, etc. that is, when we have made particular
application by Faith, God will put to his seal, that I shall know, that God is
my strength and my salvation: I shall know it; Joh. 14.21. He that loves me
shall be loved of my Father, and I will manifest my self unto him. Christ
comes, and draws the Curtains, and looks on with the gracious aspect of his
blessed countenance. When this comes, it chears the heart, and then there are
secret love tokens pass betwixt Christ and his beloved. Rev. 2.17. To him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, save he that
receives it; that is, there is a particular intimation that I shall know of my
self more than any other; more than all the world besides: It is such a joy as
the stranger is not made partaker of, Prove. 14.10. such joy as is glorious and
unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. Such peace as pass^th all understanding, Philip. 4 7.
One minute of such joy surpasses all the joy in the world besides.

Now consider, sure there is such a thing as this joy, or else do you think the
Scripture would talk of it, and of the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, by whom we
know the things that are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. There is a
generation in the world, that has this joy, though you that know it not, do
not, nor cannot believe it; there is a righteous generation that have it: and
why do thou not try to get it? do as they do, and thou may obtain it
likewise; The secrets of the Lord are revealed to them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25.14. These are hidden comforts; do you
think God will give this joy to those that care not for him? No, the way is to
seek God, and to labor to fear him. The secrets of the Lord are revealed to
such, and such only as fear him; do as they do, and follow their example, and
thou may have it likewise.

Object. Many have served Christ long, and have not sound it.

Sol. It is long of themselves; you are straightened in your own bowels, or else,
Open your mouths wide, and God will fill them. No wonder that we are so barren
of these comforts, when we be straightened in our selves. There is a thing
wondrously wanting amongst us, and that is Meditation. If we could give our
selves to it, and go up with Moses to the Mount, to confer with God, and
seriously think of the price of Christ's death, and of the joys of heaven, and
the Privileges of a Christian; if we could frequently meditate on these, we
should have these sealing comforts every day, at least oftener. This has need
to be much pressed upon us; the neglect of this makes lean souls. He that is
frequent in that, has these sealing days often. Could thou have a parley
with God in private, and have thy heart rejoice with the comforts of another
day; even whilst thou art thinking of these things, Christ would be in the
midst of thee. Many of the Saints of God have but little of this, because they
spend but few hours in Meditation. And thus, as this hour would give leave,
have we proceeded in this point.

1 COR. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.


I Have heretofore declared unto you the ground of our salvation, and have
represented unto you, first, Christ offered for us, and secondly, Christ
offered to us. Now it has pleased Almighty God, not only to teach us this by
his Word; but because we are slow of heart to believe, and conceive the things
we hear, it pleases his glorious Wisdom, to add to his Word his Sacraments,
that so what we have heard with our ears, we may see with our eyes, being
represented by signs.

There is a visible voice whereby God speaks to the eyes: and therefore we find
in Exodus 4.8. God bids Moses that he should use signs, saying, It shall come to
pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first
sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign. Signs you know are
the Object of the eye, and yet see, they have, as it were, a visible voice,
which speaks to the eye. Now God is pleased to give us these signs for the
helping,

1. Of our Understanding: The eye and the ear are the two learned senses as we
call them, through which, all knowledge is conveyed into the soul: and
therefore, that we may have a more particular knowledge of Christ, God has not
only by his Ministry given us audible voices, but visible also in his
Sacramenss, by which, as by certain glasses he represents to us the Mystery of
Christ Jesus offered for us, and offered to us. And hence is it that Paul calls
the eyes to witness, as well as the ears, Gal. 3.1. O ye foolish Galathians,
who has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth, before whose eyes
Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth crucified amongst you! That is,
before whose eyes Christ has been crucified, not by hearsay, only, but
evidently before your eyes, not in any foolish Crucifix, with the Papists, but
in the blessed Sacrament, wherein he is so represented, as if his soul were
before our eyes poured out to death: so that by these Sacraments, heavenly
things are (as it were) clothed in earthly Garments, and this is the first
reason, viz. to help our Understanding: But besides he does it,

2. To help our Memory; we are apt to forget those wonderful things Christ has
wrought for us. And therefore, verse 24. and 25. Of this Chapter we are bid To
eat his body, and drink his blood in remembrance of him. To take the signs as
tokens of him; the Sacrament is as it were a monument and pillar raised up, to
the end, that when ever we see it, we should remember the Lords death, until be
come. Its said, 2 Samuel 18.18. That Absalom in his life time had taken, and
reared up for himself a Pillar, which is in the Kings dale; for he said, I have
no son to keep my name in remembrance. He would fain be remembered, bu he had no
Child, whereby he might live, after he was dead: therefore he raises it, and
calls it after his own name, Absoloms place, as it is this day: That so as
often as any came that way, they might remember him. Christ does thus by his
Sacrament and erects it as a Monument for the remembrance of his death, and (as
it were) calls it by his own name, saying, This is my body, and this is my
blood: That when ever we see them, we may call to mind, Christ off^red for us,
and to us. But that I may apply this my Doctrine to the ears also, know that,

3. These signs are for the strengthening of our faith, and therefore it is
considered, as a seal. Romans 4.11. Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, as
a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised.
It helps our understanding by being a sign, and is a confirmation, a seal: by
virtue whereof Chrlst is passed, and made over to us, so that we have as true
an interest and right to him, as to our meat, and drink: yea, he becomes as
effectually ours, for every purpose in our spiritual life, as our meat and
drink does for our corporal. To which end these Elements are changed
spiritually in their natures; not in substance but in use* so that which was
but now a common bread, becomes as far different as Heaven is from earth, being
altered in its use. For instance, the wax whereby the King passes over an
inheritance to us, and by which conveyances of our estates are made, that wax
is but as another piece of wax differing nothing from that which is in the
shop, till the King has stamped it with his Seal: But being once sealed, one
would not give it for all the wax in the Kingdom, for now it serves to another
use; so is it here in these elements; but still know, the difference is not in
the matter, or substance, but in the use. And this is the reason why this
blessed bread, and wine is termed a communion, namely, because it is an
instrument whereby Christ inflates me into himself, and whereby I have
fellowship, and communion with him.

In the words then we have these particulars, viz.

1. A sin. If any man shall presume to eat that bread, or drink that cup
unworthily. Its a dangerous thing, a great sin to eat and drink at the Lords
Table in an unworthy manner.

2. A punishment. He eats and drinks damnation, or judgment unto himself. So
that now what was ordained to life, and appointed to be a seal and confirmation
of Gods love and favor, is now changed and become a seal and confirmation of
Gods anger and indignation. The unworthy receiving of it makes it prove clean
contrary to what it was intended.

3. A reason, because he discerns not the Lords body, but takes them as
ordinary things, deeming the elements not different from the bread and wine
which we have at our Tables, not knowing that they are the dishes wherein
Christ is served in unto us, that by these the greatest gift is given us, and
nourishment conveyed, for the maintenance of our spiritual life. This life was
given us in baptism, but in and by these signs is conveyed spiritual
nourishment for the continuance and maintenance of it, for the strengthening of
our faith, and making us daily stronger and stronger to fight the Lords
battles: Now, when we discern not this, nor by the eye of faith see Christ
Jesus, crucified for us, and by these elements conveyed unto us, but take them
hand over head without any consideration, we receive them unworthily, and a
fearful indignity is offered unto Christ, which he will certainly revenge. I Will
then 1. Show in general what it is to eat worthily. 2. What it is to eat
judgment; and then 3. I Will come to the particulars, how this sin may be
avoided, and what the particulars are wherein the sin consists.


1. Concerning the first, What it is to eat unworthily.

Obj. And here may some say, is there any of us who can avouch that he eats and
drinks at the Lords Table (...)? is any so presumptuous to say, that he is
worthy to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood? As for bodily food and
entertainment, we are unworthy to present them to him; The Centurion could say,
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; How then comes this to
pass, that he which eats and drinks the Lords body unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself? If we are not worthy to present bodily food unto him; can
we be worthy to receive spiritual food from him?

Sol. But here understand what is set down; worthiness is not always taken for
a matter of merit, or proportion of worth between the person giving and
receiving; but in Scripture it is often taken for that which is meet, fitting,
and beseeming; And in this sense the Apostle uses it, 1 Cor. 16.4. If it be
meet that I go also, they shall go with me. If it be meet: The word in the
Original is (...), or worthy, which is here rightly translated meet; so in that
Sermon of Saint John Baptist, Mat. 3.8. bring forth fruits meet for repentance;
that is, fruits beseeming amendment of life. And in this sense are we said to
walk worthy of God, who has called us to his Kingdom and glory. Worthy of God,
that is, worthy of that calling God has imparted to us, 1 These. 2.12. And
therefore to use the similitude as I have elsewere, If the King should
vouchsafe to come into a Subjects house, and find all things fit and beseeming
so great a Majesty, that Subject may be said to give the King worthy
entertainment; not that a Subject is worthy to entertain his Prince: But the
meaning is, he provided all things, which were meet and fit for the
entertainment of him. So is it here: if we prepare our selves with such
spiritual ornaments to entertain the King of glory, as are requisite for those,
who approach his Table, though our performances come far short of the worth of
his presence; yet we may be said to eat his body, and drink his blood worthily.
When the King in the Gospel had prepared his feast, two sorts of guests there
were, who where unworthy.

1. Those that made light of the invitation, who had their excuses, when they
should come to the feast; One must go to his farm, another to try his Oxen,
etc. Luke 14.18.

2. Others there were who came, and yet were unworthy guests, for coming
unpreparedly; for in the midst of the feast the King comes in to view his
guests, and beholds a man, that did not refuse to come, but yet came without
his wedding garment, and so came unworthily for not coming preparedly. Ye see
then there may be an unworthiness in those that do come, since they come
unfitted and in a dress unbeseeming such a banquet. They are unworthy receivers
of the Lords body, and he accounts it an irreverent usage of him. In like
manner may some say touching the Ministry of the Word; May not I read a good
Sermon at home with as much profit? What needs all this stir? Why, here is the
advantage and privilege you get in the public Ministry of the Word: God
himself comes down, as a King amongst us, he views his guests, and considers,
who comes with his wedding garment, who comes preparedly. Christ comes and
looks on us, and where two or three are gathered together in his name, there he
has promised to be in the midst of them: Math. 18.20. He walks in the midst of
the golden Candlesticks: The Ministers of his Word; he takes a special view of
those, that come and frequent his Ordinances, and is ready ever to reward them.
You see then what it is to eat worthily; its to do it with that reverence, that
is requisite where the King of Heaven is the Master of the Feast. Now this
being the sin, unmannerliness, and unprepared approaching his Table; we come to
the second thing, viz.

2. The punishment: And that is a terrible one: He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself: Damnation, that is somewhat
hard, the word in the Margent is better, (...), judgment. True, there are such
as so come, that they deserve to eat condemnation to themselves, as openly
profane ones, in whom it is high treason, Being God's vowed enemies, to take his
Privy Seal, and put it to so vile a use: this, I say, deserves damnation; but
then others there are that have faith and repentance, and a portion in Christ,
yet coming unworthily to this feast, eat judgment to themselves: that is a
judgment of chastisement. There is a twofold judgment.

1. One of revenge: for such a person that puts God's Seal to a wrong evidence,
having no faith to make Christ his portion: in such a one its high treason to
put forth his hand to this tree of life.

2. Another of chastisement, for such a one as has repentance, and yet comes
too unmannerly, and carries himself too carelessly at the Lord's Table: at this
the Apostle aims in the Text; not at that judgment of condemnation, but at a
judgment to prevent damnation; And this appears in the words following, where
we shall find the Apostle recounting up the particulars of this judgment of
chastisement, For this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many
sleep, ver. 30. Mark what is the judgment, he eats: why this? he is cast upon his
bed of sickness, into a Consumption perchance, or some other corporal disease;
a cause Physicians seldom or never look into: they look to Agues, Colds, or the
like; they never once conjecture that their unworthy eating at the Lord's
Table, cast them into the disease, and was the principal cause of the malady.
Nay death it self too often is the punishment of such bold attempts, so that
all the Physicians in the world cannot cure them, And thus God inflicts
temporal judgments to free them from eternal, as appears farther in the 32 ver.
When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world, that is, we undergo a judgment of chastisement, to
prevent the judgment of condemnation: which though it be a sharp and bitter
pill, yet by the mercy of God we eat that whereby damnation is prevented. This
judgment of condemnation is the portion of the profane person, who dares to
meddle with that which belongs not to him, against whom the Angel of the Lord
with a flaming sword stands to keep the way of this tree of life. Those that
come that have faith, yet coming unpreparedly, they eat judgment too, yet by
God's mercy it is that, which preserves them from the damnation of the soul.

Now before I come to the particulars, note how careful God is, that spiritual
exercises should be spiritually performed. He Is very angry, when he sees a
spiritual duty carnally undertaken. For this cause many are sick, etc. that is,
because you that are believers: have faith, repentance, and a portion in your
Savior come irreverently, come unpreparedly, perform a spiritual work so
carnally. We have presidents hereof in Scripture: and chiefly two: First, for
circumcision, Exodus 4.24. At the 21. v. God sent Moses on a Message into Egypt,
and in the 24. verse. the Text says, It came to pass by the way in the Inn,
that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. This is very strange, this has
no dependence on that which goes before: a strange accident, God sought to
kill, although he, but a little before, had sent him into Egypt, and told him
he would be with him. Why? what should he do then? how should the message be
done, and fulfilled? But what was the reason hereof? It Is not expressed, yet we
may gather from the following words, that it was by reason his son was
uncircumcised, for ver. 25. Zippora took a sharp stone, and cut off the
foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a blood^
husband have thou been unto me: God would have smitten him for the neglect of
the Sacrament of Circumcision. Another instance we have for the Passover in
Hezekiah's time. 2 Chronicles. 30, 17, 18. A multitude of the people, yea many of
Ephraim and Manasseth, Issachar and Zebulon had not cleansed themselves, yet
did they eat the Passover otherwise than it was written. There were many
likewise in the Congregation that were not sanctified; and therefore God
punished them. It Is not set down in what manner God punished them, yet by the
consequent it may be gathered that is was by sickness, for the next words are
to that effect: Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, the Lord pardon every one
that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his Father, though he be
not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, and the Lord
hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. So that you see for this God
smites a person, and it is to be feared lest judgments temporal fall on the
whole Nation for this fault; that he even smites not a few of the people to
death. But we pass from this, and come to the particulars.

3. The particulars of this offense, and wherein it consists, that a man comes
unworthily, that so we may know whether we are guilty of the crime. Know
therefore that there are two sorts, that come to the Communion.

First, those, to whom the business does not belong, that have nothing to do
with the thing, as openly profane ones.

Secondly, such as have interest in the matter, but yet come unpreparedly, and
in an unbeseeming manner; the former take part in the sign, but enjoy not the
thing signified: and the latter coming unpreparedly, depart without the
comfort, which otherwise they might have. Now mark to whom Christ would say, if
he were now coming to judgment in the clouds, to whom I say, If he were now
coming in the clouds, he would say, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit a
Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world, Mat. 25.34. to them
he would likewise say, Come to my Table, come to this banquet, partake of my
body and blood, and to as many as he would say, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting flames, to so many would he say, go you from my Table, come not
near.

Now there are two sorts of people, to whom, if the Lord Jesus were coming in
the clouds to Judgment, he would say, Depart into everlasting flames; and those
are these that know not him, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 These.
1.18. Now to these two sorts of people, Christ would say, if he were on earth,
Depart from my Table, meddle not with those Mysteries: And they are,

1. Those that know not God: and indeed it is a most unworthy thing for an
ignorant man to come to God's Table. Know, whoever thou art, that art such an
one, that it belongs not to thee, it was appointed for an understanding people.
The Lord invites not fools and block-heads to his Mysteries. God will not know
them that know not him. If thou know not what the signs are, or the relation
of them to the thing signified, have no insight, or understanding of the
Mysteries: Know that it is to no other purpose to thee to come to the Sacrament,
that if thou wentest to a Mass, to see the Gesticulations, Elevations, or if
thou wentest to see a play, not knowing to what end and purpose it was done.
Such a one is not a friend of God, but an enemy that shall be destroyed in
everlasting fire that knows not him. Deceive not then your selves, but
seriously weigh it, and consider what a Judgment falls on us for this. What an
unworthy thing is it, when as in one months space, or less, if a man had any
care, he might learn as much as would bring him to Heaven. What says the
Apostle? 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your
shame. And a shameful thing it is indeed, when the knowledge of the Principles
of Christian Religion may be had in so short a space, to be so grossly ignorant,
as commonly many are. It Is a most unworthy and a shameful thing to think the
knowledge of Christ not worth thus much pains. Thou that carest not for the
knowledge of God's ways, what have thou to do to take his Word into thy mouth,
to tread in his Courts? I doubt not but very many here too, are but Babes in
Christ. An ignorant person then cannot possibly come worthily; for w^ are to
come with faith; and Faith cannot be without knowledge. And hence are they
joined both together: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many
Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge, not subjective, but objective, the knowledge of
him: if thou know not him, his Nature, and Offices, the end of his offering
himself, and wilt be still a mere Ignoramus, come not to God's Table, go to
Nebuchadnezzar, and feed with him amongst the beasts, Dan. 4.33. thou have
nothing to do here: Nay the very beasts among whom he fed, will upbraid thee,
For the ox knows his owner, and the Ass his master's crib: but thou art like
stupid Israel, which did neither know, nor consider; Isa. 1.3. This is the
first sort.

2. The second are those, that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They have
wit enough, and can talk of Religion fast enough; but where is the obedience is
required? I know the Lord gives me the proffer of Christ Jesus; can I cast down
my proud Will, and submit it, lay down my stately plumes, and take him, not
only as my Priest, to sacrifice himself for me, but as my Lord, and my King to
be guided, governed, and ruled by him? when such a one comes that has not the
power of grace in him, who is filled with nothing, but Rebellion and
profaneness; when such a one comes, and presumes to sit down at God's Table: it
is a most unworthy Act; It Is more fit that such a one should feed amongst the
swine, than eat the body, and drink the blood of his Savior. Nor is it an
unworthy Act for these only, but also for civil honest persons, though civility
be a good stook whereon the sience of grace may be grafted: but if a man had
nothing besides what nature and Education can teach, what moral Philosophy can
store us with, we have nothing to do at this Table of the Lord. How can I dare
presume to eat Christ's body, and drink Christ's blood, that am not acquainted
with God, know not the Principles of Religion, and will not be swayed by him,
nor be obedient unto his Gospel? These are the particulars then, which make a
man an unworthy Receiver: First, when he is an ignorant person; and secondly,
when he will not obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ, such persons are to be
discarded and cashiered; they eat the Judgment of condemnation unto themselves.

But there are (as I showed you) a second sort, that come, that have interest
in the business; such as have Knowledge, Grace and Faith in Christ, and shall
taste of the new wine with Christ, in the world to come, and be with Christ,
which notwithstanding may eat and drink unworthily, and come unpreparedly, and
irreverently: whereby they lose that comfort that otherwise they might have:
and these, though they eat not the Judgment of condemnation, yet they do the
Judgment of chastisement: they put God's seal to a blank, but the former sort
put it to a false instrument, they put it to a blank, I say, and by that means
lose much comfort, yea, temporal life it self too, perchance. They eat a
Judgment of Chastisement; by putting it thus to a blank they taste God's
displeasure in sickness, weakness and death; but I will show you how you may
avoid this: why, come worthily. Fit your selves to the purpose, set to it, and
thou shall see, one Communion will even bring thee to Heaven. I say, if that
thou could but at one Communion fit thy self to come worthily, thou would
find exceeding comfort in it. Try the Lord once, and see what a mighty increase
of grace this will bring unto thee. That you may know how you may come
worthily, there are three things requisite to every worthy Receiver at the
Lord's Table.

1. Some things are requisite before the Action be enterprised, or else I shall
come very unworthily.

2. Some at the time, and in the very act of Receiving.

3. Others after the Communion is ended. Many will be persuaded that there is
some preparation to be used before hand, but never do as much as dream of any
after. whereas if a man neglect this, the Lords meat is, as it were, lost in us.

1. As for those things, which are requisite before we come to the Lords Table,
they are these.

1. A Consideration, what need I have of the Sacrament. Is there any such
necessity of it? Examine then, what need have I to eat my meat and receive my
drink? When we see God brings this before us, let us reason thus with our
selves; it is as needful for the nourishment of my soul to receive the
Sacrament, as for my body to take meat and drink. This is that whereby we are
spiritually strengthened and enabled to hold out to the last. And here I Will not
stand to dispute the case, whether a man may fall from Grace, or not. And no
doubt, but he may: yet I say not, that he does. I say, no doubt, but he may;
and why? There is such an opposition, and antipathy betwixt the flesh and the
spirit, that did not God refresh the spirit now and then it might be overborn
by the bulk of our corruptions. Now Gods Ordinances are appointed to keep it in
heart, and refresh it, as the sick spouse was staid with Apples, and comforted
with flagons. Cant. 2.5. And God has appointed his Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to strengthen, and continue that life, which we received in Baptism, as
by spiritual nourishment. In Baptism our stock of life is given us; by the
Sacrament of the holy Eucharist it is confirmed and continued. If a child be
born only, and after birth not nourished; there is none but will know what a
death such a soul will die. It will quickly perish by famine. So it is here,
unless Christ be pleased to nourish that life, which he has breathed into me
in baptism, and by his Ordinances ^o give me anew supply and addition of
grace; I am a dead man, I am gone for ever upon this ground that I receive not
the never perishing food, that endures (as Christ who is himself that meat
teaches us) unto Everlasting life. Joh. 6.27. Therefore upon examination,
being conscious, and privy to the weakness of my faith, to the manifold
imperfections of my spirit, to my want of knowledge, the frailty of my memony,
my often doubtings, the dangers of relapsing, and falling back in my Christian
progress, I cannot but apprehend, that it is no needless thing for me to come
both often, and preparedly to the Lords Table.

2. The next action requisite before my coming to the Sacrament, is the
whetting of my appetite, and preparing of my stomach; I must come with an
hungry desire, as a man that comes to his meat, that would live and be strong:
We think meat very ill bestowed on him, that has no stomach: Unless we eat
Christ's body, and drink his blood, we can have no spiritual life. All the
question, and the main business is, whether I come hungry, and thirsty, or not,
as an hungry and thirsty man, with an Appetite after his meat, and liquor;
longing after Christ, as the Heart after the water brooks. Psalm. 42.1. When a
man comes dully, and as Children that play with their meat, cares not whether
he eats or not; when a man comes, I say, without an appetite, its time for God,
to take it away from him. Its an unworthy coming, to come with an unprepared
stomach, and without whetting our faith, to feed on Christ Jesus crucified.

3. The third action requisite to a worthy Comer, is cleansing of himself. I
would fain come, may a man say, to the Lords Table, having such need of it, as
I have, and having such an appetite, and desire to feed on Christ; but I am to
come before a great King, therefore I must wash mine hands in innocence. Psalm.
26.6. In the Gospel according to Saint Mark the Jews found fault with Christ's
Disciples, because they came with unclean or common hands. For so the word
signifies, and is so used by the Apostles as equivalent thereunto. I have
learned to call nothing common or unclean. Romans 14.14. Now when I come to meet
the Lord in his Ordinances, I must put off my feet, for the place where I stand
is holy. Exodus 3.5. Wash your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts you
double minded. Jam. 4.8. The purifying of the soul is that which is required of
every worthy Communicant. We come now not to receive life, but strength; and
that it may strengthen us, we must of necessity cleanse our selves. A stomach
over-clogged with choler, whatever meat be taken into it, it turns it into i^s
own nature: so is it here, unless the vessel be clean, Quodcunque infundis,
acescit. Christ Jesus, the purest thing in the world is to come into my soul,
as into a sanctuary, and shall not I fit, trim and garnish it to receive him,
but leave it as a Pig^sty? Know therefore, that thou come unworthily when
thou come with unwashed hands. The people were to be sanctified when they
came to receive the Law, Exodus 19.10. And so must we, if we will receive the
benefit from the business in hand. But I cannot stand on all. I pas^ from this
therefore, to the second thing I proposed; and that was,

2. Those things which were required of us in the action. And there we have the
acts of the Minister in the administration: I must not look on these as idle
Ceremonies, but as real Representations, otherwise we take God's name in vain.
I must look upon the Minister, who represents the person of Christ, and by the
eyes of faith see Christ himself offered for me, when I see the bread broken,
the wine poured out. Whosoever therefore, thou art, who would worthily
partake of Christ at the holy Table, behold him offered to thee, when the
Minister bids thee take, and eat; take, and drink. And when the Minister bids
thee take, know that in as good earnest as the Minister offers thee the bread
and wine, the Lord of^^rs thee his Son, Christ Jesus. Take Christ my Son, dead,
and crucified for thee. Consider, when thou see the Minister set the bread
and wine apart, how God from all eternity set apart his Son for us: If we have
not done this, we must do it. Exodus 12.3. See the manner of the setting apart
of the Lamb, which was a type of Christ; In the tenth day of the month they
shall take unto them every man a Lamb, according to the house of their Fathers:
This Lamb was to be set apart, and taken out of the flock. And in the fifth
verse, It must be a lamb without blemish: then you shall keep it until the
fourteenth day of the same month. From the tenth day to the fourteenth it was
to be kept: This typified that Lamb of God, that was so set apart. Then was the
Lamb to be killed: by whom? Verse. 6. by all the Congregation of Israel. And
thus was Christ to be singled out, and to be slain: Every mother's son had a
hand in killing this Lamb of God. He is set apart to suffer for sinners, picked
out as a singled deer; which being designed to the game, the hounds will follow
only, and no other. Thus was Christ hunted to death by one sorrow after
another, till he gave up the Ghost upon the Cross. In the Gospel according to
St. John, we read how the people took branches of Palm trees, and went forth to
meet Christ, cap. 12.12, 13. and that was the day the Lamb was set apart; and
he was so set apart, till the Jew's Passover. This concerns me, says Christ.
Christ saw himself typified in the Lamb that was set apart: Observe then on
that very day, Father, sath he, Deliver me from that hour. On that very day in
the Lamb he saw himself to be sacrificed by all the Congregation of Israel. We
were all of us actors in the business; not one here, but had a hand in the
offering up of the Son of God, in killing Christ Jesus.

Thus for these actions of the Minister, the setting apart of the bread and of
the wine. Then follows the breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the
wine. At the breaking of the bread, consider Christ's flesh torn asunder, all
the lashes which made such scratches in his flesh, the ruptures which were made
by the nails, and the spear that pierced his side. The breaking of him by his
Father; the word signifies, crushing him to powder: God would break him, says
the Prophet, even to powder, Isa. 53.10. At the consideration hereof how should
our faith be stirred and set awake! Thou take God's name in vain, if with a
dull eye thou can see things, and not take it to heart.

The next action, is The pouring out of the wine: This is my blood, says
Christ, Drink you all of this. Do thou see the wine poured out? at that very
instant, consider how much blood Christ spilt, how much he poured forth: and
that not only in the very time of his passion, when he hung upon the Cross,
when the spears pierced his sides, when the nails bored, and dug his hands
and feet: But that which he shed in the garden in the cold Winter time, when he
shed great drops, great clots of blood, thickest blood that pierced his
garment, and ran down upon the ground. Consider how much blood he lost, when he
was whipped, and lashed: When the spear came to the very Pericardium; thus let
us weigh his torments, and it will be a means to make us much affected with his
sufferings for us.

But this is not all, there is another thing yet in the blood: This was but the
outward part of his sufferings. Yet some there are, who are against Christ
sufferings in his soul; If it were so, say they, then something either in the
sacrifices of the Old Testament or in the new Testament, should signify it.
What ever such persons object against it, I am sure there was as much in the
sacrifices of the old Testament, as could possibly be in a Type to signify it.
Now that I may make this to appear, know that in every sacrifice, there were
two parts, or two things considerable, and those were the Body and the Blood:
The whole was to be made a sacrifice, viz. both Body and blood; the body was to
be burned, the blood to be poured forth: Now nothing in a beast can signify
the sufferings of Christ in soul, better then the pouring out of the blood.
Lev. 17.11. The blood was the life, and this is that which had a relation to
the soul, and was therefore, as in the same place appears, poured out as an
atonement for the soul. And to this in our common prayers, there is an
allusion, viz. Grant us gracious Lord so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ and to drink his blood, that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his
body, and our souls washed through his most precious blood. And in Isa. 53.12.
The Metaphor holds, He poured out his soul unto death for us. So that whatever
some have fondly thought, its evident and manifest that Christ suffered both in
soul and body: Both soul and body were made an offering for sin, in the fashion
of sin, who knew no sin. I should have gone further, but the time cuts me off.

HEB. 4.16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.


IN handling heretofore the Doctrine of the conversion of a sinner, I declared
and showed you what man's misery was, and what that great hope of mercy is that
the Lord proposes to the greatest sinner in the world. I showed unto you ^he
means whereby we may be made partakers of Christ; and that wa^ by the grace of
faith, which does let fall all other things in a man's self, and comes with an
open and empty hand, to lay hold on Christ, and fill it self with him. I showed
you also the acts of Faith as it just^fies.

And now because it is a point of high moment, wherein all our comfort stands,
and in which it lies, I thought good to resume it all again, so far as may
concern our practice, that we may see what the work of God's Spirit is from the
first to the last, and the conversion of a sinner from the corruptions and
pollutions of the flesh in which he wallowed; and to this purpose have I chosen
this place of Scripture, wherein we are encouraged by God's blessed Word, that
whatever we are, though accursed, and the greatest sinners in the world; and
that whatever we want, we should come to God's throne of grace.

And we are to think that whatever sins are or have been committed, and though
our sins are never so great, yet that they are not so great as the infiniteness
of God's mercy; especially having such, not only an Intercessor, but Advocate
to plead the right of our cause, so that Christ comes, and he pleads payment;
and that however our debts are great, and we run far in score, yet he is our
ransom; and therefore now God's justice being satisfied, why should not his
mercy have place and free course? This is the great comfort that a Christian
has, that he may come freely, and boldly to God, because he comes but as for
an acquittance of what is already paid. As a debtor will appear boldly before
his creditor, when he knows his debt is discharged, he will not then be afraid
to look him in the face. Now we may come and say, Blessed Father, the debt is
paid, I pray give me pardon of my sins, give me my acquittance. And this is
that boldness and access spoken of, Romans 5.2. In whom we have access by faith.

Now that I may not spend too much time needlessly, come we to the ground and
matter in the words: Wherein there is 1. A preparative for grace. 2. The act it
self whereby we are made partakers of the grace of God.


First, the preparatives are two, The Law and the Gospel, and wrought by them.

The first preparative.

1. Wrought by the Law. The Law works in a time of great need, or rather by the
operative power of the Law convincing us of sin, we are made sensible of our
need and deep poverty: This is the first preparative, for a man to be brought
to see he stands in great need of God's mercy, and Christ's blood; so that the
sinner cries out, Lord, I stand in great want of mercy. His eyes being thus
opened, he is no longer a stranger at home, but he sees the case is wondrous
hard with him; so that he concludes, unless God be merciful unto me in Christ,
I am lost and undone for ever. This is the first preparative; and till we come
to it, we can never approach the throne of grace. The second is,

2. Wrought by the Gospel: I see I stand in great need; but by this second
preparative we see a Throne of grace set up, and that adds comfort unto me: If
God had only a throne and seat of Justice, I were utterly undone; I see my debt
is extremely great; but the Gospel reveals unto me, that God of his infinite
mercy, has erected a Throne of grace, a City of refuge, that finding my self
in need, my soul may fly unto.

And now to fit us for this, God's blessed Spirit works by his Word, to open
unto us the rigor and strictness of the Law, and our wants; to enlighten our
understandings, that we stand in great need; to win our affection, and open the
Gospel and its comforts.

Therefore, first, for the time of need: The Law reveals unto us our woeful
condition, to be born in sin, as the Pharisee said, and yet not able to see it.
Every man may say in generalities, I am a sinner; yet to say, and know himself
to be such a sinner as indeed he is, to stand in such need; that he cannot do.
This one would think to be a matter of sense, but unless God's Spirit open our
eyes, we can never see our selves to be such sinners as we are; or else what is
the reason that the child of God cries out more against his sin and the weight
thereof after his conversion, than he did before? What, are his sins greater or
more, than they were formerly? No, but his Light is greater; his eyes are
opened, and now he sees more clearly what sin is. When the Sun shines, and its
rays come in, what a number of motes do we discover, which before we saw not?
Not as if the Sunbeams made them, or the Sun raised the dust; no, there are
here as many motes, and as much dust flying about, as if the Sun shined here:
What is the matter then; Why this; the Sun discovers them to us. So that here
is the point, Our sins in our souls are as motes in the air, and are not more
than they were before conversion; but we cannot see them, till the glorious
beams of God's Spirit shine upon us. The sight of sin, and of the danger that
comes by it, is the work of God's Spirit. The Spirit discovers sin unto us,
Joh. 16.8. When the Spirit comes, he shall convince the world of sin: the word
is (...), the Spirit shall convince them: And the same word is used, Heb. 11.1.
where Faith is said to be the evidence of things not seen, (...). Heretofore we
had a slight imagination of our sins; but to have our mouth stopped, and to be
convinced, is not a work of flesh and blood, but of God's Spirit, Romans 3.19.
Till we are awakened by his Spirit, we cannot see, nor feel the mountains and
heaps of sins, that lie upon our souls. Thou art dead in sin, Romans 8. Thou art
in bondage; and to know it, is a work of the Spirit, not of nature. The spirit
of bondage, what is that? Why, however we are all bond men, until the Son has
made us free, in a woeful estate, slaves to sin and Satan; yet till God's Spirit
convince us, and show it us, and make us know it, we shall sleep secure, are
not afraid, but think our selves the freest men in the world, and see not this
to be a time of need. This therefore is the first preparative, when God brings
his people by Mount Sinai, Heb. 12.18. For you are not come unto the Mountain
that may be touched, and that burned by fire, nor unto the blackness, and
darkness, and tempest: so Gal. 4.25. Mount Sinai is made a figure of the Law,
which begets bondage. Not that Mount which might be touched, and that burned
with fire, where was the sound of the Trumpet, and voice of words, such a sound
as never before was heard, nor never will be till one day we shall hear the
same. The sound of the Trumpet which sounded at the delivery of the Law, Exodus
19.19. where it is described; for when the voice of the Trumpet sounded long,
and waxed louder and louder, that Moses heard, it was such a noise, a great
noise at first, but it grew higher and higher, and at last it came to that
height that it was almost incomprehensible; then Moses spoke: And what spoke
he? The Holy Ghost sets not down what he spoke in that place. Look in Heb.
12.21. So terrible was the voice, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake, Such a kind of lightning and loud voice this was; the Lord commands such
a voice as this, Esaias 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their
sins. When God shall sound with the voice of the Trumpet of his holy word, of
his Law, and show thee that thou art a traiterous Rebel, and there is an
Execution gone out against thee, body and goods: when God sounds thus to a deaf
ear of a carnal man, then comes the spirit of bondage of necessity on him,
which shows that we have a time of need. The Law must have this operation
before thou come to the Throne of grace. None will fly to the City of
Refuge, till the revenger of blood be hard at his heels: Nor any to Christ,
till he sees his want: Thus the Lord makes us know our need by turning the edge
of his Axe toward us. Offenders when they are brought to the bar at
Westminster for Treason, have the edge of the Axe turned from them; but when
they have received the sentence of condemnation, and are carried back to the
Tower, the edge of the Axe is turned toward them. Thus is it here; The Law
turns the edge of God's Axe toward us; and therefore it is said of S. Peter's
Hearers, Acts 2.38. That they were pricked to the heart. The Law puts the point
of God's sword to our very breasts as it were, and brings us to see that we
stand in great need of a pardon, This is the first preparative; when God
enlightens our minds to see our dangerous estate; and then there must of
necessity follow fear, and desire to be rid of this condition; for the will and
affections always follow the temper of the mind: And hence, when a man has a
false persuasion, that he is in a good case, that he is safe and well, what
works it but pride, presumption, confidence and security? So on the contrary,
when this persuasion appears to be delusion, contrary effects must follow. If a
man be in health and jollity, and on a sudden be proclaimed a Traitor, that he
must lose his life and goods, is it possible it should be thus, and he not
wrought on, nor have any alteration? So when news comes from the Law, that thou
art a dead man, and everlastingly must perish, the Law then works wrath, that
is, it manifests unto us the wrath of God. When it is thus, there follows a
shaking and trembling, and it is impossible but with Moses thou should
exceedingly quake and tremble.

2. For all this, there is a Throne of Grace erected; God has not forgotten to
be merciful, though thy sins be never so great: This is the next preparative
for faith, namely, the discovery and acknowledgment of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus. We see in in Ezra 10.2. We have trespassed against our God, and have
taken strange wives of the people of the Land; yet now there is hope in Israel
concerning this thing; we have trespassed; What then? must we be the subjects
of God's wrath? No: Yet notwithstanding though we have committed this great
offense, there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. What though we have
provoked God to indignation, must we be the matter for his wrath to work on?
No: There is balm in Gilead? Jer 8. ult. Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there
no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered? What though then we are sick to death? yet there is an help in time
of need. And this knowledge of the people, that there is a Throne of grace, is
the first comfort comes to a miserable and sinful soul. A man that has a
deadly disease, though the Physician do him no good which he has made use of,
yet this he comforts himself in, when he sees a Physician that has cured the
same disease, he sees then there is some hope. Thus it is with a sinful soul.
When the welcome news of the Gospel comes, after the Law has discovered his
disease, and says, Be not discouraged, there is a Throne of grace prepared for
thee: God has a seat of justice to deal with Rebels and open Traitors; but if
thou art weary of thy estate, if thou will submit to God, take Christ for thy
King, and cast down all thy weapons, if thou will live like a subject, he has
prepared a Throne of grace for thee. Christ is thy Attorney in the Court to
plead for thee; he is not as the Papists make him, so stout, and one that takes
such state on him, as that a man may not come near him. This is the highest
injury that can be offered to Christ, to think that any creature has more
mercy and pity than he has: It is to rob Christ of the fairest flower in his
garden, when we rob him of his mercy and pity. Mark that place in Heb. 4.15.
that we may not think him austere, We have not an high Priest that cannot be
touched with our infirmities, with the feeling of our infirmities.

Christ is no hard-hearted man; when you were his enemies he loved you,
insomuch that he humbled himself, and suffered death, even the death of the
Cross for you. And he has the self same bowels in Heaven that he had on earth;
he wept over Jerusalem, and the self-same weeping heart carried he to Heaven
with him, the self same weeping eyes: Believe not then the Papists, that he is
so hard-hearted, or so stately, and that his Mother is more ready to speak for
us; fie on it. This is to pervert the Gospel, and make Christ no Christ. We
have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 2, 17, In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, etc. Alas, poor
soul, says Christ, what the malice of the Devil is, I know by mine own
experience in the flesh; for Christ was tempted in all things according to us,
sin only excepted. I know what the temptations of the world are; but whereas we
have three enemies, the Devil, the world and the flesh, only the two former
were his. Christ had the temptations of the world and the Devil, not of the
corrupt flesh; for he had no corrupt flesh: A man that has been himself in
terrible Tempests on the Sea, when he sees a storm, out of his own experience
he pities those that are in it; when as others are not a jot moved: for he has
seen that consternation of mind, which on every side appeared. That -- plurima
mortis imago: wherereas others having not been there, lay not their miseries to
heart. Christ having suffered himself, and being tempted as we were, in
sensible of our miseries; and therefore never count it boldness to come boldly
to him, that gives thee this encouragement: Come boldly to the Throne of grace.
We must understand that all this is before faith, we must

1. Know that we have a need.

2. That there is a Throne of grace, when God enlightens my conscience, and
encourages me to come. And thus having spoken of the preparatives, I come to
the work, the main thing it self. Now this is,

2. The Act, Coming; this coming is believing; as the feet which carry a man to
the place he would be in; his feet carry him nearer and nearer. If a man cannot
be cured but by the Bath, his feet must carry him thither. Now faith is the
legs of the soul, the feet that carry us unto Christ: whereas we are afar off,
and draw back as all unbelievers; now by believing we draw near. Now as
unbelievers draw back, so believers draw forward; and therefore John 1.12. and
John 6.35, To come to Christ and to believe in him are the self-same thing. He
that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst. Coming is there made an act of faith, and the same thing with it: The
one is the expl^cation of the other; thy coming to Christ is thy believing in
him. When thou hear of a Throne of grace, and see the Lord of glory
stretching out his golden Scepter, come and touch it, take the benefit of the
King's pardon. If a man know there is such a Throne of grace, he must come unto
it; And now begins faith to work.

And that thou may understand it the better, know that faith then begins
first to work, when thou set the first step toward the Throne of grace.
And this is the hour in which salvation is come unto thy house, Luke 19.9. None
can come to me, says Christ, except my Father draw him. If thou see a virtue
to come from Christ, and to draw thee as an Adamant, and thou feel that
loadstone working on thee, then begins faith: It makes thee draw near to
Christ; whereas before thou were a stranger: Till then thou art like thy
Grandfather Adam, thou runnest away, and think thy self most secure, when
thou wast farthest from God; but now thou see no comfort, unless thou draw
nigh unto him; now as the Apostle says, Phil. 2.13. It is he that works in
us the will and the deed; this must must be wrought in us by God.

First, a will, then the deed; and then it is not only I would do such a thing,
but I do it: God works not only the will of coming, but the deed of coming; and
all his acts are acts of faith, and have a promise; God makes no promise, till
we be in Christ; till we have faith, we are no heirs of the promise; when a man
sets his face toward Jerusalem, and begins to set himself to go to Christ, all
he does then has the promise; not a tear now that he sheds but is precious,
God puts it into his bottle; not a cup of cold water, that now he gives, but
shall have a great reward; this is a blessed thing, when every thing we do has
a promise annexed to it, when every step we step has a promise made to it. Now
then the will is the first thing that is wrought in us; this is that which
makes the act of faith, that is, I have a will, a resolution to do this: And
the Apostle makes it more than the very deed it self, 2 Cor. 8, 10. as I may so
say, For this is expedient for you, who have begun before not only to do, but
to be forward. So we translate it, but look in the Margent, and it is rendered, (
to be willing) (...), as the Greek has it; as if the will were more than the
deed it self; for a man to come unwillingly, it is nothing worth; the
groundwork is the will, which is a greater matter than the deed. Nothing more
separates a man from Christ, than to say, I will not have this man to reign
over me, Luke 19.14. But if thou can frame thy will that it shall go
perpendicularly on the object, and accept Christ on the terms offered, that is
faith; and that has the promise. And therefore the Scripture compares it to
conjunction with Christ. And as in the Sacrament, we spiritually eat his flesh
and drink his blood; the conjunction is between Christ and his Church. And
therefore the Scripture compares our conjunction by faith to the mystery of
wedlock. What makes a marriage? it is consent. Will thou have this man to be thy
Husband? she answers, I will; that expression makes the marriage. The knot is
knit by this mutual pledging of troth, all other things are but subsequents of
it. So God says, Will thou have my Son? Thou shall have with him all his
wealth, though for a time thou must go bare, and fare hard; yet thou shall have
a Kingdom: When a man considers deliberately, here is the loss, I must deny my
self, and obey him, but I shall have a Kingdom, God's blessing, and peace of
conscience; All things considered, casting the best with the worst, then the
resolutioa is, this is a true saying, worthy of all acceptance, etc. I Will take
him on any terms, be they never so hard, for I shall be a saver in the end:
when we take Christ, as it were, with all his faults; such his Cross, and the
afflictions of the Gospel seem to our carnal apprehensions: though to S. Paul
these were the chief, indeed the only matter of his boasting: God forbid that I
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Galat. 6.14.

When, I say, we can thus take Christ, this is the Will, etc. this is the will
which God requires. There is another comparison in Scripture, John 6.35. it is
compared to hunger and thirst. Believing was expressed by coming. Believing is
expressed by hungring and thirsting. So when I see such a will and desire after
Christ, that I hunger and thirst after him, that a hungry man longs not more
for bread, nor the Heart thirsts more for the waterbrooks, than my soul does
for Christ; why then there is a promise made unto us; and a promise is never
made unto us, till we be in Christ. Matthew. 5.6. Rev. 22.17. Esaias 55.1. We find
promises in them all; in Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst
after righteousness; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, they shall be filled.
Consider here what the nature of hunger and thirst is; they shall be filled,
which implies they were empty before, but now they shall be filled. Suppose now
I am not filled with Christ, what am I without him? No, I want him; yet there is
a blessing to the hungry and thirsty, and there is no blessing without faith. If
we be not heirs of the faith, we cannot be heirs of the blessing. Do thou
find in thy self an hungring and thirsting after Christ? Thou art blessed, this
faith will save thee. Now faith will say, I am wonderfully pained, faint, and
even starved, that I cannot be filled with Christ; yet be content man, thou
shall be filled with him; in the mean while thou have him, and have blessedness
with him, and shall be blessed. It Is said, 1 John 3.13. These things have I
written unto you that believe in the Name of the Son of God, that you may know
that you have eternal life, and that you may believe on the Name of the Son of
God. Mark how the Apostle distinguishes these two things; thou believe on the
Name of Christ, yet say thou, though I believe, I am not sure of my
salvation, I do not know it. Why, let not that much trouble thee, that is a
consequent of it, and that the assurance will follow after; therefore you
should not confound it with believing: These things have I written unto you
that ye might know, etc. then there is a conclusion to be deduced from the
premises, so that a man may have full hold of Christ, and yet not be fully
assured of his salvation. So t^en here is the will, which is the first thing.

But the Lord works the deed also. And whereas it is said that God takes the
will for the deed, the place had need be well understood: When we say God takes
the will for the deed, it is not always true, unless it be thus understood.
When a man has done to the utmost of his power what he is able, has
endeavored by all means, then God will take the will for the deed; but if
there be ability in me, and I do not as much as I am able, I do not my utmost
endeavor, then God will not take it; but now God works the will and the deed;
when a man comes to the Throne of grace, and sets forward in his journey
toward God, the first thing he does is to come to the Throne of grace with
Christ in his arms, and then having fast hold on Christ, he hastens and delays
not, having hold as Joab on the horns of the Altar, 1 King. 2.28. He hastens,
he sees it is no time to delay, he sees its now a time of need; and Need, as the
old proverb is, makes the old wife trot. Is it not need to make have (when the
pursuer of blood follows) to the City of Refuge? who would make delays and
demurs, and not run as fast as his legs would carry him? As soon as I apprehend
my need, and see the golden Scepter stretched out, then I come with might and
main with Christ in my arms, and present him to the Father, and this is the
approaching and drawing near in the Text, to the Throne of grace.

But now when I am come thither, what do I say there? What shall I come and say
nothing? The prodigal soon resolved to go to his Father, and say, I will up and
go, there is the will; and say, there is his Speech. The believer is not like to
the Son that said to his Father, I will go, but went not; but when his Father
bids him come, he will come; he will not only say so, but will draw near, and
then he has a promise, He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, Joh.
6.37. But when we come thither, what must we do? why we must take unto our
selves words, according to the Prophets expression, Hos. 14.2. Take unto you
words, and go unto the Lord, and say, Take away all our iniquities, and receive
us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. When he comes to the
Throne of grace, the thing that he does, is, he presents unto the Father
Christ, bleeding, gasping, dying, buried, and conquering death; and when he
presents Christ to him, he opens his case, and confesses his sin to the full,
and says, Lord, this is my case: As a beggar when he comes to ask an alms of
you, he will make a preface, and tell you his extremity; Sir, I am in great
want, I have nor tasted a bit of bread in so many days, and unless you help me
by your charity, I am utterly undone. Now when these two concur, that there is
true need in the beggar, and liberality in him, of whom he begs, it encourages
the beggar to be importunate, and he prevails; you may know when the beggar
has need by his tone, accent or language: The needy beggars tone and accent is
different from the sturdy beggars that has no need; but yet, though the beggar
be in great misery, if he see a churlish Nabal go by him, he has no heart to
beg, and follows him not, nor begs so hard, because he has but little hope to
attain any thing from him. But I say let both these meet together; first, that
the beggar is in great need, then, that he of whom he begs, is very liberal, it
makes him beg hard; but now cannot he pray without book? Think not that I speak
against praying by the book; you are deceived if you think so; but there must
be words taken to us besides, which perhaps a book will not yield us. A beggars
need will make him speak, and he will not hide his sores; but if he has any
sore more ugly or worse than another, he will uncover it; good Sir, behold my
woeful and distressed case, he lays all open to provoke pity. So when thou
come before God in confession, can thou not find out words to open thy self
to Almighty God, not one word whereby thou may unlap thy sores, and beseech
him to look on thee with an eye of pity? I must not mince my sins, but amplify
and aggravate them, that God may be moved to pardon me; till we do thus, we
cannot expect that God should forgive us. A great ado there is about auricular
confession, but it is a mere babble; It were better to cry out our sins at the
high Cross, than the confess in a Priests ear. Thou whisperest in the Priest's
ear; what if he never tell it, or if he do, art thou the better? Come and pour
out thy heart and soul before Almighty God, confess thy self to him as David
did, for that has a promise made to it, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou may be justified when
thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Why so? Why, one main cause why we
should confess sin, is to justify God. When a sinner confesses, I am a child
of wrath; and of death, if thou castest me into hell, as justly thou may, I
have received but my due; when a man does thus (as the King's Attorney may
frame a Bill of Indictment against himself) he justifies Almighty God. He gives
God the honor of that justice, which at the present he executes in pouring
horror into the conscience of the sinner, and has farther in store in
providing the Lake of fire and brimstone for the impenitent. Thus did David,
Against thee, against thee, etc. Now when we have thus aggravated our misery,
comes the other part of begging, to cry for mercy with earnestness, and here is
the power of the Spirit. It Is one thing for a man to pray, and another thing
for a man to say a prayer, but to pray and cry for mercy, as David did, in good
earnest, to wrestle with God, to say, Lord, My life lies in it, I will never
give thee over, I will not go with a denial; this is termed (...), this is the
work of God's Spirit. I named you a place in Jude, ver. 20. where the Apostle
exhorts, but ye beloved, build up your selves in your most holy faith, praying
in the Holy Ghost; there is the prayer of the faithful, to pray in the Holy
Ghost. And in the Ephesians we read of an Armor provided for all the parts of
a man's body, yet will not serve the turn, unless prayer come in as the chief,
Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, etc. This is the prayer of faith,
that procures forgiveness of sins; we must pray in faith, and in the Spirit;
that is the language, which God understands. He knows the meaning of the
Spirit, and knows none else but that: Many men are wondrously deceived in
that which they call the Spirit of prayer. One thinks it is a faculty to set
out ones desires in fair words, showing earnestness, and speaking much in an
extemporary prayer. This we think commendable, yet this is not the Spirit of
prayer. One that shall never come to Heaven, may be more ready in this, than
the child of God; for it is a matter of skill and exercise; the Spirit of
prayer is another thing. The Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought; the Spirit it self makes intercession for
us with groanings that cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26 What shall we think then,
that the Holy Ghost groans or speaks in prayer? No: but it makes us groan, and
though we speak not a word, yet it so enlarges our hearts, as that we send up a
volley of sighs and groans which reach the Throne of grace. And this is the
Spirit of prayer, when with these sighs and groans I beg, as it were, for my
life. This is that ardent affection the Scripture speaks of. A cold prayer will
never get forgiveness of sins; it is the prayer of faith which prevails. The
prayer of the people avails much, if it be (...), fervent. In the Ancient
Churches those that were possessed with an evil spirit, were called (...),
because that caught them up, and made them do actions not suitable to their
nature; Prayer is a fire from Heaven, which if thou have it, will carry all
Heaven before it; there is nothing in the world so strong as a Christian thus
praying: Prayers that are kindled with such a zeal, are compared to Jacobs
wrestling with the Angel, Hos. 12.4. whereby he had power over the Angel. The
Prophet expounds what this wrestling was, he wept and made supplication unto
him; he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with him. This is the wrestling
with God, when thou fillest Heaven with thy sighs and sobs, and bedewest thy
couch with thy tears as David did; and have thy resolution with Jacob, I will
not let thee go except thou bless me. God loves this kind of boldness in a
beggar, that he will not go away without an answer. As the poor Widow in the
Parable that would not give over her suit, so that the Judge though he feared
not God, nor cared for man, by reason of her importunity, granted her desire.
Mark the other thing in the Apostle, he bids us pray with the Spirit, and with
perseverance; and he that comes thus has a promise made to it: He that
calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved. Call on me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee; it is set down fully, Matthew. 6.7. Ask and you
shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you; for
every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be as opened. One would think this were idem per idem, but it
is not so. He bids us ask and it shall be given, seek and you shall find, etc.
There is a promise annexed to asking, seeking and knocking, but it is also
proved by universal experience; for every one that asks, etc. It Is very man's
case; never any man did it yet, that has lost his labor, in not attaining
what he asked. If thou have it not yet, thou shall have it in the end; it is so
fair a petition to ask, to have thy sins pardoned, that God would be friends
with thee, and that Christ would make thee love him: and that God would be thy
God, that God delights in it. This is the point then; Suppose God answer not
presently, yet knock still, seek still; that is perseverance, the thing whereby
it is distinguished from temporary asking. The hypocrite will pray in a time of
need and adversity, but his prayer is not constant, Job 27.10. Will the
hypocrite always call upon God? If they come and seek God, and he will not
answer, as Saul did, they will try the Devil. God would not answer Saul, and he
presently goes to the Devil. It Is not so with God's children; they pray, and
pray, and wait still; they pray with the Spirit, and with perseverance; God
deals not always alike with his children, but differently; sometimes he answers
presently, sometimes he makes them wait his leisure, Psalm. 32.5. I said I would
confess my sins, (says David) and my transgressions, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin; so Dan. 9.21. When he set himself to seek God, even while
he was speaking and praying, the man Gabriel appeared unto him, and touched him
about the time of the evening oblation. Before the word was out of his mouth
God was at his heart, and presently sends him a dispatch. The like we see in
Esaias 65.24. Mark what a promise there is; It shall come to pass that before
they call I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. This is
a great encouragement; but it may be God will not always do this, and what is
the reason? Why, he has a wonderful great delight to be wrestled withal, and
to hear the words of his own Spirit; nothing is more delightful to him than
this, when the Spirit is earnest, and will not give over. I will not let thee
go, unless thou bless me, Genesis 32.26. It Is said in the Canticles, honey is
under the lips of the Church, Cant. 4.11. Why so? it is because there is no
honey sweeter to the palate, than spiritual prayer to God. And therefore God
delays to answer thee, because he would have more of it. If the Musicians come
and play at our doors, or windows, if we delight not in their Music, we throw
them out money presently, that they may be gone; but if the Music please us,
we forbear to give them money, because we would keep them longer, for we like
the Music. So the Lord loves and delights in the sweet words of his children:
and therefore puts them off, and answers them not presently: Now God's
children, let him deny them never so long, yet they will never leave knocking
and begging; they will pray, and they will wait still, till they receive an
answer. Many will pray to God, as prayer is a duty, but few use it as a means
to attain a blessing. Those who come to God in the use of it as a means to
attain what they would have, they will pray, and not give over; they will
expect an Answer, and never give over petitioning till they receive it.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.


HAving declared unto you the nature of faith, and that point which concerns
the practice of it in our near approach unto God; I am now come to show unto
you the fruits and benefits Christians receive from this Mother-grace; and that
the Apostle sets down in these words.

He sets down,

1. The Mother-Grace it self, together with its principal benefit;
Justification, or reconciliation with God: that whereas we were afar off, we
are made near; and of enemies, made friends of God. Then,

2. There are the daughters or handmaids of this grace: For when we are
justified by Faith, then,

1. We have peace with God; that peace of conscience, which passes all
understanding; then,

2. We have free access by faith unto the Throne of grace, so that we need not
look for any other Mediators. Christ has made way for us to God, so that we
may go boldly to the Throne of grace, and find help at any time of need.

3. There follows a joyful hope, that a Christian has by it, a taste of
Heaven, before he come to enjoy it. We rejoice in hope, says the Apostle; hope
being as firm a thing as faith, faith makes things absent as present; hope has
patience with it, and would have us wait. We shall be sure of it, but yet we
must wait patiently.

4. Not only rejoicing in hope, but even in that which spoils a natural man's
joy, as in crosses, troubles, afflictions; for even these are made the matter
of this man's joy, not delectable objects only. Not in time to come after
afflictions, but in afflictions; so as that which spoils the joy of a natural
man, is fuel to kindle this man's joy.

Now concerning justification by faith; though it be an ordinary point, yet
there is nothing more needs Explication, than to know how a man shall be
justified by Faith. It is easily spoken, hardly explicated; Therefore in this
mother-Grace, I shall show you, 1. What faith is, that does justify. And, 2.
What this justification is. For it is not so easy a matter neither.


1. Concerning the nature of faith, I have spoken sufficiently already wherein
it consists; but yet notwithstanding, there is a certain thing as like this
faith as may be, and yet comes short of it. Many there are who are like the
foolish Virgins, that thought they were well enough, and thought they should
come time enough. So many think verily that they have faith; yea, and perchance
go with such a persuasion to their very graves, and think they have grace, and
that they labor after Christ, and lay hold on him, and are free from worldly
pollutions, so as that they have a taste and relish of the joy of the world to
come, and yet are carried all this while in a fool's Paradise, and think there
is no fear of their safety; never knowing that they are castaways, till they
come to the gates of hell, and find themselves by woeful experience shut out of
Heaven. And their case is woeful, that are thus deceived. Know then, that it is
not every faith that justifies a man; a man may have faith, and yet not be
justified. The Faith that justifies, is the Faith of Gods Elect. Tit. 1.1.
There is a faith that may belong to them that are not Gods elect, but that
faith does not justify. In the Epistle of Timothy, that faith which justifies,
must be a faith unfegn'd, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.5, Now here is the skill of a
Christian to try what that faith is, which justifies him. Now this justifying
faith is not every work of Gods Spirit in a man's heart: For there are
supernatural operations of the Spirit in a man's heart, that are but temporary,
that carry him not through, and therefore are ineffectual: but the end of this
faith is the salvation of our souls. 1 Pet. 1.9. We read in the Scripture of
Apostasy, and falling back. Now, they cannot be Apostates, that were never in
the way of truth. This being an accident, we must have a subject for it; Now
there is a certain kind of people that have supernatural workings; some that
are drawn up and down with every wind of Doctrine; these are they that have
this cold and temporary faith; temporary, because in the end it discovers it
self to be a thing not constant and permanent. We read in John 11.26. That they
that are born of God (that is, that live, and believe in Christ) never see
death, shall never perish eternally; but yet we must know withal, that there
may be conceptions that will never come to the birth, to a right and perfect
delivery. And thus it may be in the soul of a man, there may be conceptions
that will never come to a ripe birth; but let a man be born of God, and come to
perfection of birth, and the case is clear, he shall never see death. He that
lives and believes in me, shall not see death. And this is made a point of
faith: Believe thou this?

There is another thing called conception, and that is, certain dispositions to
a birth, that come not to full perfection. True, a child that is born and
lives, is a perfectly alive as he that lives an hundred years: yet I say,
there are conceptions that come not to a birth. Now, the faith that justifies,
is a living faith: there is a certain kind of dead faith; this is a feigned,
that an unfegned faith; The life that I now live, I live by the faith of the
Son of God. Do thou think a dead faith can make a living soul? Its against
reason. A man cannot live by a dead thing, not by a dead faith. Now a dead
faith there is. A faith that does not work is a dead faith, Jam. 2.22. See
thou how faith wrought with his works and by his works was faith made perfect
for verse 26. As the body without the spirit is dead, (or without breath is
dead) so faith without works is dead also. See how the Apostle compares it, as
the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. The
Apostle makes not works the form of faith, as the soul is the form of the man:
But as the body without the spirit is dead, so that faith, that works not,
that has no tokens of life, is dead; but then does not the other word strike
home? Faith wrought with his works. It seems here is, as the Papists say, fides
informis, and works make it up as the (...) of it. But compare this with the
other places of the Scripture and the difficulty will be cleared, for instance
weigh that place. 2 Cor. 12.9. Where the Apostle prayed to God, that the
messenger of Satan might be removed from him; and he said unto him, My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. What? Does
our weakness make Gods strength more perfect, to which nothing can be added?
No, it is, My strength and the perfection of it, is made known in the weakness
of the means that I made use of for the delivery of man's soul from death. So
here the excellency and perfection of our faith is made known by works; when I
see that it is not an idle, but a working faith, then I say it is made perfect
by the work: When it is a dead faith, that puts not a man on work, never
believe, that will make a li^ing soul. In St. Judes Epistle, ver. 20. it has
another Epithete, viz. The most holy faith: not holy only, but most holy. That
faith which must bring a man to God the holy of holies, must be most holy. It Is
said, that God dwells in our hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3.17. Now God and faith
dwelling in a heart together, that heart must needs be pure and clean. Faith
makes the heart pure: It were a most dishonorable thing to entertain God in a
sty; a filthy and unclean heart: but if faith dwell there, it makes a fit house
for the habitation of the King of Saints, therefore it purifieth the heart.
Well then, do thou think thy sins are forgiven thee; and that thou have a
strong faith, and yet art as profane, and as filthy as ever? How can it be? It
is a most holy faith that justifies, it is not a faith that will suffer a man
to lie on a dunghill, or in the gutter with the hog. There may be a faith, which
is somewhat like this, but it is but temporary, and comes short of it.

But now there is another thing which distinguishes it: it is the peculiar work
of faith. In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but the new creature, Gal. 6.15. and again Gal. 5.6. Neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but faith which works by
love. It Is twice set down. Now what is a new creature? Why, he that has such a
faith, as works by love: not a dead faith, but a faith that works; but how does
it work? it not only abstains from evil, and does some good acts, which a
temporary may do, but its such a faith as works by love. The love of God
constrains him, 2 Cor. 5.14. and he so loves God, as that he hates evil for
Gods sake; the other does it not out of love to God; all the love he has, is
self-love: he serves his own turn on God rather than has any true love to
serve him.

Now that we may the better distinguish between these two, I shall endeavor to
show you how far one may go farther, than the other. I know not a more
difficult point then this, nor a case more to be cut by a thread, then this; it
being a point of conscience; therefore, First, I declared unto you the nature
of faith; How God first works the will and the deed, and that there is a
hungring and thirsting after Christ. First, I say there is a will and desire to
be made partaker of Christ and his righteousness; then there is the deed too.
We are not only wishers and woulders, but do actually approach unto the Throne
of grace, and there lay hold on Christ, touch the Golden Scepter, which he
holds out unto us; but,

Object. Now you will ask, Is there not an earnest and good desire in a
temporary faith, a desire unfeigned?

Sol. Yes, there may be for a time, a greater and more vehement desire in a
temporary, then in a true believer, then in the elect themselves, all their
life.

Object. Where Is the difference then? I thought all had been well with me, when
I had such a desire, as I could scarce be at rest, till it were accomplished.

Sol. I answer, beloved, It is a hard matter to tell you the difference: but
you must consider,

1. From whence this desire flows; whether it come from an accidental cause; as
if by accident my heart be made more soft, and I more sensible of my condition,
or whether my nature be changed; to give you an instance, in iron: when iron is
put into the forge it is softened, and as soon as it is taken forth, we say it is
time to strike, while the iron is hot; the fire has made a change in it, it is
malleable, the hammer is able to work on it; but let the fire be gone, and it is
as hard as before; nay, we say steel is harder, so that there is no change in
the nature of iron, it is hard still, redit ad ingenium, it goes back into its
own estate. If it be softened, it is by an accidental cause; so here, as long as
the temporary faith is in the furnace of afflictions, when God shall let loose
the cord of his conscience, and makes him see that there is no way for
salvation but by Christ, then the sense of his torture will make him desire
with all the veins in his heart to have Christ. See a singular example of this
temporary desire in Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and
returned and enquired early after God. So Prove. 1.27. When their fear was on
them as desolation, and their destruction as a whirlwind: when distress and
anguish comes upon you, then shall they call upon me, etc. Not with a feigned
desire, but in truth and reality they desire relief; They remembered then that
God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer; they saw a Redeemer when
he was slaying of them, and they believed that God would free them, though it
was but temporary: Nevertheless they flattered him with their mouths, and lied
unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his Covenant. Observe then this was but a temporary case,
a temporary change; there was no new creature, no new nature wrought: but being
in the furnace of affliction, as long as the fire was hot they were pliable;
they were not steadfast in his Covenant. Let this be an admonition to them that
think they never can have true faith, till God slay them. I am not of that
opinion. God sometimes uses this means, but it is not so necessary, as that it
cannot be o^herwise; and to speak truly, I had rather have faith that comes
another way: The difference is this, The temporary believers will have Christ
while God is slaying of them, whilst they are in the furnace of afflictions:
but the other in cold blood, when God's hand is not on them. The true believer
is sick of love, and when he has no affliction, nor God's hand on him, with
the Apostle, he accounts all things dung and dross for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus, Philip. 3.8. There is an ardent desire, when this
external cause draws not. If when thou art out of the forge, thou have thy
heart softened, and find this work of grace and faith to drive thee to
Christ, thou have a faith unfeigned, and so the faith of God's elect.

Again, there is not only this desire in him who has a temporary faith; but
having understood the Word, he so desires it, that when he knows there is no
having Christ, nor happiness or salvation by him, unless he deny himself, and
part from his evil ways, being persuaded of this, out of self-love he would
have Christ; and seeing these be the terms, that he must turn a new leaf, and
lead a new life, or go to hell, therefore he will do this too; this is much:
yet I say, he does this too; but how shall this be proved? most evidently in 2
Pet. 2.20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
and overcome, the latter end with them is worse than the beginning. Here is
that Apostasy, and here is the subject of the temporary faith. It had been
better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they
have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them; this was
a temporary conversion, as Ephraim, like a broken bow, turned back in the day
of battle, Psalm. 78.9. Observe what they did; they were like the foolish
Virgins, they kept their maiden-heads in respect of the pollutions of the
world; they lived very civilly, they escaped the pollutions of the world, and
no man could challenge them of any filthy act: they knew that Christ was the
King of Saints, and had the knowledge of him: they knew that it was not fit
that the King of glory and holiness should be attended on by the black guard,
that they must have sanctity that will follow him; and therefore they labored
to be fit to attend him: They escaped the pollutions of the world, but yet it
continues not: Why so? For it happened to them according to the true Proverb,
the Dog is returned to his vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the mire. Mark, the Dog turns again to his own vomit. This proceeds from
some pang in his stomach, that enforces that filthy beast to disgorge it self,
that it may have some ease; but he quickly gathers it up again, as soon as the
pang is over. Some there are, that would be content to hide their iniquity
under their tongues, at Job speaks, chap. 20. verse. 12. but there comes a pang
sometimes, a pang in their consciences, which forces them to vomit up their
sweet bits again: but well, the fit is gone; and being gone, they, like the
filthy dog, return to their vomit again, considering the pleasure which they
took in that filthy thing: that they did disgorge themselves, was but from that
pang and present pinch, not from the loathing or hatred of the thing, and
therefore they return again unto it.

By the way then take notice of the filthiness of sin; how filthy is it, that
the Lord compares it to the vomit of a dog? Then there follows another
comparison of it: It is as the Sow that is washed, and returns to her wallowing
in the mire: See another loathsome resemblance of this temporary faith; the Sow
was washed, but how? her swinish nature was not washed from her; as long as the
Sow is kept from the mire, in a fair Meadow with the Sheep, she looks as sleek
and clean as they: she was washed; there is an external change, but her nature
remained: bring the Sow and the sheep to a puddle, the sheep will not go in,
because it has no swinish nature; but the other, retaining its swinish nature,
though before in outward appearance, as clean as the sheep was, yet she goes
again to her wallowing in the mire. There may be the casting away of a man's
sins, and yet no new creature wrought in him. That I may show this to you, take
this example. A man known to be as covetous a man as lives, he loves his
money as well as his God; yet perchance this man is brought in danger of the
Law, and must be hanged for some misdemeanor committed; this man, to save his
life, will part with all he has: What, is his disposition changed? no, not a
whit; he is as covetous as before, he is the same man, he does it to save his
life, and to this end he is content to part with his money. The same mind had
those in the Acts of the Apostles, who in a storm cast their wares into the Sea
with their own hands, Act. 27. (...). willingly, and yet half unwillingly; for
the saving of their lives they would part with these things, yet it was with a
great deal of repining and reluctance. As we read of Phaltiel, when his wife
was taken from him, he followed behind weeping, 2 Samuel 3.16. till they bid him
be gone, and return back. So these men forsake their sins, and hate them, but
it is but imperfectly; they part with them, but they part weeping. Well, at
this parting there may be a great deal of joy; it may taste not only the
sweetness of the Word of God, but because they are in a disposition and way to
salvation, they may have some kind of feeling of the joys, and taste of the
powers of the world to come; as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4. It is impossible
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. There is a supernatural work
wrought in them, and they have tasted the good Word of the Lord; they begin to
have some hope, and rejoice in the glory of the world to come: What is the
difference then? here is a tasting; but as it is Joh. 6.54. it is not said, he
that tastes my flesh, and tastes my blood; but he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life. There is a difference betwixt tasting and
drinking, there may be a tasting without drinking; and the Text says, Matthew.
27.34. When they gave Christ Vinegar, he tasted thereof, but would not drink.
He that can take a full draught of Christ crucified, he shall never thirst, but
shall be as a springing fountain that springs up to everlasting life; but it
shall not be so with him that does but taste. The Vintner goes round the
Cellar, and tastes every Vessel; he takes it into his mouth, and spits it out
again, and yet knows by the tasting, whether it be good or bad; the wine goes
but to his palate, it reaches not the stomach. So a temporary believer tastes
and feels what an excellent thing it is to have communion with Christ, and to
be made partaker of his glory; but he does but taste it. Look in Hosea 5.15.
where we have another instance of this temporary Believer: Ye would think they
sought in God in a good sort, and in as good a manner as one could desire:
well, but how did they seek him? It was only upon occasion, in time of
affliction: I will go and return to my place until they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early; and
again, Hosea 6.4. The Lord complains of them notwithstanding. They will in
their affliction seek me early: Was not this a fair returning? Come (say they)
let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us, etc. What a
deal of comfort did they seem to gather from the ways of the Lord! But see
what follows, Hosea 6.4. O Ephraim, says the Lord, what shall I do unto thee?
O Judah what shall I do unto thee? For your goodness is as the morning cloud,
and as the early dew it goes away; that is, it is but a temporary thing,
wrought by affliction, which will not abide. As when a wicked man on his
deathbed desires that God would spare him and restore him to his health, and
that he would become a new man, all this comes but from the terrors of death;
for it often proves, that if God restores him he becomes as bad, if not worse,
than ever he was before. But that I may not hold you too long;

2. Take this for another difference: That Gods children can as earnestly
desire grace as mercy; The temporary desire mercy, but never desire grace. The
believer desires grace to have his nature healed, to hate his former
conversation. The temporary never had, nor never will have this desire; should
one come to the temporary believer, and tell him God will be merciful unto him,
you may go on, and take your fill of sin, you shall be sure of mercy; he would
like this well, and think it the welcomest news as could be, because he only
fears damnation, and self-love makes him only desire freedom from that; but
now the child of God hates sin, though there were no Hell, Judge nor Tormentor;
he begs as hard of God for grace, as for mercy, and would do so, were there no
punishment. His nature being changed, he desires grace, as well as mercy,
which the temporary never does.

3. The last mark is from the words of the Apostle, Neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Love
and the new creature puts Gods children on work; their hearts are first
altered, and changed by being made new creatures. As the Scripture says, his
flesh is circumcised, he is a dead man; dead, not, as formerly, in trespasses
and sins, but dead unto them. Ephesians. 2.1. and Romans 6.11. Deadness argues
impotency of doing those things which a living man does; he cannot walk, etc.
The temporary will not sin for fear of after-claps, but this man cannot sin,
his heart is changed, he is dead to sin; we see how both abstain from sin, but
the temper and disposition is not alike. The temporary believer perchance
commits not the sin, but he could find in his heart to do it; he says not with
Joseph, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against my God? The other
says, I could do this evil well enough, but I will not. Thou can not be^n
those that are evil says Christ in his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus. This
was her great commendation. Revel. 2.2. Now he that is born of God cannot sin,
there is that seed, that spring in him, that for his life he cannot sin, but it
turns his heart from it; for his life he cannot tell how to swear, lie, etc. or
join with others in wickedness; but this must be understood of the constant
course of their lives; I speak not what they may do in temptations, when they
are surprised, but in the course of their lives, they commit sin, as if they
knew not how to do it; the other does it skilfully; these coblingly, and
bunglingly, they do it ill-favouredly; thus it is with a wicked man in doing a
good work, he cobles it up. This is intimated unto us in the very Phrase of the
Apostle, Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin: It is not the same thing
to sin, in St. John's acception, and to commit sin; committing sin is the
action of the Artist, and Practitioner in the Trade; From this the seed of God,
which abides in the regenerate; secureth him, 1 John 3.9. Psalm. 32.12. Thy
faith then must be a faith that works by love: Can thou do those good works
thou do out of love? then, my soul for thine, thou art saved. Get me any
temporary that loves God, and I shall say something to you. Have thou then a
faith that causes thee to love God, a working faith, and a faith that will not
suffer thee to do any thing displeasing to him? if thou have such a faith, thou
art justified before God.

2. And so I come now to the point of justification, the greatest of all
blessings: Blessed is he (says David) whose transgression is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered; blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity: It is the most blessed condition that can be; it is set down by way
of Exclamation. O, the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity! or, as the Original imports; O, the blessedness of the man discharged
from sin. Here are many blessings conceived in our justification from sin. For
justification, see what it is; the Scripture in St. Paul's Epistles, speaks of
justification by faith; and in St James, of justification by works. Now it will
be useful to us in this point to know whence justification comes; it comes from
justice, Tsedeck, as the Original has it, and Hitsdiq, to justify; so that
justification and righteousness depend one upon the other; for what is
justification but the manifestation of the righteousness that is in a man? And
therefore in Gal. 3.21. they are put for one the same thing: For if there had
been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness had been by
the Law; that is, justification had been by the Law. Again, If righteousness be
by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2. that is, also, if
justification had been by the Law, etc. Justification is a manifestation of
righteousness; and as many ways as righteousness is taken, so many ways is
justification, which is a declaration of righteousness; so that if there be a
double righteousness, there must be also a double justification. Beloved, I
bring you no new doctrine; be not afraid of that; but I show you how to
reconcile places of Scripture against the Church of Rome, and those things
which the Papists bring against us in this point. It stands by reason, seeing
justification is a declaration of righteousness, that there must be so many
sorts of justification, as there be of righteousness.

Now there is a double sort of righteousness, Romans 8.4. That the righteousness
of the Law may be fulfilled in us; see then there is a double righteousness;
there is a righteousness fulfilled in us, and a righteousness fulfilled by us,
that is walking in the Spirit. The righteousness fulfilled in us, is fulfilled
by another, and is made ours by imputation; so we have a righteousness without
us, and a righteousness inherent in us: the righteousness without us, is
forgiveness of sins, and pardon of them, which is a gracious act of God,
letting fall all actions againsts me, and accounting of me, as if I had never
sinned against him all my life time; then there is a righteousness within me,
an inherent righteousness. And if a righteousness, then justification; for that
is but a declaration of righteousness. And so that which the Fathers call
justification, is taken generally for sanctification; that which we call
justification, they call forgiveness of sins; that which we call
sanctification, they call justification: so that the difference is only in the
terms. Justification we must know, is not taken only as opposed to
condemnation, which is the first kind of righteousness, Romans 6.7. He that is
dead, is freed from sin; if you look to the Greek, or to the Margent, it is, he
that is dead, is justified from sin: This is not took in the first sense as
opposed to condemnation, but in the other sense as it has relation to final
grace. The perfection of sanctification is wrought in me; for where there is
final grace, there is a supersedeas from all sin; so Rev. 22.11. Let him that
is righteous, be righteous still; the Greek is, let him that is righteous, be
justified still. See then the difference between St. Paul, and St. James. St.
Paul speaks of that which consists in remission of sins, as in comparing the
Apostle with David will appear, Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven. St.
James speaks of justification in the second acception. You need not fly to that
distinction of justification before God, and justification before men: Think
not that St. James speaks only of justification before men; Was not Abraham our
father justified by works, when he offered up Isaac on the Altar? What,
justified by killing his Son? this was a proper work indeed to justify him
before man, to be a parricide; to kill his son, though it were not so before
God. So Psalm. 106. we read how God accounted the act of Phineas for
righteousness: Thus you see how works are accounted righteousness in the second
kind of righteousness. In the former righteousness we are justified by faith,
for in righteousness inherent there is goodly chain of virtues; Add to your
faith virtue, etc. add one grace to another; Add to virtue, knowledge: Faith is
but one part of the Crown. Now this justification in the first sense, whereby
my sins are forgiven, is called the righteousness of God, because of Christ
which is God, because it is wrought by Christ, Dan. 9. he is called an
everlasting righteousness, which continues for ever, world without end; for do
not think the Saints in heaven have only the second kind of righteousness, for
they have the same covering by justication by Christ in heaven, that they had
before. God covers their sins, not here only, but there also; justification
follows them for ever.

Quest. But now, what parts has justification in it? we are wont to say that
there are two parts; one imputation of righteousness, the other forgiveness of
sins.

Sol. I answer; for my own part I think Justification is one simple act of God,
and that it is improperly distinguished as parts; but rather as terminus a quo
is distinct from terminus ad quem. And this I shall show unto you both by
reason and authority, that faith is but one act.

Let none say that I take away the imputation of the righteousness of Christ:
No; the bringing in of light, and the expulsion of darkness is not two acts,
but one; but there is terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem. We are accounted
righteous, and that is, we have our sins forgiven. And the reason is this; if
sin were a positive thing, and had a being in it self, then the forgiveness of
sin must be a thing distinct from the imputation of righteousness. Scholars
know the difference between adversa and privantia, white and black are both
existent, but darkness and light are not, but only a privation one of another.
Darkness is nothing of it self, but the absence of light; The bringing in of
light is the suppression of it: You must understand sin has no being, no
entity; it is only an absence of righteousness, the want of that light which
should be in the subject: Which want is either in our nature, and then it is
called original; or in our person and actions, and then it is called actual
transgression. Sin is an absence of that positive being, which is, as I said,
either in our nature, or works. Then thus I will resolve you in another point,
viz. If sin were a positive thing, all the world cannot avoid it, but God must
be the Author of it; for there is nothing can have a being, but it must derive
its being from the first being, God. Now, how can we avoid God's being the
Author of sin? Why thus; It is nothing.

But what, is sin nothing? Will God damn a man, and send him to hell for
nothing?

I answer, it is not such a nothing as you make it; a man is not damned for
nothing. It is a nothing privative, an absence of that that should be, and that
a man ought to have. As when a Scholar is whipped for not saying his lesson, is
he whipped, think you, for nothing? Indeed he has nothing, he cannot say a
word of his lesson, and therefore it is he is whipped; it is for a thing he
ought to have, and has not. Well, if you will say there are two parts of
justification, do if you please; but this I take to be the more proper and
genuine explanation.

Besides, it appears by testimony of the Apostle, Romans 4.6. As David describes
the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without
works, etc. Saying, blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered. The Apostle cites the Prophet David. Psalm. 32. Mark the
Apostle's conclusion, and how he proves it. His conclusion is, That man is
blessed, unto whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works. His argument
then must needs be thus framed.

He whom God forgives, is blessed;

But Him, to whom God imputes righteousness without works, God forgives;

Therefore he is blessed.

Now, how could this assumption hold, if imputation of righteousness, and
remission of sins were two distinct acts? for, not imputing righteousness, is,
not to bring in a light which keeps out darkness. But observe, the Apostle to
the Colossians and Ephesians, makes this forgiveness of sins the whole work,
nay, foundation of our redemption. But here remember, I deny not the imputation
of righteousness; for that is the foundation of the other; here is the point.
How is Christ's righteousness imputed to me? that positive thing, which expels
the other? Not so, as if Christ's righteousness were in me subjectively; for it
was wrought by his passion as well as his action. The Apostle calls it faith in
his blood; by faith in Christ, Christ's passive obedience is imputed to me.
What do you think the meaning is, that God does esteem me, as if I had hanged
on the Cross, and as if I had my side pierced? No, that would not stead me, or
do me any good; that which was meritorious and singular in him, did reach to
us: So that the meaning is this, as it is in the Articles of the Church of
England, That we are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works and
deservings; that is, for the merits of Jesus Christ, God is well pleased with
the obedience of his Son, both active and passive: He is so far satisfied, as
that he takes us to be in that state for his sake, as if we had fulfilled all
his Laws, and never broken them at any time, and as if we owed him not a
farthing: This is imputative righteousness, however the Papists may scoff at
it. And this kind of justification must of necessity be by imputation: Why?
because, when a man has committed a sin, it cannot be undone again: God, by
his absolute power, cannot make a thing done, undone; for it implies a
contradiction. The act past cannot be revoked, nor the nature thereof changed;
murder will be murder still, etc. How then can I be justified, the sin being
past, and the nature of it still remaining? I say, how can I be justified in
the first sense any other way than by imputation? It is said in 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was, in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, etc. This kind of justification, which consists in
remission of sins, cannot be imputative; sin cannot be changed, nor the thing
done, undone.

But now comes a greater question: if by justification our sins be forgiven
us, what sins are forgiven, I pray? sins past, or sins to come? we are taught
by some, that in the instant of justification, all our sins past and to come
are remitted; which is in my mind an unsound doctrine: For if we look narrowly
into it, we shall find that in propriety of speech, remission of sins has
relation to that which is past; it is said therefore, Romans 3.25. Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God. And remission of sins has relation to those that are past, as appears
by inevitable reason; for what is remission of sins, but sin covered? Now can a
thing be covered before it be? blot out mine iniquities, etc. Psalm. 51.1. says
David; can a thing be blotted out, before it is written? this is the thing
makes the Pope so ridiculous, that he will forgive sins for the time before
they are committed; but what, do we get nothing for the time to come? yes, yes,
when the sin is past, by faith we have a new access unto God; and having risen
by repentance, we get a new act, not of universal justification, but of a
particular justification from this and that particular sin.

But if there be forgiveness of sins past already, and I know that I am
justified, and my sin remitted; may I now pray for forgiveness of sins past?
The Papists say it is active infidelity, and as absurd as to pray to God to
create the world anew, or incarnate his Son again.

But there is no remission where there is no praying; and there is need of
praying for the remission of sins past, and against sin for the time to come,
as I shall show next time; as also, consider whether there be any interruption
of the act of justification by falling into great sins. There is no man has a
mind more against quierks and quillets than I; yet for the opening of these
things, and staying and settling the mind, and clearing the understanding, give
me leave the next time to clear these things unto you.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.


IN this Chapter, especially in the beginning thereof, I showed unto you that
the Apostle sets down unto us those special comforts, that a man receives after
God has wrought that supernatural grace of faith in his heart; so that here is
set down The Mother-Grace, Justification by faith; and then the blessed issues
or daughters thereof; and those are, a free access to God, a joyful hope of the
glory to come, and not only a patient, but a joyful suffering of all
afflictions that shall befall us in this life.

Concerning justification by faith, I labored to open it unto you the last
day; three things may well be considered therein.

1. What that faith is whereby we are justified. 2. What that justification is,
we have by faith. 3. What relation the one of these has to the other.
Concerning the first of these I told you, that it was not every faith that
justifies, nor every kind of faith that a man can live by. There is a dead
faith, and a man cannot live by a dead thing: And there is a living faith, and
that is called a faith unfeigned. And though it be in Scripture called the
faith, yet it is with some restriction; it is the faith of God's elect; and
common to none besides. There is a faith also which is but temporary; that
being touched with the sense of sin, and seeing there is no deliverance from
the curse due to sin, but by Christ; and that there is no part to be had in
Christ, but by renouncing all corruptions; the consideration of the
desperateness of his case without Christ, makes him long after him; and since
he cannot have Christ without leaving sin, he will resolve on that too; he will
make toward Christ, and perhaps he comes to taste of the sweetness of Christ,
and feels the power of the world to come; he forsakes sin, and thereby comes so
near the true believer, that a man must as it were, cut a hair to divide
between them. And this is a thing very necessary to be considered of.

And I showed unto you also that these are not moral things; not a faith that
is wrought by the power of men, but by a work of God's Spirit; for it humbles a
man for sin, and makes him make toward Christ, and seek him above all things,
and having laid some hold on him, he escapes the pollutions of the world, and
yet this faith is but temporary; a thing supernatural it is, yet it is without
root. Now as I noted unto you, this is not different in the circumstance of
time; for time alters not the thing. A child that lives but half an hour, does
as properly and truly live, as one that lives a hundred years. But it is
called temporary, not that therein stands the difference, but therein it is
shown, and that proves the man to have something wanting. Our being united to
Christ, and being nigh unto him, is as a graft or scyons put into a Tree; there
are two grafts put into one stock, and each of them have all the several things
necessary done unto them, as cutting, binding, etc. yet time discovers that the
one thrives, and the other withers; so that there was a fault unseen; though he
that put in the gra^^s never saw it, yet time discovers it. Now the difference
is not in the time, but in the foundation of the thing it self. Now what the
difference is between these, I labored to declare unto you the last day.

The use of it is in brief, this faith, (I mean the s^und faith) is not in all
these. All have not faith, the faith, I say, of God's (...) yet some come so
near, and have faith so like it, that it will trouble a wi^^ man to make the
distinction. These are like the foolish Virgins, that lived very civilly, and
kept their maiden-heads in regard of the world; none could accuse them for any
evil they had done; yet they are at length shut out. Many think themselves in a
good way, and a safe condition, yea, and go out of the world in this conceit,
and think they are entering into the gate of Heaven, till they in a moment are
cast down to hell: Try we therefore, search and sift our selves; if this grace
were as grass that grows in every field, it were something; but it is a
precious flower, which, if we have not, Christ prefiteth us nothing. This is
the means of Christ's being applied unto thee; how does it therefore behove
every one of us to look to it, and not to slubber over the matter slightly, but
to search and try, and examine our selves. And in the marks I showed before
that it was such a thing as may be likened to a conception which never comes to
the birth; such a thing is this temporary faith.

Among others let me add the tokens of love; it is twice set down in the
Galatians, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision; etc. but faith which
works by love; and again, neither circumcision, etc. but the new creature.
They that have a temporary faith want nothing but the new creature; what is
that? it is faith that works by love. They that love God, it is a sure token
that God has loved them first, and God never gives this love to any but they
have faith unfeigned.

The next thing is, he is ever careful to try himself, to prove himself. The
temporary cannot endure to be brought to the touch or trial. He accounts every
beginning of grace in himself very great; every Molehill to be a Mountain. Now
God's children know that they may be deceived with counterfeits, and therefore
they try themselves.

Mark the speech of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.5. Examine your selves, prove your
own selves; know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except you be reprobates? Let us understand the words; first, we see then it is
a thing that is possible to be known, whether we are in the faith, or no; and
this is flat against the Papists; for they think a man can have but a
conjectural knowledge, that he has grace and faith. It may be probable, they
say, but it cannot be certainly known; but does not the Apostle say, Examine
your selves, prove your selves, know you not your selves, etc. No Papist can
know it, yet it is possible to be known. Prove and try, you shall not lose your
labor. If you take pains in it, you shall attain it in this world. Make your
calling and election sure, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.10. on God's part it is
sure enough, for the foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. but make it
sure unto your selves, in respect of your own knowledge. Know you not your own
selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates: It is a thing may
well be made sure of; therefore search, try, examine, etc. Others are content
with bare beginnings that never come to any maturity; but those that have true
faith, are ever bringing themselves to the trial and touchstone.

But may some say, I have tried and examined my self, and I do not find that
Christ is in me; what am I a reprobate therefore?

No: God forbid: I say not the man is a reprobate that cannot discern that
Christ is in him; See what that is that will explain this, 1 Cor. 11.19. For
there must be heresies among you, that they which are aproved, might be made
known; there must be (...), men that are approved, such as have endured the
dint and shot of the Musket: such as have put themselves to the trial, and
come off well: these are the (...), and are opposed to those (...), who are
such men, as taking things hand over head, do not search, and try, and examine,
and put themselves to the proof; it is a sign these have not true faith, for
what, is the having of Christ so slight or poor a thing, as that they will take
no pains for him, or care not for knowing whether they have him or no? what,
neglect Christ so much, as not to adventure on the trial? these are those
(...). But he which has this saving faith, he is ever putting himself to the
trial. Again, God's child, not only uses the means in himself to try himself,
but he prays for the aid of God also; he knows that his own heart is
deceitful, and may cozen him, but that God is greater than his heart, and
knows all things. And therefore he cries unto God to try him, as Psalm.
139.23. Try me, O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts; look;
look well whether there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting; there is an everlasting righteousness, and an everlasting way that
leads unto it, about which these are not content to try themselves only, but
they desire God to try them also; and to make them know the uprightness of
their own hearts, and not to suffer them to be deceived thereby. Now that I
have done with.

Consider now what that justification is, that is obtained by this true lively
faith; I showed unto you that justification is ordinarily taken for an
acquittance from a debt. It is derived from justice or righteousness; therefore
I showed that justification and righteousness are taken for one and the
self-same thing; for if there had been a Law given which could, etc. that is,
justification had been by the Law. Now as there is a double righteousness, so
there is also a double justification. Not that I hold there is any other
justification, as it comprehends remission of sins, but only one, but other
ways, as many righteousnesses as there are, so many justifications there are.
Now there is a double kind of righteousness, the one imputed, and the other
inherent; the one is the righteousness of Christ, an act transient from
another, which cannot be made mine but by imputation. Besides this, there is
another which is inherent, a righteousness in us. S. James speaks of the one,
and S. Paul of the other. One is opposed to condemnation, and the other to
hypocrisy. The soundness of the heart is respected of God for righteousness,
in respect of the graces inherent in us.

Now to give you a touch of the difference between the one and the other, and
therein to declare the difference between us and Rome: Know then, that the
question between us and Rome, is not Whether justification be by faith or no?
but whether there be any such thing as justification or no? The Doctrine of the
Church of Rome is, that there is no such Grace as this.

But concerning the first of these, that justification which is by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, I showed unto you that imputation in this
case, is, as when a man comes to hold up his hand at God's Bar, as it were, and
it is demanded of him what he has to say for himself, why he should not die;
and then this justification by Christ's righteousness is opposed to
condemnation. Then justification by faith, is, that when I come to stand before
God, though conscience say I am guilty of a thousand sins, yet I may go boldly
and plead my pardon, which will acquit me, as if I had never sinned at any
time. God was thus in Christ reconciling us (the world) unto himself, not
imputing their sins unto them. Now sin is a thing past, which being done,
cannot be made undone, the sin remains still: murder is murder still; and
adultery is adultery still; it cannot be undone again. Now how shall this man
that is guilty of murder and adultery be made just? it cannot not possibly be
but by not imputing his sin unto him, so that God should account it to him, as
if it had not been done at all by him; he puts it upon Christ's account;
Account: The word is used in the Epist. to Philemon, v. 18. where S. Paul
says, If he has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that on mine account.
A man's sins being thus put upon Christ's account, he is accepted of God as
freely as if he had never owed him any thing, or as if he had never offended
him. Now this is done by transferring the debt from one person to another; so
that we see this imputation of sin to Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to
us is most necessary. It must be so: And if there were no testimony for it in
Scripture, yet reason shows that there can be no righteousness, but by God's
acceptance of us in Christ, as if we had never sinned; there is the difference
then. To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is accounted to him for righteousness.

But does God justify the ungodly? that is a hard speech; we read in the
Proverbs, 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, even
they both are abomination to the Lord.

But here we must understand this as we do some other Scriptures; we read in S.
Luke 7.22. that the blind see, the lame walk, the dumb speak. It Is impossible
for a man to be blind and see, to be dumb and speak, all at once; yet take the
chief of sinners, suppose Paul, and he was so in his own account; but the act
of justification alters him. God justifies the ungodly, that is, him that was
even now so; but by the imputation of Christ's righteousness he is made
righteous, that is, righteous in God's account. And indeed, justification in S.
Paul's acception, importing the remission of sins, the person justified must of
necessity be supposed to have been a sinner; otherwise remission of sins would
no more concern him, than repentance does the holy Angels which never offended.

But in proceeding in this point I did reflect a little back. God finds a man
with a number of sins, full of sin, and forgives these sins; now I demanded
this; how far does this justification and forgiveness extend? to sins past
alone, or to sins past and to come? And I answered that we must consider this
matter two ways.

First, to justify a man's person simply; and then to justify a man from this,
or that particular act: The phrase is used in Scripture, Acts 13.39. And by him
all that believe, are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. There is justification from this or that thing:
There is first, Justification of a man's person; he that was an enemy, is now
made a friend; he is now no longer a stranger at home, but is in the list of
God's household. Now this we say, no sooner does a man receive it, but the
self-same hour that he receives it, the bond is cancelled, the evidence is
torn, and fastened to the Cross of Christ, and hangs up among the Records,
whereas before it was an evidence against us, and would have lain heavy on us
at the bar; but now it is fastened to the Cross, as a cancelled Record, the
bond is become void.

Secondly, but now when we consider justification from this or that particular
act; I declared that so a man is only justified from sins past; for it is
contrary to reason and Scripture, that a man should be justified from sins to
come: For Scripture, the Apostle has it, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; and it is
clear also from the nature of the thing. A thing cannot be remitted before it
be committed, nor covered before it had an existence, nor blotted out before it
be written. Therefore justification from such or such a fault, must have
relation to that which is past; but for justification for the time to come, I
will speak anon; there I left the last time.

I have now faith, and I believe in Christ; I have now relation to him, and
remission of sins past. But why then do I pray for it? to what end is that?
Bellarmine objects that it is an act of infidelity to pray for it afterward;
but we do it, and we ought to do it; see Psalm. 51. David made that Psalm after
the Prophet Nathan had told him his sin was pardoned; See the title of it, (and
we must know that the title is a part of God's word as well as the rest) A
Psalm of David when Nathan came unto him, after he had gone in unto Bathsheba:
Nathan told him that God had took away his sin: Yet he cries here throughout
the whole Psalm, to have his sin pardoned and blotted out; so that though there
were faith and assurance, yet he still prays for it. Now Bellarmine says, this
cannot be; but does he dispute against our opinion? no, he disputes against the
Holy Ghost; for David having received a message of forgiveness, yet prays.
Therefore if the Jesuit had grace, he would join with us to salve the matter,
rather than through our sides to strike at God.

But it is a Fallacy to join these two together; for a man to pray for a thing
past, it is an act of infidelity; as to pray that God would create the world,
and incarnate his Son.

I answer, there is difference between an act done, and an act continued; when
the World was made by God, God had finished that work. And when Christ took our
flesh upon him, the act was done; but the forgiveness of sin is a continued
act, which holds to day and to morrow, and world without end. God is pleased
not to impute thy sins, but cover them; Now this covering is no constant act,
but upon a supposition of constant indulgence, which ought to be solicited by
constant prayer. I may cover a thing now, and uncover it again; now forgiveness
of sin being an act not complete, but continued, and continued world without
end (and therefore we say the Saints in Heaven are justified by imputative
righteousness, God's continuance of his act of mercy.) The point then is this;
As long as we continue in the world, and by contrary acts of disobedience
continue to provoke God to discontinue his former acts of mercy, and our sins
being but covered, therefore so long must we pray for forgiveness. When the
servant had humbled himself before his Lord, it is said, The Lord of that
servant loosed him, and forgave him the debt, Mat. 18.27. But though he forgave
him, yet he did another act that caused his Lord to discontinue his pardon,
Matthew. 18.33. Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants,
as I had pity on thee? He had pity on him; yet since he does another act, which
turns his Lord's heart against him, therefore he is now cast into prison, and
he must not come out thence till he has paid the utmost farthing. He had
forgave him to day and to morrow, and would have continued his forgiveness, if
he had not thus provoked him; we must pray to God to continue his acts of
mercy, because we continually provoke him by new acts of rebellion. Add to
this, The King grants a pardon to a man; In all Patents of pardon there is a
clause that the man must renew his Patent. If forgiveness may be renewed, then
those things are to be renewed again, by which the renovation of my remission
may be wrought. God would have me renew my acts of faith; and if of faith, why
not of repentance, and of prayer? There is a singular place in Ezekiel. 36.29, 35,
37. that makes it plain, That though God intends to do the thing, yet he
appoints this to be the means. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; (i.e.) though I have
done it, and intend to do it, yet will I do it by the means of prayer.
Howsoever that God had promised Eliah, that rain should come upon the face of
the earth; yet he goes upon the Mount, and saw no show of a cloud. The Text
says not what he did; but he put his head between his knees. Saint James
says, he prayed, and ^he opened Heaven, and brought down rain. It was an
humble secret gesture. A man may be more free in private, than in public. He
prayed, and the heavens opened. God had promised it, and would do it, but yet
he would be sought to. So we see the mediate cause is prayer; so though the
Lord will do this, yet for all this he will be enquired of: It is not with God
as with men; men, who have promised, would be loath to be sued to, not to break
their promise; they account that a dishonor to them, but it is not so with
God; God has promised, yet thou shall have no benefit of it, until thou sue to
him for it; therefore thou must go to God and say, Lord fulfill thy promise to
thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to trust. God loves to have his bond
sued out. Lord, make good this word, perform that good word that thou have
spoken. God would have his bond thus sued out. And as thy faith, repentance,
prayer is renewed, so is thy pardon renewed. When God will make a man possess
the sins of his youth; when a man is careless this way, it pleases God to
awaken him. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquity of my youth, Job 13.26. When a man forgets the iniquities of his
youth, and renews not his repentance, and has not new acts of faith and
petition, then God makes him to possess the iniquities of his youth; he makes
his sins stand up and cry out against him, and by this means his old evidences
are obliterated. When a man has a pardon, and it is almost obliterated, the
letters almost worn out, that they cannot be read, he would be glad to have it
renewed, to have a new exemplification. Every sin it puts a great blur upon
thine old evidences that thou can not read them, They may be firm in Heaven,
and yet perhaps be so blurred that thou can not read them, and therefore if
thou would get them cleared again, thou must go to God by prayer, and renew
them again; so that whether our evidences be blur'd, or whether it be that God
will make us possess the iniquities of our youth, it is necessary to pray for
the forgiveness of those sins, which have been before forgiven.

But now you will say, when I have sinned afterward, how come I then to be
justified? Then a man would think repentance only does it, and without
repentance a man cannot be justified.

But you must understand, repentance is not an instrument at all; faith only is
the instrument, faith justifyeth me from sin hereafter, as well as before. The
case is this, faith brings lif^. The righteous shall live by his faith, as the
Prophet Habakkuk speaks. 2.4.

What do then new sins do?

There are two sorts of sins; one of ordinary incursion, which cannot be
avoided; these break no friendship betwixt God, and us; these only weaken our
faith, and make us worse at ease. But there are other sins which waste a man's
conscience; A man that has committed murder, adultery, and lives in
covetousness, which (in the Apostles) is Idolatry; as long as a man is in this
case, he cannot exercise the acts of faith; we must know faith justifies not
as an habit, but as an act applying Christ to the comfort of the soul. Now a
wasting sin it stops the passage of faith, it cannot act till it be opened by
repentance; Physicians give instances for it. Those that have Apoplexies,
Epilepsies, and the Falling sickness, are thought to be dead for the time, as
it was with Eutichus, yet says Saint Paul, his spirit was in him, Act. 20.13.
Every one thought him dead, yet his spirit is in him; however in regard of the
operation of his senses it did appear he was dead. So, if thou art a careless
man and lookst not to thy watch, and to thy guard, but art overtaken in some
gross, and grievous sin, thou art taken for dead. I say not, a man can lose his
life that once has it; but yet in the apprehension of others, and of himself
too, he may appear to be dead. As in Epilepsies, the nerves are hindered by
obstructions; so sin obstructs the nerves of the soul, that there cannot be
that life and working, till these sins be removed. Now what is repentance? why,
it clears the passages, that though faith could (...) before, yet now it gives
him dispositions unto it. As a man in a (...), cannot do the acts of a living
man, till he be refreshed again; so (...) its repentance which clears the
spirits, and makes the life of faith pass throughout, Now when repentance
clears the passages, then faith acts, and now there is a new act of faith,
faith justifies me from my new sins; faith at first and at last, is that
whereby I am justified from my sins, which I commit afterward.

But this forgiveness of sins, what does it free us from?

In sin, we must consider two things; the fault and the punishment. Now
consider sin as it is in it self, and as it respects the sinner, as acted by
him, as respecting the fault of the sinner, it is (...), a transgression of the
Law; The punishment is death; as it respects the sinner, it is guilt. The sin
is not guilt, but the guilt the sinners. For instance, a man that has told a
lie, or sworn an oath, the act is past, but a thing remains, which we call the
guilt. At if a man commit murder, or adultery, the act is past, but yet if he
sleep, or walk, or wake, the guilt follows him. If he live an hundred years, he
is a murderer still, and an adulterer still, the guilt follows him; and nothing
can take away the murder, or adultery from the soul, but the blood of Christ
applied by faith.

First, God takes away the punishment. There is now (says the Apostle) no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit; Romans 8.1. what, nothing in him worthy condemnation? God
knows, we are worthy of a thousand condemnations. There are two Judges; there
is a double guilt; when a man is brought to the bar, first, the Jury judge the
fact, and then the Judge that sits on the Bench, he judges the punishment; one
says guilty, or not guilty? The other says guilty, then he judges him. Now
when we are justified, we are freed, from both these guilts; sin when it is
accomplished, it brings forth death: Jam. 1.15. You know the natural work of
sin, (...), it labors with death; now God will stop the acts of it, that it
shall not do that, which it is apt to do, which is as good, as if the sin were
taken away; when there were wild gourds sliced into the pot, 2 Kings 4.31. it is
said the Prophet took that venomous herb away; (i. e.) though the thing were
there, yet it is as if it were not there, it shall do no manner of hurt: Bring
now and pour out, and there was no evil thing. So in respect of us, though
there be an evil thing in punishment, and what, if we had our due, would bring
condemnation, yet when we are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, it can do us
no evil, no hurt; it is said in the Scripture, that the stars fell from heaven;
why the stars are of that bigness that they cannot fall from heaven to the
earth; but they are said to fall, when they give not their light, and do not
that, for which they were put there; so, though I have committed sin, yet, when
God is pleased for Christ's sake to pardon it, it is as if it were not there at
all.

This is a great matter, but I tell you there is more; we are not only freed
from the guilt of the punishment, but, which is higher, we are freed from the
guilt of the fact. I am now no more a murderer, no more a liar; when I have
received a pardon from the blood of Christ, he frees me from that charge, the
world is changed with me now. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? Romans 8.33. If the Devil lay any thing to thee thou may deny it. Such a
one I was, but I am justified, but I am sanctified. 1 Cor. 6.11. A man has
committed High Treason against the King, and the King gives him a pardon for
the Treason; if I call him a Traitor, he can have no remedy against me, for he
is one; the pardon takes not away the guilt: But i^ his blood be restored unto
him, by Act of Parliament, then if I shall call him Traitor, he may have remedy
against me, because he is restored fully, and is not liable to that disgrace.
This is our case, though our sins be as red as scarlet, yet the die shall be
changed; Isa. 1.18. It shall be so bloody: Thou have the grace of
justification, and this does not only clear thee from the punishment, but from
the fault it self; See in Jer. 50.20. The place is worth Gold: In those days,
and in that time says the Lord, ^he iniquity of Israel shall be sought for,
and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found:
For I will pardon them whom I reserve: What is the matter? What a sinful man,
and no sin? What then there is search made for sin in such a man, shall it not
be found? You will say this is meant of the grace of sanctification; no: I will
pardon them, that pardoning of sin makes the sin not to be found. What a
wonderful comfort is this? When I shall come at the day of judgment, and have
the benefit of my justification, the last absolution, such sins shall not be
charged on me, my sins and iniquities shall not be remembered. I will remember
their sins no more, says God; it is a wonderful thing, and a strange mistake
in many men, especially the Papists; Did they ever write comfortably of the day
of judgment? Never; they make that a terrible day. Alas poor souls, they knew
not that justification is that, that makes sins, that they shall never be
remembered: Mark, it is said, Thou shall hear of all thy good deeds for thy
honor, and thy praise; but for thy sins, there shall search be made, and they
shall not be found, when God forgives sins, he does it fully, it shall never be
cast in thy teeth again; but thou shall hear of all thy good deeds, not of thy
bad. Then lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near; Luke 21.28.
here is the blessed grace of justification, that we being justified by faith,
have not only no condemnation, but no guilt; whereas all the sins of the wicked
man, shall be set before his face, and he shall stand quaking and trembling by
reason thereof; not one good thing that he has done shall be remembered, but in
the iniquity that he has committed, in that shall he dye; Ezekiel. 18.24. and so
I have said somewhat of that point.

You may remember that I said (a word perhaps that some think much of) that the
question betwixt us and Rome, is not Whether we be justified by faith or no?
But Whether we be justified at all; I will make it good. There are two graces,
righteousness imputed, which implies forgiveness of sins; and righteousness
inherent, which is the grace of sanctification begun. They utterly deny that
there is any righteousness, but righteousness inherent. They say forgiveness of
sins is nothing but sanctification. A new doctrine never heard of in the Church
of God, till those last days, till the spawn of the Jesuits devised it.
Forgiveness of sin is this, that God will never charge me with it again. They
say that forgiveness of sin is an abolishing of sin in the subject, where is
true remission; as much as to say, There is no justification distinct from
sanctification: whereas the Apostle distinguishes them, when as he says, The
Son of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption: 1 Cor. 1.28. He is made unto us (of God.) By the way let me expound
it unto you. Christ has three offices; A Prophetical, Regal and Sacerdotical
office. He exercises his Prophetical office to illuminate our understanding.
He exercises his Kingly office to work on our will and affections; there are
two branches of it, the Kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of glory. How am I
made partaker of Christ's Prophetical office? He is made unto me wisdom, before
I was a fool, but now, by it, I am made wise. First, he enlightens me, and so
he is made unto me wisdom; well, he is my Priest; how so? He is made an
expiation for my sin; he is said to be (...) in Saint John, A propitiation for
our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the world. There is a
difference between (...) and (...), that is a bar^ pardon, but this is such a
propitiation, as the party offended is well pleased with, Christ being made a
ransom; he is made unto us (...), by the oblation offered unto his Father. He
is righteousness imputed to us. And as a King, he rules me in the Kingdom of
grace, and in the Kingdom of glory; in the Kingdom of grace he is made unto me
sanctification, and in the Kingdom of glory he is made unto me redemption; it
is called by the Apostle, the redemption of our bodies; these two are thus
clearly distinguished. The work of Christ's Priestly office is to be a
propitiation for our sins; sanctification proceeds from the Scepter of his
Kingdom: The one is without me, the other within me, The one receives degrees,
the other not. As a man that is holy, may be more holy; but imputed
righteousness does not more forgive one man than another. Imputation is without
augmentation or diminution. Those things which have diverse contraries, cannot
be one and the same thing. Justification and Sanctification have diverse
contraries. The contrary to justification is condemnation; but the contrary to
sanctification is wickedness, and false dealing, etc. Aristotle distinguishes
homonymous words, and bids you consider their contraries; thus you see the
difference between these two.

I should now come and descend unto the dependence one has on the other: (i.
e.) in what respect does faith justify? Is faith an instrument to work
justification, or to receive it only?

The answer is clear, it justifies in regard of the object. If you remember
the two places I bid you compare, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood; is that all? compare this place with
chap. 5.9. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him; we are justified by his blood, and by faith in his
blood: here are two acts which signify the same thing. It is no more then to
say, I was cured by the Bath, or by going to the Bath, so that says is the
legs of the soul, that bring a man to Christ. And so my faith is an instrument,
not to procure my justification, but to receive it; so then seeing faith is an
instrument, to receive justification, and not to procure it, then the weakest
faith carries away as much forgiveness as the strongest. A strong faith rids a
great deal of work, because it is an active instrument. The stronger faith
works the greater work; but in the point of justification, it is an
instrument, whereby my justification is wrought, an instrument, whereby Christ
is received. And the weakest hand may receive a piece of gold as well as the
strongest; we must know that in the point of receiving, we live on Gods alms.
All our justification is his free gift, and faith is that Palsy hand, which
receives all our comfort. It is not then a strong faith that justifies, but
faith; it is called by Peter, a like precious faith. Simon Peter a servant and
an Apostle of Jesus Christ to them that have obtained like precious faith with
us, through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ; 2 Pet. 1.1.
It is (...), in the meanest Christian that has a trembling hand to pitch on
that, and draw virtue from him; it is a like precious faith in them, as in the
most great Apostle Peter, and all the rest.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.


I Have heretofore declared unto you, that in these words, and the words
following, there are set down the great graces and great blessings which you
have in Christ, in the Kingdom of grace, before you come to the Kingdom of
glory.

First, here is set down the mother and radical grace of all the rest, and that
is justification by faith; and then follows the blessed fruit that issues
from thence.

1. Peace with God.

2. A gracious access into his presence.

3. A joyful hope arising from that great glory that we shall enjoy for the
time to come.

4. In the worst of our troubles, and midst of our afflictions, this joy is so
great, that it cannot be abated by any of them; yea, it is so far from being
abated by them, that they are as fuel to kindle it: We rejoice in affliction
(says the Apostle) that which would undo the joy of a carnal man, is made the
matter of this man's joy.

Concerning the first of these, I showed you that justification is the ground
or foundation of all the rest: Being justified by faith; that is the root and
ground. without which there is no fruit, no peace, no joy, no hope, much less
any kind of rejoicing in tribulation. Faith is that which seasoneth all; we
must first be justified by faith, before we have any other comforts; for that
is the first ground, the first rudiment for a Christian in the School of Christ.

Therefore I proposed unto you three things for the understanding of it.

1. What that faith is that justifies. 2. What that justification is that is
obtained by faith. 3. What relation the one of these has to the other.
Concerning the first of these I showed you that it is not every faith that
justifies. I showed you that there is a dead faith, whereupon the Apostle
says, The life that I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal.
2.2. A dead thing cannot make a living man; it must be (and I showed you how) a
living faith.

Again, I showed that b^side the true faith, there was a temporary faith, which
is active too, and comes near the other. It had the operations of the Spirit,
but it wanted root. It had supernatural works, but it wanted the new creature.
There was a conception, that was but an abortive kind of birth, it came not to
maturity, not to a full g^owth, it did not continue. And I showed unto you how
a man might discern one of these from the other; for herein lie^h the wisdom of
a Christian, not to content himself, or be deceived with fl^shes; therefore the
Apostle exhorts us ^o prove, and try, and examine our selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. it
is an easy matter to be deceived, and therefore God's people should be careful
to examine themselves, to have their senses exercised herein, that however
others may slight and slubber over the matter, they may be careful in it; and
then they will not only do it themselves, but they will crave the aid of God
also: Prove me, O my God, etc. try me, etc. Psalm. 139.23.

Then for the second thing, concerning that justification that is obtained by
faith. I showed you that the word justification was derived from justice or
righteousness; and as many ways as justice and righteousness may be taken, so
many ways may justification be taken: Sometimes for justification of
righteousness in a man, and sometimes it is opposed to condemnation; so it is
taken in St. Paul, and it is taken as an acquital; sometimes it is^ oppose to
hypocrisy and pollution in a man's soul; so it signifies sanctification,
whereby God not only covers our sins past, but heals our natures. The first is
perfect, but imputed: the second inherent, but imperfect. When the time comes
that God will finish his cure, he will then make a perfect cure; when final
grace comes, we shall not need to think of a Popish Purgatory. Death is the
Lord's refining pot; then there is not a jot of sin shall be left in a
Christian. Now, when God has taken away our dross, then to think we shall be
put in a refining fire; that an entire soul that has no blot, that one that
has no spot, should be purged after final grace has made him clear and whole,
this is against reason and common sense. They might have learned better of
their own Thomas; all the fire in the world will never put away sin without the
infusion of grace. This by the way concerning them.

I showed besides, that these two being both righteousnesses, the Church of
Rome confounds them both together: Saint James his justification with Saint
Paul's. They confound inherent righteousness which is begun, and shall be
perfected in final grace, with the other; so that the point is not between us
and Rome, Whether faith justifies by works or no? but Whether it justifies at
all? In truth that is the state of it: The question is this, whether there be
such a grace as justification that is distinguished from sanctification, or
whether there be another grace of sanctification? Do not think that we are such
block-heads as to deny faith and sanctification; yet faith is but a piece or
part of that train of virtues. There justification is taken for sanctification;
we acknowledge a man is justified by faith and works: but the question is
between us and them, whether there be any justification besides sanctification?
(i. e.) whether there be any justification at all or no? we say sanctification
is wrought by the Kingly office of Christ; he is a King that rules in our
hearts, subdues our corruptions, governs us by the Scepter of his Word and
Spirit; but it is the fruit of his Priestly office which the Church of Rome
strikes at: ( i. e.) whether Christ has reserved another righteousness for us,
besides that, which as a King, he works in our hearts; whether he has wrought
forgiveness of sins for us? we say he has, and so says all the Church, till
the new Spawn of Jesuits arose. They distinguish not remission of sins, from
sanctification. Bellarmine says, remission of sins is the extinguishing of sin
in the soul; as water, though it be cold, yet the bringing in of heat
extinguishes the cold; and so remission of sins is the bringing in of inherent
righteousness, which extinguisheth all sin, which was before. A strange thing,
and were it not that the Scripture does speak of a cup in the hand of the
Harlot of Rome, whereby she makes drunk the Inhabitants of the earth with the
wine of her fornication, Rev. 17.4. and 18.3. except the men of her communion
were drunk, it were impossible that a learned men should thus shake out an
Article of our and their Creed, which has ever been believed by all the
Churches. When the Scripture speaks of forgiveness of sins, see how it
expresses it, Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one to another, Brethren,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you.

Observe, in the Lord's Prayer, we pray that the Lord would forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us. Let him that has
common understanding judge: Do we forgive our Neighbors by extinguishing sin
in the subject? I forgive you; ( i. e.) I take away the ill office you did me:
Does he forgive thus? Alas no! forgiveness is without a man. I have an action
against you, perhaps an action at Law; I will let fall my suit, my charges I
will forgive; this is forgiveness. God justifies, who shall condemn? Though
God has just cause to proceed against me as a Rebel, yet he is content to let
fall his action, to fasten it upon the Cross of his Son; there to fix the
Chirographum, the handwriting against us, Colos. 2.14. He will let fall that
which was the ground of a suit against us, all that he could say against us.

That you may understand the thing the better, there are two things, two kinds
of righteousness; the one of justification, the other of sanctification. The
Holy Ghost distinguishes them by several terms, 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. You see here are two distinct graces, righteousness and
sanctification; they make them but one, sanctification and remission of sins.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans
8.30. Here justification and glorification are nothing else but justification
and sanctification. St Paul speaks of a thing past, not of the glory to come;
them he glorified, not shall glorify: he means sanctification, which is
inchoate glory. For what is the glory we shall have in heaven, but the
enlargement of those inherent graces God begins in this world? Here is the
seed, there is the crop; here thou have a little knowledge, but there it shall
be enlarged; now thou have a little joy, there thou shall enter into thy
Master's joy; here some knowledge, but there thou shall have a full knowledge,
and a full measure. Here glory dwells in our Land, but there we shall with
open faoe behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and be changed into the
same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.
(i. e.) we are more and more conformed to the image of Almighty God, by
obedience and holy qualities infused into us, that we grow from one degree of
sanctification unto another. And so you see how these are distinguished by
their terms. Justification and glorification, justification and sanctification.
There is another place in St. John, an hard place; but yet as I take it, these
two righteousnesses, that have the same name for justification and
sanctification, are righteousnesses both of them, to be distinct in their
terms, in that place it is said, Joh. 16.8. That when the Spirit shall come, he
shall reprove; or (as we should translate it, and as you read it in the margin)
he shall convince the world concerning sin, righteousness and judgment. Thus I
say it should be translated, for it is of no sense to say that God should
reprove the world of righteousness; on what occasion this was spoken, we must
not stand to speak: but righteousness and judgment is justification and
sanctification. And the drift of the place is this; when the Spirit shall come,
how? not upon me or thee; but the Spirit here spoken of is that Spirit that
should come upon the Apostles, it shall begin at the day of Pentecost; and
these 1. should set forth like twelve Champions to conquer the world, and to
bring them unto the Scepter of Christ. He shall convince the world; (i e.) when
the Spirit shall come on you, and your tongues be tipped with that spiritual
fire, which shall be active; it shall convince the world of three particulars,
of sin, righteousness and judgment: Of the point of humiliation for sins, the
point of justification by righteousness imputative; and the glory of
sanctification in judgment, and righteousness inherent. This method St. Paul
uses in the Romans to stop every man's mouth. First, He convinces the
Gentile, which was easy to be done; after he convinces the Jew, that there is
righteousness to be had in another, though none in my self. He shall convince
the world, etc. As if he should say, To be shut up under unbelief, is to be
convinced of all sins. Now consider what is the nature of unbelief; it is to
fasten all sins upon a man: and when I have faith, all my sins are put out of
possession, they are as if they were not; but if we are shut up under unbelief,
we are dead. The second work of God's Spirit, is the Ministry of the Word; He
shall convince the world that there is righteousness to be had by a communion
with another; though we are guilty in our selves, yet he will set us free; and
the reason is, because I go to my Father. As if he should say, though you be
convinced of your sins, that you are wholly dead in trespasses and sins, and
have no means in the world to put that away; yet notwithstanding, the second
work of God's Spirit, is to convince of righteousness; that there is a
righteousness to be had in Christ, because he was our Surety, arrested for
debt; he was committed to prison, where he could not come out, till he had paid
the utmost farthing. There is a justification to be had in me; I go to the
Creditor, I have made no escape; not like one that brake the prison, and ran
away, but I am now a freeman. I have not made an escape before the debt is
paid, then I might be brought back again; but the debt is discharged, and
therefore I go to my Father, to maintain my pl^ce and standing. I was given
unto death for your sins, but I am risen again for your justification, and I
now sit at my Father's right hand: this is the second thing. But is there not a
third thing that the work of the Ministry must do? Yes, to convince the world
that there is judgment or righteousness inherent. There is a hard place, I
shall speak of it; it is usual in Scripture to join righteousness and judgment
together. The words of the Lord are righteousness and judgment. And the
integrity of a man's heart which is opposed to hypocrisy, is called judgment;
as God lives who has taken away my judgment, Job 27.2. How did God take away
his judgment? is it meant that he had taken away his wits? No, but he has put
his heavy hand on me, that has put a conceit in the mind of my friends that I
am an hypocrite; though, to confront the error of his misjudging friends, he
was resolved to persist in his integrity; verse. 8. My righteousness I hold
fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
His judgment was taken away, ( i. e.) the opinion they had of his integrity:
And this will expound another place in Matthew. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he
not break, and smoking flax shall be not quench, until he send forth judgment
unto victory? What is that, until he send forth judgment? This judgment
signifies nothing but those inherent graces, those infused qualities, that God
sends into the heart of a Christian; which being produced in the children of
God by the spirit of judgment, through which they are e^abled to judge what is
right and acceptable to God in Christ, who is their wisdom, are themselves
called judgment. You read therefore, of washing away the filth of the Daughters
of Sion, and purging the blood of Jerusalem, which is the sanctification of the
Church, by the spirit of judgment, Isa. 4.4. In a man's first conversion there
are but beginnings of grace: what is faith, hope, patience and fear? it is like
a smoking flax, (i. e.) like the smoking wick of a candle made of flax: as
when a candle burns in the socket, it is now up, now down, you know not whether
it be alive or dead; so in the first conversion of a Christian, infidelity and
faith, hope and despair mount up and down. There is a conflict in the beginning
of conversion, but he will not give it over until he bring forth judgment,
until he get the victory of all opposition from the flesh. And what is the
reason? Because the Prince of this world is judged. He shall convince the world
of an inherent righteousness in spite of the Devil's teeth, because he is
condemned. He that before worked in the children of disobedience, is now cast
down. The strong man is cast out, and therefore, upon that ground you have the
third point. Besides the grace of justification following upon Christ's death,
there is another; the grace, I mean, of sanctification, through which the Devil
shall be dispossessed; the Devil is strong where he does wicked things, but he
shall be disarmed, he shall not touch thee, the wicked one shall not hurt thee,
thou shall overcome him.

I now go forward.

The third thing I noted besides faith and justification, was, Tha^ we must
observe what relation one has to the other; and how it comes to pass that
justification is attributed to faith, there being more noble graces in us, than
faith.

I answer; the reason is because faith is brought as the only instrument,
whereby we receive our justification, purchased by the merits of Christ's
death. When we say faith is an instrument, we must understand it right well; we
say not faith is an instrument to work my justification, Christ alone must do
that; it is no act of ours, nothing is in us; faith is said to be an
instrument, whereby we get our justification in respect of the object, it is a
nearing us to Christ; it is the instrument of application, the only instrument
whereby we apply the medicine, and the plaster of Christ's blood; whereby we
that were strangers* and afar off, are made near; faith is the only hand which
receives Christ; when the hand lays hold on a thing, it lays hold on a
thing without it self; so is faith a naked hand, not as a hand that gets a
man's living, but like a beggar's hand that receives a free alms given by the
donor; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.17. For if by one man's offense death
reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. There is
abundance of grace, and a gift of righteousness; faith is the only means
whereby we receive this gift: Whereupon I inferred this, which was of great
consequence; seeing faith did justify, not as an active instrument, but as it
did r^ceive the gift of grace, it did follow, that the weakest faith that was
did get as much justification as the strongest faith of any whatsoever; because
faith justifies not as a work, but as it did receive a gift; therefore our
Savior says, O, ye of little faith! Matthew. 8.26. yet, as little as it was, it
was builded upon the Rock; and though Satan desired to winnow them, and fifth
them as wheat, yet they remained firm; as our Savior says of the faith of
miracles, If ye had faith as much as a grain of mustard seed, ye should say to
this Mountain, be removed, and it would obey you: Mar. 11.23. So for common
faith, which the Apostle calls so, because it is common to all the Elect,
Tit. 1.4. if thou have so much faith, thou shall be able to remove Mountains of
Corruptions; suppose thou have a trembling hand scarce able to hold, yet have
the persuasion of the woman in the Gospel, If I may but touch him, I shall be
whole: I shall be saved, healed, if I can but touch him: And mark our Savior,
The People thronged about him, and he says, Who is it that touches me? A
wonder that he, when they crowded him, should ask such a question; but Christ
knew that some body touched him, beside the touch of the multitude: indeed that
woman ^ouched him more than the crowd that pressed him, as St. Augustine says,
Illa mulier quae fimbriam tetegit, magis tetegit, quam turba quae pressit. it
is said in the Text, The poor woman came trembling, and told him all the truth.
And he said, be of good comfort; though thou have a paralytick, and
palsie-sick-hand, yet the touch is enough, Luke 8.47. the least faith brings as
much life as the greatest.

Object. But then, what need a man look for a great faith?

Sol. Yes, by all means; for though thou have much comfort by a little weak
faith, yet the more faith, the more comfort; and therefore it is to very much
purpose to labor after a strong faith. Abraham (it is said) staggered not
through unbelief, Romans 4.20. if thou have a strong faith, thou will have a
strong consolation: Thou may by thy weak faith be healed of thy disease, yet
by the weakness of thy faith, may want much of the strength of thy comfort;
therefore thou must go from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. but know this, that a
newborn child (...), is not yet so strong as a man, yet he is as much alive,
as the strongest and tallest man; so that again thus, thou art yet but a
newborn babe, not so strong or so lively as one more grown, but yet thou have
all the lineaments of the new creature in thee, though thou art not so strong
and lively as another may be.

Object. Did not you tell me that it was not every faith that did justify, but
a working faith? how then does faith alone justify?

Sol. I answer, When faith justifies, there is one thing said of another; the
subject and the predicate are Faith justifies. Justification is attributed unto
faith; Look on the word ( only) whether it does determine the subject or the
predicate; does faith which is alone severed from good works, justify? so the
proposition is false. First, that faith which is alone, separated from love and
the fruits of good works, does not justify; but let the ( alone) be put to the
predicate; faith justifies alone; (i. e.) faith is the only virtue in the soul
whereby a man is justified, that is true: As if a man should say, the eye alone
sees, it is true; if we put it thus, the eye severed from the members of the
body, sees, it is false. If the eye were taken out of the head, it would
neither see alone, nor at all; but the meaning is this, the living eye is the
organ whereby a man discerns a visible object; so faith, though joined with
other graces, yet takes not other with it for helps of Justification.

Object. But why should God select this virtue among others, that are more
noble?

Sol. I say as before, God had respect to the low estate of his handmaid, it
was reason that God should choose the lowest and the meanest: God selected this
poor beggars hand for two reasons.

First, in respect of God.

I say 1. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the Law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,
Romans 4.16. so that here are two strong reasons; one in respect of God, tha^ God
by so mean a thing as a beggars hand, should bring a man to justification; and
the other in respect of faith it self, that it might be by grace, for when thou
bring nothing but a bare hand ready to receive a pardon, this must needs be
of grace. If God say thou must love me, this were an exchange, not a free gift.
I lay down something, and I take up something for it. Faith is that naked hand
which fills it self with Christ, it lays fast hold on Christ crucified with
all his merits.

As if a man were ready to be drowned, there is a cable cast to him to lay hold
on, and he laying hold on it, is drawn safe to the Land; but a man when he lays
hold on the cable, must let go all his other holds which he laid hold on
before. Thus must a man let go all other holds, and lay fast hold on Jesus
Christ.

Faith has two faculties: 1. It opens its self to let fall all other things:
And then 2. When it is a naked hand, it lays hold on Christ, and then it is
filled with Christ, when the believer esteems all dross in comparison of
Christ; it has all fullness by grace: Where is then rejoicing and boasting?
Romans 3.27. it is excluded; by what Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of faith.
And then chap. 4.2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to
glory but not before God; faith takes away all boasting. Let him that
glories, glory in the Lord. Therefore it is of faith that it might be of
grace. This is the reason in respect of God.

2. In respect of our selves; To the end the promise might be sure to the seed;
what is the reason why people doubt and think nothing sure; it is because they
come not with a naked hand; I must have such a measure of humiliation, of
patience; all to bring somewhat with us; whereas if we look on these things, we
shall never be heard. If the bare acceptance of Christ, with a trembling hand
will not make thee sure, thou understandest not the excellency of that very
treasure whereof thou art possessed; what can thou have more than the bare
receiving of such a gift by faith? The reason why we are not more sure, is
because we come not with a naked hand.

By the way there are many means, some ( a priori) others ( a posteriori.)

1. For the first; they are those things by which faith is wrought, though they
are not so evident, yet they are most sure; when I consider God calls me in my
blood, having nothing in me, and will be friends with me, bids me take his Son,
and I do not, bids me take his Kingdom and glory with him, and I refuse it,
though this be a matter not so evident, yet it is most sure.

2. Then there are other arguments which come from the fru^ts of faith ( a
posteriori) they are more evident, but not so sure. And thus have I declared
unto you the first point of justification by faith, it is so sweet a string,
that I cannot tell how to leave it, and therefore harp so long upon it.

Now let us come from the Mother to the Daughter; the eldest Daughter is peace
with God, then this is the first birth; And we are at peace, etc.

In this peace we will consider these three particulars.

1. What is that peace which we have. 2. With whom we have it. 3. By whom, and
by whose means we have peace with God, etc. It is procured by Jesus Christ.
What we have; peace.

With whom; God.

By whose means? Our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. What this peace is. You know the point of peace is a great matter; it is
the Apostolical Benediction: Grace and peace in all the Epistles; Grace and
peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.2. and
chap. 3.16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace by all means always.
This is a thing by all means to be desired, you must labor to get it; this was
the Angels song when Christ was born, Luke 2.14. Glory be to God on high, on
earth peace, good will toward men. This peace is a thing by all means to be
sought after, and what it is, you may know by the contrary; you know what a
miserable thing war is; God grant you may not know it too soon: You know what
it is to have an enemy among us. This is our case, till we be justified, we are
at daggers drawing, at point of hostility with God. It is a foolish conceit for
a man to think that by reason of God's predestination he is justified before he
was; this is a foolish conceit; until thou art justified by faith, thou art not
justified at all. God's predestination does not make a change in the subject;
if I intend to enrich a beggar, he is in rags still, for all my intention, till
my intention be put in execution. Paul was elected before the foundation of the
world; but till he was converted, he was an enemy, and a persecutor, the chief
of sinners, as he speaks of himself, Romans 5.10. so the Scripture speaks in that
point: If when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life? Before the time
of peace came, we were unbelievers, enemies, in the state of enmity, when as
before, God was thy enemy, as soon as thou have touched Christ by a lively
faith, presently all the actions he had against thee are let fall; God is
friends with thee; this is a high and a deep peace, and this comprehends all
kind of blessings; Amasa, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. one of the valiantest Captains that
David had, speaks there of peace; one would think it not so proper, it belongs
not to them to talk of peace, but because peace comprehends all kinds of
blessing, it is said, Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Amasa, who was
chief of the Captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side thou
Son of Jesse; peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy helpers, for thy
God helps thee. This is a speech from a Soldier to a Soldier, and this is
done in a military way; Peace is welcome though coming from a Warrior, because
it comprehends all manner of Blessings; It Is said, 2 Samuel 11.7. That when Vriah
came unto David, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did,
and how the war prospered. Look unto the Margin according to the original, and
it is, He demanded of the peace of Joab, and the people, and of the peace of
the War. A man would think it a contradiction that he should demand of the
peace of the war; so then this peace which we have with Almighty God, after we
are justified by faith, is the comprehension of all manner of good. This having
peace with God is the fruit of the Spirit.

But with whom is this peace? with God; it is not peradventure so with thy
self: thou may have a turbulent conscience, insomuch that thou would give
all the world to have it quiet, to be assured that there is peace between God
and thee; that is not the point: The thing thou gettest by faith is peace with
God: When thou art troubled with thy self, and have but a weak act of faith,
yer if thou believe, thou art more afraid than hurt; thou art cock-sure, and
shall be calm and quiet in God's good time.

Object. But why should Christians be so foolish, so troubled? what is the
reason the children of God do disquiet themselves?

Sol. Because they are fools, they stand in their own light, are straightened in
their own bowels. God is liberal and free, but there is some hope of worthiness
in us, and we do things we should not do. We are always poring on our selves,
and do not bring a naked hand; and this is the reason we are so full of
distractions: for he that seeks justification (I mean remission of sins) by his
own performance, will never attain it. Observe what the Apostle speaks upon
this point, Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the law. This was their stumbling stone,
as he there says, Romans 9.31, 32.

Again, it is the nature of many peevish people amongst us, that they will not
be comforted; when news was brought to Jacob that Joseph was slain and lost, it
is said, All his sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to
be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son,
mourning, Genesis 37.35. They have a kind of pettishness, and peevishness, and
wilfulness; they will not be comforted, and it may be there is some kind of
pride in it too; they would perhaps be thought to be the only mourners of
Israel, of the Kingdom. As Rachel mourned for her children, and would not be
comforted, Matthew. 2.18. they shut up their eyes against all comforts; God
commands them to be comforted, and they will not; it is no marvel then that
they eat the fruit of their own hands; it is a part of our office to bring
comfort, we have an injunction to it; Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people, says
the Lord; we bring the tidings of peace, and our feet should be beautiful, Romans
10.15. we bring good news, all is well; as Noah's Dove coming with an Olive
branch in her mouth. Comfort ye, comfort ye, cry aloud, spare not. If you stop
your ears, who can help it? the Lord is gracious and charge us to comfort
you: and can there be any better news than to say, All is peace, all your sins
are done away. I have blotted as a thick cloud thy transgressions: as who
should say, it is the tidings of such good things, as all within thee is too
little to praise the Lord, and therefore it is not a thing to be slighted over;
blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32. which is no Noun
Adjective, nor of the singular number neither; it signifies blessednesses, as
it were an heap of blessings. They commonly call it the eight beatitudes, it is
but varied upon diverse subjects; were there eighty eight, that were all one: To
have thy sins forgiven thee, is the comprising of all happiness; and he whose
iniquity is covered, has interest in them all.

Again, when a man sets his eyes too much upon his sins; more upon his sins
than upon the mercies of God freely offered in Christ, this is a wonderful
hinderance of the peace; Thou look on the wrong object, looking too much on
thy sins, when thou should look on Christ, that brazen Serpent offered unto
thee; then it is no wonder that thou see not Christ though he be near thee:
Mary Magdalen complains and weeps (as she thought) to the Gardener, that they
had taken away her Lord, and she knew not where they had laid him, when as he
stood at her elbow; her eyes were so full of tears that she could not behold
her Savior. Now therefore stand not in thine own light, but look upon Christ
as well as upon thy sins; observe, though there be a peace and a calm, yet
presently all turmoils will not cease after humiliation: When there is a great
storm at Sea which lasts perhaps twenty four hours, and then cease, what are
the waves presently quiet, as soon as the storm is over? no, there will be
tossing and rolling many hours afterward, because there must be a time of
settling; and so though there be peace between God and thee, and the storm over,
yet there must be a time of settling.

I should now show you the difference between the peace that wicked men have
and this other peace; theirs is not peace: There is no peace to the wicked:
It Is a truce only, and we must make a great difference between a truce and a
peace. A truce when it is expired, commonly ends in more bitter War. With them
there is a cessation of trouble, their consciences do not accuse them, but when
the time limited is over, and conscience again breaks loose, it will be more
unquiet and unsettled than ever before; it will be at open war against them.

ROMANS 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ; By whom also we have access by faith into this grace
wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.


HAving out of these words declared unto you, the Mother-grace justification by
faith, I proceed to the consideration of her Daughters, those fruits or graces
which spring from a true justifying faitb. So that here we have the great
Charter and Privilege that a justified man is endowed withal. First, He has
peace with God. Secondly, Free access unto him. Thirdly, Unspeakable joy, and
that joy not only in respect of that delectable object, the hope of the glory
of God in heaven hereafter; but here also, that which spoils the joy of a
natural man, ( afflictions, etc.) are made the matter of this man's joy.

Now concerning peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, the first of
^hese, I considered three parts in it.

1. What the peace was which the justified man enjoys. 2. The parties between
whom this peace was made. 3. Who was the peace maker.
Concerning the peace I declared unto you what it was, that it was an
unconceivable thing, The peace of God that passes all understanding; a thing
which our shallow understandings cannot reach unto, we cannot apprehend the
excellency of this grace: Consider it^ excellency by the contrary, there is no
misery in the world like that, as when a man stands at enmity with God: Do we
provoke the Lord? Are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22. If a man sin against a
man, says Eli, the Judge shall judge him; another man may take up the quarrel,
but if a man sin against God, if the controversy be between God and us, who
shall intercede for us? 1 Samuel 2.25. Were it not for this our peacemaker
Christ Jesus, we should be in a woeful condition, unless he put to his hand, and
took up the matter.

Now it is a great matter to come to the fruit of peace; the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace; Jam. 3.18. We have this
fruit of peace from righteousness, we do not sow fruit but seed, the fruit
comes afterward. It is not so with a Christian, he is as sure, as if the thing
where in hand, he sows not only the seed, but the fruit of peace in
righteousness, that is, in that application of Christ's righteousness, to his
justification; as soon as he is justified, at that instant, he has the fruit
of peace.

So we have peace, but with whom is it? it is between God and us. God, and a
justified man is at peace through Jesus Christ; at the very same instant that a
man is justified, he is at peace with God. This peace, as I declared unto you,
is a gift of an high nature, which belongs not to every man, but to the
justified man only; he who is justified by faith, he only has peace. In the
Ephesians and Isaiah there are general proclamations of peace; Peace be unto
them that are near, and unto them that are afar off: and Isa. 57.19. The word
the Apostle uses in the Ephesians, has allusion to this in Isaiah, verse. 19.
I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to them that are afar off, and to
them that are nigh, says the Lord, and I will heal them; but the wicked are
like a troubled Sea, that cannot rest. There is no peace (says my God) to the
wicked. Though the proclamation be never so general to Jews and Gentiles, yet
it belongs only to those who have peaceable minds toward God, those who will
not stand on terms of rebellion against him: What madness is it to think, that
if I stand in point of rebellion against God, I should have peace with him? But
I must cast down my arms, renounce my treasons, and I must come with a
subject's mind, then there will be peace, otherwise no peace. When Jehu came to
revenge the quarrel of God, Joram asked him, Is it peace, Jehu? he answers,
What peace so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and her witch-crafts
are so many! 2 King. 9.22. As long as thou continuest in a course of rebellion,
what have thou to do to talk of peace? Why think thou on peace, when thou
art the chief rebel? As long as wickedness continues in thy heart, thou have no
peace of God by Jesus Christ.

Now it may fall out that there may be a kind of quietness in the conscience of
a wicked man; but we must make a great difference between a peace and a truce;
a truce is but a cessation of war, for such a time; and many times when the
truce is over, it ends in greater war, because they have the more time to
gather strength, and increase their Forces: So there may be a peace or a truce
between God and wicked men, but it is the highest judgment that can be upon a
wicked man to be thus let alone; but it is not so with godly men; God breaks
their peace, and hedges up their way with thorns, and many times torments their
conscience, and breaks their peace; but when God suffers a sinner to thrive in
sin, when he suffers him to go on so long, that his own honor is almost
touched; I held my peace, says God, then thou thoughtest me to he such a one
as thy self, Psalm. 50.21. God holds his peace, then the sinner says, God does
not heed. However the preacher amplifies these things, God is not so terrible
as they make him: Well, but though God hold his peace long, yet at last he will
speak; Oh, consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there b^ none to deliver you. When the time of the truce is out, then the
conscience is like a fierce Mastiff; the longer he is tied, the more fierce he
is when he is let loose: so conscience, when he has been long quiet and tied
up, when God lets loose the cords thereof, it will be more fierce than ever
before, it will then fly like a Mastiff in thy face, and as it were tear thy
throat; and then there will be in thee the very flashings of hell.

Now there is a great difference between the peace of God's children, and this
little cessation of war in the consciences of wicked men: When the strong man
armed, keeps the house, the goods that he possesses are in peace, Luke 11.21.
When Satan is the Master, and thou do his will, and he has thee at command,
he does not trouble thee; when he keeps the house, the goods are in peace; but
when a stronger than he comes, and puts him out of possession, then comes the
strife and debate. Look therefore to thy peace; is it such a peace as thou have
never found any conflict, any stirring, striving betwixt the strong man and the
weak? suspect that peace; that is not the peace of a justified man, but of such
a one who is held by the Prince of darkness.

2. Again, how comes this peace to wicked men? they consider not the wrath of
God, nor the danger of sin; they consider not that Tophet is prepared of old,
Isa. 30. ult. if they did but consider this, it would spoil their sport, and
break their peace: but now a justified man, he knows what sin is, and what hell
is; and at that very time, when he is thinking of his sins, and of damnation,
when he knows that this is the reward of God's enemies, he has peace even
then. This proceeds from the sense of God's frank and free remission in
Christ, with which the children of God are much affected. St. Augustine cries
out, Quid retribuam Domino, quod recolit haec memoria mea, and anima mea non
metuit! inde diligam te Domine, and gratias agam, etc. Confess. 2.^. What shall
I render unto the Lord, that I recollect these Impurities and Monsters of sin,
and yet am not overwhelmed with consternation in the recognition of them! I
will love thee, O Lord, and give thee thanks, and confess to thy name. The
other, the wicked, they shut their eyes that they may not see their danger; and
because they discern it not, therefore they are at peace. A man in a dark night
going over a dangerous Bridge, that if he miss but a step he is drowned, yet he
passes over securely, and is not afraid, because he wants light to discover
the danger; but bring him the next day, and show him what a danger he escaped,
and the thoughts of it will make him quake and tremble, though the danger be
past: So these men, being in darkness, see not their danger, and (therefore) do
not fear; but God's child having his eyes in his head, discerns the danger, and
sees also how he is delivered by Jesus Christ: He is at peace, not because he
sees not the danger of the way, but because he knows that God made the way
broad by Jesus Christ, and so is freed from sin and death.

Now to speak something to them that have this true and sound peace, this peace
is with God; I showed you the last time that this peace is not always in their
own conscience, but it such on God's part, which is the safe part; many reasons
there are, why God does not show it unto them; though all be quiet betwixt God
and them, yet they have not an apprehension of it in their consciences.

I showed that this is many times their own fault, because they will not be
comforted; all their thoughts are bent upon their sins, and their provocations
of God, and they have not an eye open, to look upon the mercies of Christ; they
put it off, and will not comforted: and if they put it off from themselves, no
marvel if they have not peace in their consciences.

This may come by reason of the great conflict before in the conscience: God
raises a great storm, and when he intends to bring a man to some great work,
or to a great deal of joy, he first humbles him; the Prince of our salvation
was consecrated by afflictions, and we must be conformable unto Christ out
Head; When the storms are past, the Sea will continue raging for a while; and
when you have turned the wheel round, If you take away your hand, it will go
round it self for a time: So when you are justified by faith, the storm is
over, yet the roaring of the waves will continue; it will be so with the
children of God; though there be a calm, yet there will be some remainders of a
storm.

Again, they are in travail, and that is a painful thing; My little children
with whom I travail, Gal. 4.19. They have the pangs of the new birth, and it is
a good while before they can find that quietness their heart does long for.

Again, God purposely does, though he be friends with them, take away from them
the sense of peace, because he takes delight to find that strength of faith:
Faith is manifest that way, faith is most strong when there is least sense. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1. the less sense, the faster
the hold; and God loves this at life, that when he spurns and frowns, he will
not let go, nor be put off; let him kill me, he shall kill me with Christ in my
arms, I will not let go my hold; God cannot fail, he has given me his Word,
and therefore I will not let go. Such a strong faith had Abraham, contrary to
reason; God's Word is true, he gives me his Word, and I will trust him: So a
child of God will not be put off; though God write bitter things against him,
he will not forego him. We have an excellent example in the woman of Canaan;
the end of it is, O woman, great is thy faith, Matthew. 15.28. But how does the
greatness of it appear? Lord, have merry upon me, my Daughter is grievously
afflicted, etc. Why not rather, Lord have mercy on my daughter? the reason is
because she was afflicted in her daughter's affliction. By the way we may
hereby understand the meaning of the Commandment, where it is said, he will
visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate him: But why to the third and fourth
generation? because, I may see the third and fourth generation, and may see the
judgment of God on them, and may remember my sin, for which they are plagued;
the case is mine, and not theirs only; Lord have mercy upon me, for my daughter
is diseased: I see my own sin is punished by the judgment on her in my sight.
Poor woman, Christ will not hear her; she might have been dashed out of
countenance, the Disciples were weary of her clamorous cries, and say, Send her
away, for she troubles us: What, says Christ? Is it fit to take the
children's bread, and cast it unto dogs? This was enough to dash her quite;
before she was discouraged by silence, but to be called dog, it were enough
quite to discourage her: but see the fruit of faith; she seeks comfort of that
which would have undone another: What, am I a dog under the table? there I
shall get a crum; others of the children that are better, let them have the
loaves: I account my self happy if I may but get a crum. O woman, great is thy
faith: This is great faith when it goes contrary to all sense; that when God
calls me dog, when he spurns at me, and frowns on me, I will not be put off.
Faith is of the nature of the Vine, if it have but the least hold on the wall,
it makes use of it, and climbs higher and higher: So out of the least thing
that drops from her Saviors mouth, she raises her faith higher: So though we
have this peace with God, yet often times he with holds the notification of it to
us.

3. The last thing is to note the difference between the peace of a carnal and
a spiritual man; carnal peace is mixed with a great deal of presumption and
pride; but the more spiritual peace thou have, the more thou art dejected in
thy self, the more cast down: see it in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, 62, 63. I
will establish with thee an everlasting Covenant; then shall thou remember thy
ways, and be ashamed when thou shall receive thy sisters, thy elder, and thy
younger; and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy Covenant:
and I will establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the
Lord, that thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou
have done, says the Lord: When God is pacified, yet they hold down their
heads, and are ashamed; when a man knows that God has pardoned his sins, he
is ashamed that he has carried himself so wickedly against God, of whose mercy
he has now such experience: When God is pacified, a man remembers his former
sins, and is confounded; as it is, Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall you remember your
own evil ways, and your doings that were not good; and shall loath your selves
in your own sight fer your iniquities, and for your abominations in that time
when I am pacified toward you. That which would work in a carnal man security
and pride, (for he never thinks himself better than when there is peace within)
will work in the child of God the grace of humiliation. In the last Chapter of
Job, God had manifested himself wonderfully to Job; and however before he had
very sharp afflictions, his sufferings in soul were next to the sufferings of
Christ. I believe never any man suffered so much as Job did, insomuch that the
arrows of the Almighty stuck in him, the poison whereof (says he) drinks up
my spirit, Job 6.4. This was the case of Job, and he stood upon terms of
justification; he wished that God would dispute with him, that God would either
be the Opponent or the Answerer. If God would answer, he would oppose; or if
God would oppose, he would answer. God comes as he would have him, and Job is
not at that point that he was before; when God draws nigh unto him, he says, I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees thee, Job
42.5. Well, this may make thee a proud man, and elevate thee: no, says he, now
I abhor my self in dust and ashes. The nearer God draws unto us, and the more
merciful he is unto us, by that light we the more discern our own abominations.
That which would make another man proud, brings Job to the knowledge of his
vileness. Therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

3. Now another thing is, Who is this Peacemaker? This I shall but touch: We
have peace with God: But how? Through our Lord Jesus Christ; he is our
peacemaker, and interposeth between his Fathers wrath and us, Ephesians. 2.14. For
he is our peace; who has made both one, and has broken down that partition
wall between us; we have not only peace with God through Christ, but Christ is
the very peace; not only the peace maker, but the peace. There was a middle
wall of partition between the Jews, and the Gentiles; and between God, and us;
Christ breaks it down; sin shall no longer be a wall of partition. Having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, for to make himself of twain one new man, so making peace, and that
he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross. There was hatred
between God and us. Christ has crucified that hatred with the nails wherewith
he was fastened to the Cross; he has killed it by his crucifixion, and now
enmity being slain, peace must needs be alive; there is peace and
reconciliation made. You are come (says the Apostle) to the blood of
sprinkling; Heb. 12.24. whereas the blood of Abel cried for vengeance against
Cain the murderer: This blood cries for peace, it outcries all our sins; sin
has a voice; its said, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah went up into the ears of
the Lord; Every sin thou committest has a voice to cry, but the blood of
Christ has a shriller voice, and outcries the cry of thy sins; it is so
preheminent, it speaks for peace, and does outcry the voice of our sins; the
high Priest was a type of Christ, Numb. 16. He must have on his frontlet
Holiness to the Lord; as one which bears the iniquity of the holy things of the
Children of Israel representing the holy one of the Lord and standing in the
person of Christ; Moses says (when there was wrath gone out from the Lord)
unto Aaron, ver. 46. Take a censer and put fire therein from off the Altar, and
put on incense, and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an atonement for
them, for there is wrath gone out, the plague is begun; So when the wrath is
gone out, the High Priest comes and offers up himself a sweet incense
acceptable unto God. And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and came into the midst
of the Congregation, and behold the plague was begun among the people, and he
put incense and made an atonement for the people. When wrath is come out from
the Almighty, and his Army is sent out for to destroy the Rebels, now our High
Priest stands between the living and the dead, and offers up himself an
obligation to Almighty God to make peace: Look to the case of Balaam; when the
people had committed fornication, Phineas executed judgment; wherefore the Lord
says, Numb. 25.12. Phineas has turned away my wrath from the people and if
that one act of Phineas his zeal for the Lord, in killing the Fornicators
before the Congregation, if this, I say, appeased Gods wrath for the whole
Congregation; how much more does our Phineas who has fulfilled all
righteousness, whom the zeal of Gods house had eaten up? He is nothing but zeal
it self, and all that he does in our name unto his father, is for our good. How
much more shall Christ pacify Gods wrath, who has received the gash of Gods
Sword upon his own body, and would not have himself spared, that he might do
it? As Jonah was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the
Son of man be in the heart of the earth. Mat. 12.40. There is a mighty storm,
and Jonah is cast out into the Sea, presently the storm cease; so Christ
having suffered for us, there is peace, the storm is over.

Now follows in the next place in the Text; By whom we have access by faith
into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.
These are the two privileges that a justified man has; he has a gracious
access unto God; Suppose he be in a fault, (as who is not?) if any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous: These things have
I written, (says the Apostle) that you sin not; but if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, etc.

This is the state of a justified man; though he do by his relapses provoke
God, yet he is in the state of a subject; though he be a disobedient subject,
yet a subject, not a foreigner as before; but now ye that were not a people,
are become the children of the living God, Romans 9.26. A child of God in the
midst of rebellion no sooner repents but he is sub misericordia; as soon as
he is in the state of grace, he is under God's protection, he is no stranger:
and as soon as he converteth unto his heavenly father, though he has his blood
about his ears, and is in his rags, yet he may with an humble boldness come to
God; By Jesus Christ he may come boldly to the throne of grace, that he may
find help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. The Apostle in Ephesians. 2.18. sets down
twice the great privileges Christians have, For through him we both have an
access by one Spirit unto the Father: It is Christ which makes the way. To have
a friend at the Court is a great matter, especially when a man has need of
him; Christ is gone before us, and he lives for ever to make intercession for
us, and we need no other Mediator: thus he bespeaks his Father; Father, this is
one of mine that I shed my blood for, one of those that thou gave me; I
beseech thee have pity upon him, and I beseech thee give him audience: Ephesians.
3.12. By him, (i. e.) through Christ, we have access by one Spirit unto the
Father, in whom we have boldness by the faith of him, and access with
confidence. I go not now doubting unto God, I prefer my suit with boldness.
Mark the Apostle St. James; If any man want wisdom, or any other thing, let him
ask it of God that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: It is
otherwise with men; when one has done a great man wrong, and comes to desire a
favor at his hands: Oh Sir! says he, do you not remember how you used me at
such a time, or in such a place? that he is presently upbraided with, it is
cast in his dish: but it is not so with God; he gives liberally, and upbraids
no man: so there is a free and a bold access with faith and confidence, by whom
we have boldness and access: let him not doubt or waver; that is a notable
place; here is bold access by faith unto God, and by that we may be assured of
whatever we ask; if it be forgiveness of sins, we may be sure they are
forgiven; if we ask in faith we may be assured. By the way take notice of the
folly of the Papists, who think that a man can have no confidence or assurance
that his sins are forgiven. This is our confidence, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us: Now, is it not according to his will to
ask forgiveness of our sins? Does not he enjoin us to do it? Therefore what
infidelity is it, not to be assured of it? And what impudency is it in them, to
go about to cut off that which is the whole comfort of a Christian? The
assurance of his salvation. Thus it is indeed with those that have no feeling
nor confidence, as those who are in hell think there is no heaven; and they who
teach such uncomfortable Doctrine can receive no comfort farther than the
Priest gives it them. It 's true, there is not true assurance, but in the true
Church; but there it may be found.

And as I began with sowing in tears, so I would end with reaping in joy: that
is the next thing in the Text, for which I pass over the other part of it. I
begin with humiliation, but end with joy; and not only that joy which we shall
have in the Kingdom of heaven, but on earth while we have these things but in
hope and expectation. A man that would reckon up his estate, does not only
value what he has for the present, but he reckons his reversions also; what he
shall have after such a time, what will come to him or his heirs. God's
children, they have a brave reversion; glory, and honor, and a Kingdom: It is
your Father's good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. We are all the
children of God, but it does not appear what we shall be: when he appears, we
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. He shall change
our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body.. We are here sons, but
yet, but in a strange Country, no body knows what he is, and therefore he
meets with many affronts. The King when he was in France, went for an attendant
on the Duke, and is he troubled at it? No, he knew that the world knew it not,
they knew not what he was; and therefore he is not troubled at it. So is it
with children of God; but when they shall appear, they shall be advanced, and
their enemies ashamed. By the way, let not the people of God be discouraged by
the taunts, jeers and reproaches of wicked men; they know not what you are, and
therefore make light of you; as they did of Christ himself. Well, besides what
we have in reversion, the very present hope of it works wonderful joy in the
heart of a Christian. David did not live to see the glory of Solomon's Temple;
but he made provision for it, and cast the model of it, and he took much
delight in the contemplation of what it would be. The consideration of these
hopes makes my flesh rest in hope, and my heart rejoice, Psalm. 16.9. The
consideration of the resurrection made David's heart rejoice: The consideration
of that which is to come, should bring abundance of joy unto a Christian, these
are strange things, not like the joy of a natural man; for his heart is sad in
the midst of laughter, Prove. 34.13. but these rejoice with a joy unspeakable,
and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Here are some sparks, some beginnings of the
glory of heaven, and of that great joy which we shall have hereafter; but I
cannot speak of these things in an hour.

But forasmuch as the Devil transforms himself into an Angel of light, there is
no work of God's Spirit in the hearts of his children, but Satan, like an Ape,
labors to imitate in the hearts of wicked men, to make them secure: we must
know that there are joys in some who are not regenerate. They that receive the
Word on the Rock, received it with joy. The Word, if it be apprehended, and
has but the least footing, brings joy with it.

But now to know how I may get this joy, how beneficial a thing is it to have
such a comfort on earth, as to know that I have this true joy! and to be able
to distinguish this joy from the false joy, from the flashes, those fleeting
joys of the wicked, which are but as the crackling of thorns under a pot,
Eccles. 7.6. for theirs is but as a blaze that suddenly goes out. Now if thou
would know thy joy aright, and whether it differ from that counterfeit joy
which flesh and blood, and the Devil suggests: Look to the things that go
before, and produce this joy.

1. The first thing that goes before true joy, and produces it, is an opening
unto Christ when he knocks at the door of thy heart: As in that famous place,
in Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me.
There is, if thou open, a sweet and familiar communication between Christ and
thee; he communicates himself at dinner and supper. A man comes not melancholy
to meals; Christ will come, and make merry with thee, he will sup with thee
familiarly. But how is it with thee? Has Christ knocked, and thou have given
him a slieveless answer, and have thou joy? it is a false joy. But when Christ
knocks at the door of thy heart, there must be an opening the door on thy part,
when he knocks by his Word and Spirit: And do thou give such an answer as the
Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 5. I am come into my garden, my Sister, my
Spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honeycomb
with my honey. Now Christ coming to Supper, knocked at the door, and would bring
in a great deal of joy: I sleep, says the Spouse, but my heart waketh; it is
the voice of my well-beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me, my Sister, my
Love, my Dove, my Undefiled. When God comes and wooes us, and desires to
communicate himself unto us, and desires us to put off our clothes, do thou
look for comfort if thou openest not? At last I opened to my Beloved; verse. 6.
But he had withdrawn himself, and was gone; my soul failed when he spoke: I
sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.
When thou give not Christ entertainment when he comes, thou may seek, and
not meet with him. ^t is observed that the Keepers of the Wall are the greatest
strikers: Those whom God has set to be Watchmen, instead of comforting, they
smite; verse. 7. The Watchmen that went about the City, they found me, they
smote me, they wounded me, they took my vail from me: She gets raps from them
who should protect her, because she did not entertain Christ: if thou find
any comfort after Christ has knocked, and thou have opened unto him; then it
is true joy, and thou may make much of it.

2. If it be true joy, there goes faith before it; for being justified by
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. So that the
exercising of the acts of faith, is a spiritual means to raise comforts in our
souls; Joh. 6. I had need to speak of this, for there is want of the exercises
of faith: Is it enough, think you, ^o have faith once exercised? He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: It is not enough
to eat once a year. A man will not be in good liking that eats but once a year,
but a man must eat once a day at least. A Christian should feed on Christ every
day, make him his ordinary food, renewing every day the acts of faith, receive
Christ crucified, by faith, every day. If a Christian would consider that God
offers Christ unto him every day, and thou renewest thy faith, and claspest him
every day, it would be a special way whereby joy should be raised in the soul.
It is said in Romans 15.13. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God: Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in
hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. Thus when thou have exercised the
acts of faith in believing, and then upon that rejoycest, then it is seasonable
and true joy, and not the counterfeit joy of the wicked: when it arises and
springs from believing, when that procures it, it likewise distinguishes it
from all false joys. The Apostle tells us, Philip. 1.24. Having this
confidence, I know that I shall continue with you all, for your furtherance and
joy of faith. It is called the joy of faith, because it springs from that
principle of rejoicing, from that mother-grace, that your rejoicing may be the
more abundant.

The preaching of the Word whereby faith is wrought, brings abundance of joy.
That place of St. Peter is remarkable; 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye
love; in whom, though now you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory: Yet believing; that is, yet exercising the acts
of faith, which we too much neglect. If we did exercise these acts every day,
we should have our Charter of joy renewed every day; yet believing, ye rejoice.

3. Pray and be thankful; praise and thanksgiving are those fruits which fulfill
all our joy. When thou prayest, thou conversest with God, thou speak with
him face to face, as Moses did. He who can pray spiritually, and pray hard unto
God, as Moses face shined when he talked with God, so will thy soul thrive,
praying hard, and being thankful: There is no greater means than this to get
this joy; Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praising is
comely for the upright. Upon this hangs all our comfort; praise always brings
rejoicing; the one begets the other. In Isaiah, The comfort there that God's
children receive, is the changing of raiment; Christ preaching the acceptable
year of the Lord to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give to them
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garments of praise for the
spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61.3. The ground of praise is joy; one follows the
other: Observe, God will give us the oil of joy; Christ was anointed with this
oil above his fellows: Christ has fullness of joy; this oil does not come on
his head alone, but it trickles down unto the lower most hemm of his garment,
even upon all the lively members of his mystical body.

I will add in the last place, when a man considers the great things which are
given to him by God, and what an estate we get by Christ. I have forgiveness of
sins; and Blessed is the man, whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32.1. Christ's
blood is wine, and my name is written in the book of life, Do not rejoice
(says our Savior) because the Devils are subject unto you; but rather
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven, Luke 10.20. When I consider
that I am not in the black Roll, and it is my faith which strengthens me, which
makes me reckon Christ my chiefest wealth; this makes me rejoice in mine
inheritance, and in hope of the glory of God. When I consider the great reward
in the world to come, this is a great cause of rejoicing; and therefore God's
children long for the coming of Christ: it is made, Tit. 2.13. a mark of those
that shall be saved; That they long for the appearance of Jesus Christ, looking
for, and hastening unto the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And in 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and
hastening unto the coming of the day of God. A longing expectation there is in
all the creatures after the second coming of Christ; They wait (says the
Apostle) for the manifestation of the Sons of God: and presently he adds, Not
only they, but we also that have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan and long
for the coming of that day, Romans 8.19.23. And therefore the last breath of the
Scripture is breathed out in the confirmation of this hope, Rev. 22.20. He that
testifies these things, says, Surely, I come quickly; Amen, even so be it,
come Lord Jesus. There is a sweet Allegory to express this in Cant. ult. 14
Make haste, my beloved, and be like the Hind, and like the Roe; Come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly; and come as the Hind, and as the Roe, and as a Heart upon
the Mountain of spices: Make haste, and come quickly; be swift, and do not
tarry: and in a better place I cannot end.

FINIS.
THE SEAL OF SALVATION: OR, GOD's SPIRIT Witnessing with our Spirits, THAT We
are the Children of GOD.

IN TWO SERMONS.

Preached at Great S. BARTHOLOMEWS, by the most Reverend JAMES USHER late
Archbishop of ARMAGH.

Difficilia pulchra. ROMANS 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ranew at the King's Arms in S. Paul's Church
Yard. 1678.

THE SEAL OF Salvation.
ROMANS, 8.15, 16. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear: but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father.

The same Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God.


THe Apostle sets down in this Epistle a platform of Christian Doctrine,
whereupon all persons and Churche^ might safely build themselves; showing
therein a sure way, how those might come to the Lord Jesus Christ who are to
obtain salvation by him, which he delivers in three heads, showing

1. First how God will convince the world of sin.

2. Secondly he discovers to them what that righteousness is, which without
themselves is imputed to them.

3. Thirdly he sets forth that righteousness inherent, and created in us by
sanctification of the spirit with the effects thereof, and Motives, and Helps
thereunto.

Answering that threefold work of the spirit in John 16. where Christ promises
that when the comforter should come he should reprove ^he world of Sin, of
Righteousness, of Judgment.

First, he shows the Comforter shall work a conviction of Sin, a making of a
man as vile, empty and naked as may be; not a bare confession of sin only,
(which a man may have and yet go to hell) but such a conviction as stops a
man's mouth that he has not a word to speak, but sees a sink of sin and
abomination in himself, such as the Apostle had, Romans 7.18. For I know that in
me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. To attain to this sight and
measure of humiliation, there must be a work of the spirit First therefore in
the first Chapter the Apostle begins with the Gentiles, who failing grossly in
the duties of the first Table, God had given over also to err in the breach of
all the Duties of the second Table. Then the next Chapter, and most of the
third he spends on the Jews: they bragged of many excellent privileges they had
above the Gentiles, as to have the Law, Circumcision, to be leaders of others,
to have God among them, and therefore despised the Gentiles. The Apostle
reproves them, showing that in condemning the Gentiles, they condemned
themselves, they having a greater light of knowledge than the Gentiles, which
should have led them to the true and sincere practice of what they were
instructed in. Then he goes on and shows all naturally to be out of the way,
ver. 19. and so concludes them to be under sin, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world become guilty before God. This is the end of the
first part.

This being done, in the latter end of the Chapter he proceeds to speak of the
second work of the Comforter. To convince the world of righteousness; but on
what grounds? Because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more, that is, he
shall assure the conscience that now there is a righteousness of better things
purchased for us: that Christ was wounded, arraigned and condemned for us; that
he was imprisoned, but now he is free, who was our surety; yea, and that he is
not free, as one escaped, who has broken prison and run away, (for then he
could not have stayed in Heaven no more than Adam could stay in Paradise after
his fall) but now that Christ remains in Heaven perfectly, and for ever
reconciled with the Father: this is a sure sign to us that the debt is paid,
and everlasting peace and righteousness brought in for our salvation. This the
Apostle enlarges and shows this to be that righteousness which Adam had, and
which we must trust all unto. And this he does unto the sixth Chapter.

From whence the Apostle goes on to the third point, convincin the world of
judgment and of righteousness, unto the ninth Chapter, which are two words
signifying one and the same thing; but because he had named righteousness
before which was the righteousness of justification (without a man) in Christ
Jesus; he calls the third judgment, which is that integrity which is inherent,
bred and created in us, to wit, sanctification, as we may see in Esaias 42.3.
where it is said of Christ, A bruised reed shall be not break, and the smoking
flax shall he not quench, till he bring forth judgment unto victory. Where he
shows judgment to be a beginning of righteousness in sanctification, even such
a one as can never be extinguished. So Job 27.2. The word is taken where Job
expostulateth the matter: As the Lord lives who has taken away my judgment,
etc. all the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue deceit. God forbid that I
should justify you, till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, my
righteousness I will hold fast, and will not let it go, etc. Here you see by
judgment is meant integrity, and that righteousness which is created and
inherent in us; so that the substance of that place in Esaias is, that God will
never give over so to advance and make effectual that weak righteousness and
sanctification begun in us, until it shall prevail against and master all our
sins and corruptions, making it in the end a victorious sanctification. And the
ground hereof is, for the Prince of this world is judged; he is like one
manacled, whose strength and power is limited: So that now, though he be
strong, yet he is cast out by a stronger than he; so that he cannot, nor shall
he ever rule again as in times past.

This strain of Doctrine the Apostle follows in this Epistle, showing that as
the righteousness of Justification by the blood of Christ is a thing without
us, so the righteousness of Sanctification is a thing created and inherent in
us, and the ground of the witness of our spirits, as we shall show in its own
place. So that the blood of Christ does two things unto us; in Justification it
covers our sins, and in Sanctification it heals our sins and sores; that if
there be any proud or dead flesh, it eats it out, and then heals the wound.
Therefore the Apostle says You are not under the Law, but under Grace. He that
sees the Law is satisfied by another, and all to be of free grace, he will not
much stand on any thing in himself for his Justification; but as a poor beggar,
be content all should be of mere grace: Therefore he concludes, Sin shall not
have dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

After this the Apostle goes on to other particulars, showing diverse things,
especially the twelfth Verse of this Chapter, where he drives unto the point of
sanctification, as though he should say you are freed from the Law indeed, as
it is a Judge of Life and Death, but yet the Law must be your Counselors; you
are debtors of thankfulness (seeing whence you are escaped) that you may not
live after the flesh, and then he proceeds to show them how they should walk,
that seeing they had received the spirit, they should walk after the spirit;
now that they had received that which should subdue and mortify the flesh and
the lusts thereof, they should be no more as dead men, but quick and lively in
operation, by living after the spirit, otherwise they could not be the Sons of
God, verse. 16. and he comes to the words that I have now read, For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father: for the spirit it self bears witness
with our spirits, that we are the children of God.

Where the Apostle shows the ground of our Union and Communion with Christ,
because having his spirit we are of necessity his, as S. John speaks, 1 John
3.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us by the spirit which he has give^
us. What ties together, and makes one, things far asunder, but the same spirit
and life in both: so that spirit which is in Christ a full running over
fountain descending down, and being also infused into us, unites us unto him;
yea, that spirit communicated unto me in some measure (which is in him such
fullness) that spirit does tie me as fast unto Christ as any joint ties member
to member, and so makes Christ to dwell in my heart; as the Apostle speaks to
this purpose, Ephesians. 2.21. That thus by one spirit we are built up and made the
Temple of God, and come to be the Habitation of God through the spirit; so that
by this means we are unseparably knit and united unto him; for what i^ it makes
one member to be a member to another? not the nearness of joining or lying one
to, or upon another, but the same quickening spirit and life which is in both,
and which causes a like motion: for otherwise if the same life were not in
that member it would be dead, and of no use to the other; so that it is the
same spirit and life in the things conjoined, which unites them together; yet
to explain this more (as I have often in the like case said) Imagine a man were
as high as Heaven (the same spirit and life being diffused into all his parts)
what is it now that can cause his toe to stir, there being such a huge distance
betwixt the head and it? Even that self-same life which is in the head being in
it; no sooner does the head will the toe to stir, but it moves. So is it with
us; that very spirit which is in Christ being in us, thereby we are united unto
him, grow in him, live in him, and he in us; rejoice in him, and so are kept
and preserved to be glorified with him. He is the second Adam, from whom we
receive the influence of all good things; showring down and distilling the
graces of his spirit upon the least of all his members. That look, as it was
said of Aaron (who was a type of the second Adam) and of that holy Oil
(representing the graces of his spirit) Which did not only run down his head
and beard, but the skirts of his garment also, and all his rich attire about,
Psalm. 133.2. So when I see the Oil of Christ's graces and spirit not only rest
upon the head, but also descend and run down upon the lowest of his members;
making me now (as one of them) in some sort another man than I was, or my
natural state could make me; by the same spirit I know I am united unto Christ.
To this purpose is that which Christ to stands upon (in Joh. 6.) unto the Jews;
where speaking of the eating of his flesh, and that bread of life which came
down from heaven, (lest they should be mistaken) he adds, It is the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit, and they are life: So that we see it is the spirit that gives a
being to a thing. And therefore the Apostle proceeds to show, As many as are
led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, Romans 8.13. That look as
Christ is the ^^ue natural Son of God, so we as truly (by conveyance) of the
same spirit into us, are his Sons by Adoption, and so heirs with God, yea, and
joint heirs with Christ; this he begins to show, verse. 13. So that being in
this excellent estate, they were not only servants and friends (a most high
Prerogative) but they were now the Sons of God, having the spirit of Adoption,
whereby they might boldly call God Father. In which Verse the Apostle opposes
the spirit of bondage, which does make a man fear again, unto the spirit of
Adoption, which frees a man from fear.

Now two things may be observed hence: 1. The order the spirit of God keeps
ever it comforts; it shakes, and makes us fear. This the Apostle speaks to Heb.
2.14. where he shows, that the end of Christ's coming was, That because the
children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the
same; that through death, he might destroy him that had the power of death;
that is, the Devil: and deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their
life time subject unto bondage. The first work then, of the comforter is, to
put a man in fear. 2. Here is showed, that until the spirit does work this
fear, the heart will not stoop. The Obstinacy is great; yea, so great, that if
hell gates were open, ready to swallow up a man, he would not yield until the
spirit set in to convince the heart. Therefore St. John tells us, Joh. 16. That
when the spirit it come, he will reprove the world of sin; that is, he will
convince and show a man that he is but a bondman: and so from this sight he
makes us to fear. No man must think this strange, that God deals with men at
first after this harsh manner; to kill them as it were, before he make them
alive: nor be discouraged, as if God had now cast them off as none of his: For
this bondage and spirit of fear is a work of God's spirit, and a preparative to
the rest, yet it is but a common work of the spirit; and such a one, that
unless more follow, it can afford us no comfort.

But why then does God suffer his children to be first terrified with this fear?

I answer, That in two respects this is the best and wisest course to deal with
us; or else many would put off the matter, and never attain a sense of mercy.

First, in respect of God's glory.

Secondly, in regard of our good.

First in respect of God's glory; and that first because, as in the work of
Creation, so in the work of Redemption, God will have the praise of all his
attributes: for as in the work of Creation there appeared the infinite wisdom,
goodness, power, justice, mercy of God, and the like; so will he in the work of
our Redemption have all these appear in their strength and brightness: and when
we see and acknowledge these things to be in G^d in the highest perfection,
hereby we honor him; as on the contrary, when we will not see and acknowledge
the excellency of God's infinite attributes, we dishonor him: yea, and I may
safely add, that the work of Redemption was a greater work than the work of
Creation; for therein appeared all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in the
conveying of it unto the Church. Herein appeared first, infinite Wisdom, in
ordering the matter so as to find out such a way for the Redemption of Mankind,
as no created understanding could possibly imagine or think of. And secondly,
for the Mercy of God; there could be none comparable to this, in not sparing
his own Son, the Son of his Love, that so he might spare us who had so
grievously provoked him. And thirdly, there could not be so much Justice seen
in any thing as in sparing us not to spare his Son, in laying his Son's head
(as it were) upon the block, and chopping it off: indeed the death unto which
he gave his Son was not only more vile than the loss of his head, but far more
painful and terrible to nature, the death on the Cross; in renting and tearing
that blessed body of his; even as the Veil of the temple was rent, (which was a
type of him) so was he rent, and tore, and broke for us, when he made his soul
an offering for sin. This was the perfection of Justice. And thus was he just,
as the Apostle speaks, and the Justifyer of him him that believes in Jesus.
God would have Justice and Mercy meet and kiss each other; and that for two
reasons, for the magnifying of his Justice, and for the magnifying of his Mercy.

First, For the magnifying of his Justice. The spirit must first become a
spirit of bondage and fear for the magnifying of God's Justice: Thus the
Prophet David having sinned, was driven to this practice, Psalm. 51.4. Against
thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. Thus
he, a holy man, was brought to confess his sin, to give God the glory of his
Justice. And so to this end, that a man might pass through or by (as it were)
the gates of hell unto heaven, the Lord will have his Justice extended to the
full; for which cause lessening, or altogether (for a time) abstracting all
sight of mercy, he turns the Law loose to have its course. And thus, as in the
work of Redemption, he would have the height of Justice appear; so would he
have it appear in the application of our Redemption, that Justice should not be
swallowed up of Mercy. But even as that woman, 2 King. 4. Who had nothing to
pay, was threatened by her Creditors to take away her two Sons, to put them in
prison. So though we have nothing to pay, the Law is let loose upon us, to
threaten Imprisonment and Damnation, to affright and terrify us; and all for
the magnifying of God's Justice: which also, we satisfy not by what we suffer,
yet it is meet we should acknowledge and learn thereby more highly to value the
suffering of our Savior. But farther, God has set forth many terrible
threatenings in his Word against sinners; shall all these be to no purpose? The
wicked, they are insensible of them; must they therefore be in vain? Some
people there must be, on whom they shall work: Shall a Lion roar, says the
Prophet, and we not be afraid, Amos, 3.8. Since then those who should, will
not, some there be who must tremble, and those even of God's own dear Children.
This the Prophet excellently sets forth, Isa. 66.2. where the Lord shows who
he will regard; But to this man will I look, even to him that is of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word. So that you see, even some of his own must
tremble, and be thus humbled of necessity: and that it is not without a just
cause, that God does deal with his own Children after this manner, though it be
sharp in the experience. We must fear, tremble and be humbled, and then we
shall receive a spirit not to fear again. That vain courage which some brag
they have, so as not to fear Death, is not it which is meant here; f^^ alas
such braggers, out of ignorance of the thing, and desire to be out of misery in
this Life, may embrace Death unwillingly, hoping it may put an end to their
sorrows. But this spirit not to fear again, is such a spirit that assures me of
the forgiveness of all my sins, showing me my freedom by Christ Jesus from
Hell and eternal Damnation, making me live a holy Life, and from hence not to
fear, and so sealing me up unto the day of Redemption, as you shall hear more,
when we come to speak of the witness of the spirit. This now is for the glory
of Gods Justice.

Secondly, it is requisite that the comforter should first work in men a fear,
for the glory of Gods mercy; which would never be so sweet, relish so well, nor
be so highly esteemed of by us, if the awful terror of Justice had not
formerly made us smart: As we may see in that parable (whereunto our Savior
likeneth the Kingdom of Heaven) of the man that owed ten thousand Talents unto
the King his master (he shows him mercy) and forgives him all; but what did he
first? Why first he requires the whole debt of him, and because he had nothing
to pay; he commands him, his Wife and Children, and all that he had to be sold,
that payment might be made; first he would have him pincht thoroughly, that he
might know much he was indebted, and (in that case) how great that favor was
which he received in having all that he owed forgiven him. Thus a King many
times casts men in Prison, suffers the sentence of condemnation to pass on
them, and perhaps orders them to be brought to the place of execution, before
he pardons them, and then mercy is mercy indeed, and so God deals with us many
times, he puts his Children in fear; shows them how much they owe him, how
unable they are to pay, casts them into prison and threatens condemnation in
Hell for ever, after which when mercy comes to the Soul, then it appears to be
wonderful mercy indeed, even the riches of exceeding mercy. Why do so many find
no savor in the Gospel? Is it because there is no sweetness, or matter of
delight in it? No, it is because such have had no taste of the Law, and of the
spirit of bondage, they have not smarted, nor found a sense of the bitterness
of sin, nor of that just punishment that is due unto the same. Even as the King
will suffer the Law to pass on some grievous malefactor for high Treason, bring
him to the place of Execution, and lay his head on the block, before a pardon
he produced (as we have had experience in the Country of a man who otherwise
would not cry nor shed a tear for any thing; Despising Death, and not afraid
to meet an host of men.) Such a one having now at an instant a pardon brought
from the King, how wonderfully does it work upon him, causing softness of heart
and tears to flow from his eyes when nothing else could; whilst the wonder of
this mercy, which now appears so sweet, and sea^onable is beheld and admired,
he is so struck that he knows not what to say: for this cause therefore God
shows us first a Spirit of bondage to prepare us to relish mercy, and then he
gives a Spirit of Adoption not to fear again: And thus by this order the one is
magnifyed and highly esteemed by the foregoing sense of the other.

If therefore this terror and fear be hard and troublesome unto us, yet if it
be for Gods glory, let us endure: If he will give me over to a wounded
terrified conscience, to fears, tremblings, astonishments, yea or to draw me
into the fire it self, or any other punishment, so we see he dealt with his
Church of old, he brought her through the fire and water before she came into a
wealthy place. Psalm. 66.12. Since it is for his glory, I must be contended. But
what do I say? He gets nothing by us of all that we do, all is for our selves;
our Acknowledgments of him, make him no stronger, wiser, juster, or better then
he is, but in glorifying of him we do glorify our selves, and so pass from
glory to glory, until we come to be fully transformed into his Image. And
herein consists our happiness in acknowledging of his wonderful Attributes,
that by the reflex and knowledge of them, we grow up in them as much as may be.
God was as glorious, powerful, wise, just, happy and good before the World was
made as now, and if the case be put concerning glorifying of him, the three
persons of the Trinity were only fit and worthy of so great honor, not we; as
we may read Prove. 8.30. There wisdom shows how it was with the Father, before
all time, and that they did mutually solace themselves in the contemplations of
one another glory. Then (says Wisdom) Was I by him as one brought up with him,
and I was daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him, and in 17 John. There
we read the same thing in effect, where Christ prays, And now O Father glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
World was. So that the Admiring, beholding and magnifying of Gods glory (as
much as may be) laboring to be like him is our glory, and thus much of the
glory of God in beginning of this work in us by fear.

The second thing was to prove that this course was for our good, and this
appears two ways. 1. In our Justification. 2. In our Sanctification.

For the first, we are such strangers unto God, that we will never come unto
him till we see there is no other remedy, being at the pits brink ready to
starve, hopeless of all other helps, being frozen in the dregs of sin,
delighting in our ways; as we see in the parable of the prodigal son, who would
never think of any return to his Father till all other helps failed him, money,
friends, acquaintance, and all sorts of food; nay if he might but have fed upon
husks with the Swine, he would not have thought of returning any more unto his
Father: but this being denied him, (the text says) he then came to himself,
which shows us that whilst men run on in sinful courses they are mad men of
themselves, even as we see those in Bedlam, are beaten and kept under, and
comforts denied them, till they come to themselves. And then what says he? I
will arise and go to my father, confessing that he had sinned, and I will say,
Father, I have sinned, etc. 15. Luke. So is it with us, until the Lord humble
us and bring us low in our own eyes showing us our misery and sinful poverty,
and that in us there is no good thing, (that we be stripped of all help in and
without our selves and must perish for ever unless we beg his mercy) we will
not come unto him. As we see it was with the Woman that Christ healed of her
bloody issue, Luke. 8.43. How long it was before she came to Christ, she had
been sick twelve years, she had spent all her substance upon physicians, and no
body could help her, and this Extremity brings her to Christ. So that this is
the means to bring us unto Christ, to drive us on our knees, hopeless as low as
may be, to show us where help only is to be found; and make us run unto it.
Thus therefore when men have no mind to come to Christ he sends (as it were)
fiery Serpents to sting them, that they might look up unto the brazen Serpent,
(or rather unto Christ Jesus of which it was a type) for help, so unto others
being strangers unto him, he sends variety of great and sore afflictions to
make them come to him that he may be acquainted with them; as Absalom set Joabs
Corn on fire because he would not come at him, being twice sent for. So God
deals with us before our Conversion many times, as with iron Whips lashes us
home turning loose the avenger of blood after us, and then for our Life we run
and make have to the City of Refuge. Thus God shoots off as it were his great
Ordinance against us to make us run unto him. Thus John the Baptist, came
preaching of Repentance, in attire, speech and diet all being strong and harsh,
clothed with a Camels hair and with a girdle of skin about his loins, his meat
Locusts and wild Honey, the place, was in the wilderness, his speech harsh and
uncomfortable, thundering with his voice, calling them a generation of vipers,
and telling them that now also was the ax laid to the root of the tree, that
every tree that brought not forth good fruit was hewn down and cast into the
fire. As also we know in this manner the Lord came Elijah. 1 Kings 19.11 First
a great strong wind rent the mountains, and break in pieces the Rocks before
the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind, and after that went an Earthquake,
but the Lord was not in the Earthquake; and after the Earthquake a fire, but
the Lord was not in the fire: (these were as a peal of great Ordinance, shot
off to prepare the way, showing the King was a coming) and after the fire a
still small voice, and there the Lord was. So the Lord rends tears, and shakes
our Consciences and rocky hearts, many times to prepare the way for him, and
then he comes to us in the still and soft voice of Consolation.

Secondly, for our Sanctification, it is good for us that the Comforters first
work be to work fear in us, for we are naturally so frozen in our dregs, that
no fire in a manner will warm and thaw us. We wallow in our blood, and stick
fast in the mire of sin, that we cannot stir; so that this fear is but to pull
us from our Corruptions and make us more holy. As we see if a man have a
Gangrene beginning in his hand or foot which may spread farther, and be his
death if it continue so, he is easily persuaded to cut it off, lest it should
go farther. So does God deal by us with this fear of bondage, that we might be
clothed anew with his Image in Holiness and Righteousness. Now to effect this,
the sharpest things are best, such as are the Law, the threatenings of
Condemnation, the opening of Hell, the racking of the Conscience and a sense of
wrath present and to come. So hard-hearted are we by Nature, being as children
of the bondwoman, unto whom violence must be used. Even as we see a man riding
a wild and young Horse, to tame him, he will run him against a wall (that this
may make him afraid) ride him in deep and tough Lands, (or if this will not
do) take him up into the top of some high Rock, when bringing him to the brink
thereof he threatens to throw him headlong, make him shake and quake, whereby
at last he is tamed. So deals the Lord by us, he gives us a sight of sin, and
the punishment due thereunto, a sense of wrath, sets the Conscience on fire,
fills the heart with fears, horrors, and disquietness, opens Hell to the Soul,
brings a man as it were to the gates thereof, and threatens to throw him in,
and all this to make a man more holy, and to hate sin the more. So that you see
there must be a strong mortifying and subduing of us by a strong hand to bring
us unto Christ for our Sanctification, nothing but a fiery furnace can melt
away that dross and tin which cleaves unto such corrupt metal as we are. See
this method excellently set forth in the Prophet Ezekiel. 22.19.20. Because ye are
all become dross, behold I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem, as they
gather Brass, and Iron and Lead and Tin into the midst of the Furnace to blow
the fire upon it to melt it, so will I gather you in mine Anger and in my fury,
and I will leave you there and melt you.

Before I proceed farther, give me leave to answer an Objection of a troubled
soul which may arise hence, O may a soul say, what comfort then may I have of
the first work of the Spirit in me? For as yet I have found none of these
things; I have not been thus humbled, nor terrifyed, nor had such experience as
you speak of in that state under the spirit of bondage.

I answer, though this be a work of the spirit, yet it is not the principal
justifying and saving work of the spirit, yea the children of the Devil may
come to have a greater measure of this then Gods own dear Children, whom (for
the most part) he will not affright nor afflict in that terrible manner as he
does some of them, but the consequence of this is more to be accounted of, then
the measure, to see whither that measure I have, (what ever it be) leads me.
For if the measure were never so absolutely necessary to salvation, then all
Gods. Children should have enough of it. But I make a difference still between
humiliation and humility, which is a grace of it self, and leads me along with
comfort and Life. Thus therefore I think of humiliation, if I have so much of
it as will bring me to see my danger and cause me to run to the medicine, and
City of refuge for help, to hate sin for time to come, and to set my self
constantly in the ways and practice of holiness, it is enough. And so I say in
the case of Repentance, if a man have a sight of sin past, and a heart firmly
set against all sin for the time to come, the greater and firmer this were, the
lesser measure of sorrow might suffice for sins fore-past. As we see a wise
Father would never beat his Child for faults that are past, but for the
prevention of that which is to come, for we see in time of Correction, the
Child cries out, O I will never do so any more. So God deals with us, because
our resolutions and promises are faint and fail, and that without much
mourning, humiliation and Stripes, we attain not this hatred of sins past, and
strength against them for time to come, therefore it is that our humiliation
and sorrow must be proportionable to that work which is to be done, otherwise
any measure of it were sufficient which fits us for the time to come.

But I will add, there are indeed diverse measures of it, according unto which
the conscience is wounded or eased; when there is a tough melancholy humor
that the powers of the soul are distracted, good Duties omitted, and the heart
so much the more hardened: When upon this the Lord lets loose the band of the
conscience, oppressing the same with exceeding fears and terrors, this the
Lord uses as a wedge to cleave in sunder a hard piece of wood. God then does
show us, because we would not plough our selves we shall be ploughed. If we
would judge our selves (says the Apostle) we should not be judged, and
therefore the Church confesses and complains, Psalm 129.2. That the ploughers
ploughed upon her back and made deep furrows, Why? How came this, she did not
plough up her own fallow ground, wherefore the Lord sent her other strangers
and harsh ploughers, that ploughed her soundly indeed. Wherefore does God thus
deal with his Children, because he is the great and most wise Husbandman, who
will not sow amongst thorns. Therefore when he is about to sow the seed of
Eternal Life in the soul (which must take deep root and grow for ever) he will
have the ground thoroughly ploughed.

The way then to avoid these things, that are so harsh and displeasing to flesh
and blood, is to take the Rod betimes and beat our selves, for when we are slow
and secure and omit this, God does do the work himself: But yet God makes a
difference of good education in those who have kept themselves from the common
pollutions, and gross sins of the times, it pleases God, says comes into
them, they know not how, nor the time, Grace drops in by little and little, now
a little and then a little by degrees, sin is more and more hated, and the
heart inflamed with a desire of good things in a conscionable Life. But in a
measure (I say) such must have had, have, or shall have fears and terrors; so
much as may keep them from sin, and quicken them to go on constantly in the
ways of holiness; or when they fly out of the way they shall smart for it and
be whipped home again; yet for the main they find themselves as it were in
Heaven they know not how. But if a man have stuck deep and long in sin, he must
look for a greater measure of humiliation and fear, and a more certain time of
his calling, there must be hawling and pulling such a man out of the fire with
violence; and he must not look to obtain peace and comfort with ease, God will
thunder and lighten in such a man's conscience in Mount Sinai, before he speak
peace unto him in Mount Zion.

A second time there is also, of a great measure of humiliation; which is
(though a man may be free from great, gross sins, and worldly pollutions) when
the Lord intends to show the feeling of his mercy and the sense thereof to any
in an extraordinary measure, or to fit them for some high services, then they
shall be much humbled before, as we see St. Paul was, Act. 8.9. God did thunder
upon him, and beat him down in the High way to the ground, being stricken with
blindness for three days after.

Thus much shall suffice to have been spoken of the 15th verse, touching the
Spirit of Bondage, and the spirit of Adoption. The Apostle tells them, they may
thank God the spirit of fear thus came, that hereafter they might partake of
the Spirit of Adoption to fear no more; he stirs them up (as it were) to be
thankful, because now they had obtained a better state: Why, what estate? A
very high one, verse. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits,
that we are the children of God.

ROMANS 8.16. The same Spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God.


HAving spoken concerning the Spirit of Bondage and the Spirit of Adoption in
the former verse, the Apostle, in these words that I have now read, does as it
were stir up those unto thankfulness; to whom he writes, because they had now
attained to a better state; The Spirit it self bearing witness with their
spirits, that they are the children of God.

The thing then is, to know our selves to be the children of God, there must be
sound evidences; here then are two set down, whose Testimony we cannot deny. I
will touch them as briefly as I can, and so will make an end.

First, the witness of our spirit.

Secondly, the witness of God's Spirit with our spirits.

These are two Evidences, not single, but compounded; wherein you see there may
be some work of our spirit.

But some may say, our spirit is deceitful; how then can our own spirit work in
this manner to testify?

I answer, In this place (our Spirit) is as it were an evidence of God from
heaven, as a loud token given, assuring me upon good grounds, that I have not
mis-applyed the promises; but though God do write bitter things against me, yet
that I love him still, and cleave unto him, that for all this I know that I
still hunger and thirst after Righteousness; that I will not be beaten off, nor
receive an ill report of my Lord and Savior; that I rest, wait, fear and trust
in him still. When thus our valor and faith is tried, then comes the same
spirit, and seals with our spirit, that we are the children of God: When our
seal is first put, then God seals with our spirit, the same thing by his
spirit. To this effect is that in 1 John 3.8. we read three Witnesses are set
down, the Spirit, the Water, aand the Blood; and these three agree in one.
These three witness that we have everlasting life, and that our names are
written in heaven. How do these three agree with these two Witnesses? very
well: St. John, he ranks them according to the order of their clearest
evidence; first the Spirit, then the Water, then the Blood: the Apostle here,
he ranks them according to their natural being; first, our spirit in
Justification and Sanctification, and then God's spirit. For the spirit, of all
other, this is the clearest evidence; and when this is bright and manifest,
there needs no more, the thing is sealed. So the Testimony of Water is a clear
evidence, (whereby is meant Sanctification) this is put next unto the Spirit;
for when the Spirit is silent, yet this may speak: for though I have many wants
and imperfections in me, yet if my spirit can testify unto me that I have a
desire to please God in all things, that I resolve upon and set up his service
as the pitch of all my utmost endeavors, that with allowance I willingly
cherish no corruption, but set my self against all sin; this Water will comfort
and hold up a man from sinking; as we see in all the sore trials of Job, Job
28.2. Still he stood upon the integrity of his own spirit, and would not let
that go, though he were sore beaten of the Almighty, and slandered for a wicked
person. But the water may be muddy, and the struggling of the flesh and spirit
so strong, that we happily shall not be able to judge which is master: What
then? Then faith lays hold of the blood in Justification, (which though it be
the darkest testimony) yet is as sure as any of the other. Now in comparing of
these witnesses together in St. John and in my text, I rank the water and the
blood with the testimony of our spirit. And the Spirit mentioned in St. John
and in my Text, to be all one; not as though we wrought them, but we believe
them to be so. If a man ask how I know that I am sanctified, the answer must
be, I believe and know it to be so: the work producing these things in me comes
of God; but for the work of discerning (this is certain) how our affections
stand in this case; it comes of us, but yet to come nearer the matter.

The testimony of our spirit I conceive to be, when a man has taken a survey
of those excellent things belonging unto Justification and Sanctification, when
according to the substantial truths which I know in the Word, I observe and
follow as fast as I can what is there commanded; when I take the Candle of the
Word, and with the bright burning lamp search into the Word, what is there to
be done, and so bring it home to my self, thereby mortifying my corruptions;
this is the groundwork of the witness of our Spirit. First, (as in the blood)
with my spirit I must see what is needful to be done in order unto
Justification, what free promises of invitation belong thereunto; I must see
how God justifies a sinner, what conditions on our part are required in
Justification; I must see what footings and grounds for life, and what way of
hope there is for a graceless man to be saved; yea, even for the worst person
that may be. In this case a man must not look for any thing in himself as a
cause, Christ must not be had by exchange, but received as free gift; as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith, that it may be by grace,
to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed. I must there bring unto
the receiving of Christ a bare hand. It must be of grace: God for this cause
will make us let fall every thing before we shall take hold of him. Though
qualified with humiliations, I must let all fall; not trusting unto it, as to
make me the worthier to receive Christ (as some think.) When thus (at first for
my Justification I received Christ) I must let any thing I have fall, to lay
hold of him; that then he may find us thus naked as it were, in our blood; and
in this sort God will take us, that all may be of mere grace. Another thing the
Apostle adds, and that is, that the promise may be sure: If any thing in us
might be as a cause or help to our Justification, a man should never be sure;
therefore it is all of grace, that the promise might be sure. As though God
should say, I care for nothing else; bring me my Son, and show me him, and then
all is well. And in this case you see he does not name hope, or love, or any
other grace, but faith; for the nature of faith is to let fall all things in
laying hold on Christ: In Justification, faith is a sufferer only; but in
Sanctification, it works and purges the whole man; and so witnesses the
certainty and truth of our Sanctification, and so the assurance of Salvation.

Hence from the nature hereof in this work, the Apostle in 2 Pet. 1.1. writes
to them who had obtained like precious faith: In this case it is alike to all
in virtue in this work, whatsoever the measure be. And I may liken it thus, St.
Paul, you know, writes, With these hands I get my living. Now, though strong
hands may work more than weak hands, and so earn a great deal more; yet a
beggar who holds out his hand, may receive more than he or any other could
earn. So faith justifies only receiving, not working; as we may see, Joh. 1.12.
But to as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God; even to them that believe in his Name. Received him; that is, believe in
him; How? Come and take him: How? as it is in Rev. 22. And let him that is
athirst come; and whosoever will, let him come, and take of the water of life
freely. Now, when I see that God keeps open house, come who will, without
denying entertainment to any, and when God's spirit has wrought the will in
me, what lets me now to receive Christ? Now, when the spirit has wrought this
will in me, and I come, and take God at his word, and believe in Christ; laying
hold by degrees on the other promises of life, winding and wrapping my self in
them as I am able, it is faith: But that persuasion only which many have, that
they shall go to heaven, is not faith, but rather a consequent hereof. The
promise is made unto those that believe in Christ; For in him, says the
Apostle, all the promises are yea, and Amen. If a man weep much and beg hard
for the remission of sins, he may weep and be without comfort unto the end of
his life, unless he have received Christ, and applied his virtues home unto his
trembling soul. A man must first receive Christ, and then he has a warrant to
interest himself in all the promises. So that now this being done, if such a
man were asked, have thou a warrant to receive Christ? Yes, I have a warrant,
says the soul, for he keeps open house unto all that come, wellcoming all, and
I have a will to come, this is a good and sufficient warrant for me to come, if
I have a will wrought in me, and then if I do come, this is the first thing to
be observed in the witness of our Spirit.

Now if a man do stagger for all the King keeps open house, so as he will not,
or does not come, then in the second place comes Invitation, because we are
slow to believe, therefore God invites us, as in Matthew 11.28. Come unto me
all ye that Labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Many object,
O I am not worthy to come, but you see here is invitation to encourage me to
come, yea the sorer and heavier my load is, I should come so much the rather:
So that in this case, if the question should be asked of such a one, friend how
came you hither? What warrant had you to be so bold? Then he shows forth his
ticket, (as if he should say) Lord thou gave me a word of comfort, a warrant
of thy invitation, in obedience to thy word, and faith in thy promise, I come
hither. Now this invitation is directed to them who as yet have no goodness in
them, when then my Spirits warrants this much unto me, that upon this word of
promise, and invitation I have come in for releif and ease of may miseries unto
Christ Jesus, the great Physician, relying on him for cure, and lying as it
were at his feet for mercy, this is the testimony of my Spirit that I do
believe, and a ground for me to rest on, that now I am in the way of life, and
justified by his grace.

Thirdly, sometimes Christ meets with a dull and slow heart, lazy and careless
(in a manner) what becomes of it, not knowing or weighing the dangerous state
it is in, making excuses; here Christ may justly leave us, (for is it not much
that the King should invite us for our good) as he did these in the Gospel, who
for refusing to come to his Supper were excluded from ever tasting thereof,
strangers being fetched in, in their places. God might so deal with us, but you
see in 2 Corinthians. 5.20. God sends as Embassage to entreat us, (erects as it
were) a new office for our sakes, says he: Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to
be reconcile unto God: This may seem to be needless, we being weaker than he.
Ambassadors for the most part are sent unto those that are stronger. The
Apostle reasons the matter, are we stronger than he, do we provoke the Lord to
anger? But here we see and may admire his infinite rich goodness, that he comes
and sues to us to be reconciled, as we see it is a kind of indignity for a
great Monarch to sue for peace to them that are far below him and his
inferiors. This dishonor God is willing to put up at our hands, and sues unto
us first, when it rather became us upon our knees to beg and sue first unto
him. The effect of the Embassy is, that we would be friends with him, and
receive that which is so highly for our advancement; when therefore I see that
this quickens in my heart, so that as (S. James speaks) of the engrafted word,
that is able to save our souls) I can bring it home, having some sweet relish,
and high estimation of it in my heart, that it begins to be the square and rule
of my life, then I am safe. If this or any of these fasten upon the soul, and
thereupon I yield and come in, it is enough to show that I am a justified
person. And from hence our spirit may witness, and that truly: this is a third
thing in the witness of our spirit.

Fourthly, if none of all this will do, then comes a farther degree, a command
from the highest, you shall do it; as in 1 John 3.23. And this is his
commandment that we should believe on his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another as he gave us commandment. In the Parliament of Grace there is a Law of
Faith, which binds me as strictly to believe, as to keep any of the
commandments: Says the Apostle, Romans 3. Where is boasting then? it is excluded,
by what Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of Faith. So that if I will not
believe on the Lord Jesus, who eases me of the vigor of the Law, and so is my
righteousness, I must perish for ever. What? may one object, must I needs
believe? Yes, thou art as strictly bound to believe, as not to murder, or not
to be an Idolater, not to steal or commit adultery: nay, I will add more, that
thy infidelty and contempt of that gracious offer, thy disobedience to the Law
of Faith is greater than thy breach and disobedience to the Law of Works, when
thou do fling God's grace in his face again, and (as it were) trample under
foot the blood of the Covenant: See for this John 16.9. What is that great sin
which Christ came to reprove? even this infidelity (says he) because they
believe not in me: which in two respects is a great sin. First, because it is a
sin against God's mercy. Secondly, because it is a chain which links and binds
all sins together. Thus our Faith is sure when it relies on the word, otherwise
all other thoughts are but presumption, and will fail a man in the time of
need; for what is faith but my assent to believe every word of God he has
commanded me to believe, and so endeavor the practice of it.

Fifthly, if none of these prevail, there comes threatening; then God swears,
that such as refuse shall never enter into his rest. If a Prince should sue
unto a Beggars Daughter for marriage, and she should refuse and contemn him, do
you think he would be well pleased? So it is with us, when the King of Heavens
Son sends unto us. Will you be married to me? if we refuse, the Son takes it
wonderfully ill. Therefore Psalm. 2.12. he says, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and ye perish in the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are
all those that put their trust in him. So in the Hebrews, God swore, that
because of infidelity, those unbelieving Jews should never enter into his rest.
All the rest of the threatenings of the Law were not backed with an oath, there
was some secret reservation of mercy unto them upon the satisfaction of Divine
Justice; but here there is no reservation, God has sworn such shall never come
into Heaven. Look not for a third thing in God, now as a mitigation of his
oath, it cannot be, he has sworn that an unbeliever shall never enter into his
Rest.

These five things are the grounds of Faith, even unto the worst and
unworthiest persons that may be, and by all or some of them he creates Faith in
us, which once wrought in the heart by the spirit of God secretly, and we
discerning the same, this is the witness of our spirit.

Now our spirit having viewed all these things, and the promises upon which
they are grounded; thus it witnesses, as if one should demand of a man, Are
these things presented to thy view, true? Yes, will he say, true as true as the
Gospel: then the next thing is, is all good and profitable? O yes, says he, all
is very good and desirable; then the upshot is, I; but is this good for thee?
If your soul answer now, Yes, very good to me; if then thou accept of this, and
wrap and fold thy self in the promises, thou can not wind thy self out of
comfort and assurance to be Christ Jesus; for pray what makes up a match but
the consent of two agreeing: so the consent of two parties agreeing (upon this
message) makes up the match betwixt us and Christ, uniting and knitting us unto
him. There are also (being now incorporated) other means to make us grow up
him, by which time discovers what manner of ingrafting we have had into him:
for we see four or five scions are ingrafted into a stock, yet some of them may
not be incorporated with the stock, but wither. So many are by the Word and
Sacraments admitted as retainers and believers of the promises, who shrink and
hold not out, because they never were thoroughly incorporated into Christ, but
imperfectly joined unto him. But howsoever all that come to life must pass this
way, if they look for sound comfort. And thus much shall suffice for the
witness of our Spirit in Justification.

But the testimony of our spirit goes further, wherein I might show how in
sanctification our spirit says, Lord, prove me, if there be any evil in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting: he loves the Brethren, and desires to fear
God, as Nehemiah pleads, Nehem. 1.11. Be attentive to the prayer of thy
servant, and of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name. This is the warrant
that I am partaker of that inward true washing, and not of that outward only of
the Hog, which being kept clean and in good company will be clean, till there
be an occasion offered of wallowing in the mire again. But when I find that
though there were neither Heaven to reward me, nor Hell to punish me, if
opportunity were offered, yet my heart rises against sin, because of him who
has forbidden it; this is a sure evidence, and testifies that I am a child of
God. This is for the first thing in bringing of a man in, to survey the
promises belonging to Justification and Sanctification, wherein our spirit
seeing it self to have interest, does truly and on sound judgment witness the
assurance of our Salvation. Secondly, when I find Christ drawing me, and
changing my nature, that upon the former reasonings, view, and laying hold of
Christ, making me now have supernatural thoughts and delights, (for this a man
may have;) then certainly my spirit may conclude that I am blessed: for says
the Scripture, Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to come unto
thee. But some like Dreamers do dream of this only, I know not on what grounds,
but do I this waking with my whole soul? does my spirit testify it upon good
grounds, why then I may rest upon it, it is as sure as may be. Thus much is the
testimony of our spirit. Now it is clear how faith is wrought, briefly two
ways, which the Lord uses to bring a man to the survey of those grounds upon
which our spirit does witness.

First, he works upon the understanding.

Secondly, On the will and affections.

It is a strange thing to consider how this work is begun and finished? so that
we may say hereof as the Lord poseth Job in Job 38.37. Who has put wisdom in
the inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the heart? And in another
place, Where is the way where light dwells, and as for darkness where is the
place thereof.

First, God enlightens the understanding with the thunderings of the Law, when
he shows a man such a sight as he could not have believed, and convinces hem
in general, that his estate is not good, that without mercy Hell attends him;
this is a flash of Lightning from Mount Sinai. Secondly, comes a Thunderclap,
laying all down, laying flat the will and affections, dejecting a man; so that
this first secret work of faith is a captivating of the understanding, will and
affections. Now the act both of the understanding and the will is set forth in
this case, Hebr. 11.13. These all died in faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them afar off, were persuaded of them, and embraced
them, etc. In this Scripture is set down the two hands and arms of faith.
First, believing Christ out of sight. Secondly, laying hold and embracing the
promises. They in the old Testament did not receive Christ in the flesh, and so
are said to look afar off: as the Apostle speaks 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom ye having not
seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice,
etc. But the Apostle adds they were persuaded of the promises, and embraced
them. This is the work of the spirit upon the understanding, convincing the
soul of sin, showing there is a remedy, tells the soul all is mavelous true
that God has revealed in his word; and then draws to this conclusion, Christ
came to save sinners, whereof I am chief; therefore he came to save me.

Yet all this while the will may be stubborn and rebellious, and the affections
disordered; therefore here comes in the second arm of faith, not only being
persuaded of the word as a word of truth, but as a good promise of good things
to me: so that here is another degree of the working of the spirit to compel
the will and affections, so sweetly grace having removed that perverseness and
disorder which governed them before. Now this gentle enforcing and often
beating upon the will again and again what the understanding has rightly
conceived, this at last works upon the will, and moves it; for we see the
wickedest man in the world lays hold on the worst things as good and profitable
unto him: so when the best thing is presented to the will as the best thing,
and the necessity thereof urged by dangers ensuing inevitably, if I will not,
then it apprehends that, and says of it, as Peter at the Transfiguration; It is
good for us to be here, and let us build Tabernacles. Hence you see what faith
is in this working, An act of the understanding forcing in that way of
conviction which we mentioned, the will and affections. And thus when the
understanding is captivated, and the will brought to be willing, then the first
act of faith is past. From whence we proceed to the second, which is the
running to the City of Refuge, the application and believing of the promises,
and so to the apprehending of Christ, surveying of the promises belonging to
justification and sanctification, and bringing them home to the soul, from
whence comes the witness of our spirit.

Before we come yet to speak of God's spirit witnessing with our spirit,
because betwixt this work there may be many times, and is an interposing trial,
ere the spirit of God witness with our spirit, we will first touch that. When
our spirit has thus witnessed in Justification and Sanctification, God may now
write bitter things against me, seem to cast me off, and wound me with the
wounds of an enemy, remove the sense of the light of his countenance from me;
what then is to be done? why, yet I will trust in him though he kill me, sure I
am: I have loved and esteemed the words of his mouth more than mine appointed
food, (as Job speaks) I have laid hold of Christ Jesus by the promises, and
believe them: I have desired and do desire to fear him, and yield obedience to
all his Commandments: if I must needs die, I will yet wait on him, and die at
his feet. Look, here is the strength of faith, Christ had faith without
feeling, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? When
sense is mavelous low, then faith is at the strongest. Here we must walk and
live by faith, we shall have sense and sight enough in another world. The
Apostle tells us, Now we walk by faith, and not by sight, and by faith we
stand. As we may see a pattern of the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22. First she
was repulsed as a stranger, yet she goes on, then she was called a dog, she
might now have been discouraged so as to have given over her suit; but see this
is the nature of Faith, to pick comfort out of discouragements; to see out of a
very small hole those things which raise and bring consolation: she catches at
this quickly, Am I a dog? why yet it is well, for the dogs eat the crumbs that
fall from their Master's Table. Thus Faith grew stronger in her, and when this
trial was past, Christ says unto her, O woman, not O dog now, great is thy
faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. And thus have I done with the
testimony of our spirit.

Then from our believing of God in general, believing and applying the
promises, and valourous trustings of God, and restings upon God, taking him at
his word, comes the testimony of Gods spirit witnessing with our spirit that we
are the children of God.

I say this being done, and God having let us see what his strength in us is,
he will not let us stand long in this uncomfortable state, but will come again
and speak peace to us, that we may live in his sight (as if he should say)
what, have thou believed me so on my bare word? Have thou honored me so as to
lay the blame and fault of all my trials on thy self for thy sins, clearing my
Justice in all things? have thou honored me so as to magnify mercy to wait
and hope on it for all this? have thou trusted me so as to remain faithful in
all thy miseries? Then the Lord puts unto the witness of our spirit the seal of
his spirit, as we may read Ephesians. 1.13. Says the Apostle, In whom also ye
trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gopel of your Salvation: in
whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc. Here is the difference
betwixt faith and sense, faith takes hold of general promises, draws then down
to particulars, applies them, and makes them her own, lives and walks by them,
squaring the whole life by them in all things. But sense is another thing; even
that which is mentioned Psalm 35.3. When there is a full report made to the
soul of its assured happiness, Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. When a man
has thus been gathered home by glorifying him, and believing his truth, then
comes a special evidence to the soul with an unwonted joy, and says, I am thy
salvation, which in effect is that which Christ in another place speaks, John
14.21. He that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self unto him. And as it is in the Canticles 1.2. Then he will kiss
us with the kisses of his mouth, so as we shall be able to say, My beloved is
mine, and I am his. When God has heard us cry awhile till we be thoroughly
humbled, then he takes us up into his arms, and dandles us.

So that a meditation of the word being past, a man having viewed his Charter
and the promises, surveying Heaven, the privileges of Believers, and the glory
that is to come; then comes in the Spirit and makes up a third, with which
comes joy unspeakable and glorious in such a measure, that for the present we
can neither wish nor desire any thing else, the soul resting wonderfully
ravished and contented. This cannot, nor shall not always continue, but at
sometimes we shall have it, yet it remains always so, as it can never finally
be taken away, as our Saviors promise is John 16, 22. And ye now therefore
have sorrow, but I will see you again; and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy shall no man take from you. This is the root of all consolation, that God
will not forsake for ever: But will at last come again, and have compassion on
us, according to the multitude of his mercies.

But here some may Object: What? Does the spirit never seal but upon some such
hard trials after the witness of our Spirit?

I answer, the sealing of Gods Spirit with our Spirit is not always tied to
hard foregoing trials immediately, for a man may be surveying Heaven and the
glory to come, or praying earnestly with a tender and melting heart, applying
the promises, and wrestling with God, and at the same time Gods seal many times
may be and is put unto the same. For as the Wind blows where it lists, and
no man discerns the coming thereof: So may the Spirit seal at diverse times,
and upon diverse occasions; yea and why may it not seal in time of some great
suffering for the truth, as we read of the Apostles in 5 Acts 41. Who went away
from the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name.

Lastly for trial we must now see how to distinguish this Testimony of the true
Spirit, from the counterfeit Illumination of the Anabaptists and some Friars
who will have strange sudden Joys, the Devil no question then transforming
himself into an Angel of light unto them. This trial therefore is made by
three things going before, and three things following after, For the things
that go before.

First see that the groundwork be true. If a man be in the faith, and do
believe the word, if upon believing and meditation, there be an opening unto
the knock of Christ at the first, and not a delaying him like the lazy spouse
in the Canticles, if in this case the spirit come and fill the heart with joy,
then all is sure and well, it comes with a promise, for then Christ promised to
enter, but if a man have a dull dead delaying ear, and therewith great
fantastic Joys, he may assure himself the right Spirit has not wrought them,
they are but idle speculations, but if this joy comes upon the surveying of our
Charter and evidences, it is sure we may build upon it.

Secondly, A man must consider, if he has as yet overcome strong passions and
tentations, and passed thorough much hazard and peril for Christ, having been
buffeted with diverse temptations of which he has obtained mastery; for the
seal of Gods Spirit with our Spirit, comes as reward of service done, as you
may see Revelat. 3.17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden
Manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which no man knows saving he that receives it.

Whereby he means he will give a secret love token to the soul, whereby it
rests assured of the unspeakable love of God, and freedom from condemnation.
Now what was this white stone? The Athenians had a custom, when Malefactors
were accused and arraigned, to have black and white stones by them, and so
according to the sentence given, those condemned had a black, and the acquitted
had a white stone given them, unto this the Holy Ghost here alludes, that this
stone, this seal shall assure them of absolute acquittance from condemnation,
and so free them of the cause of fear. Again he tells us Christ will give a man
a new Name, that is, write his Absolution in fair letters in the white stone,
with a clear evidence: As if he should say (when Christ has seen a man
overcoming, and how he has conflicted with tentations, and yet holds out,
pressing for the Crown unto the end of the race.) Christ will come in then and
stroke him on the head, easing him of all his pains and sores with such a sweet
refreshing as is unspeakable. When a man has won it, he shows he then shall
wear it.

Thirdly, if the Spirit seal after Meditation on the word, it is right, the
Apostle says in whom after that ye believed ye were sealed, etc. Examine the
root of this joy, the Spirit gives no comfort but by the word. If a man do
meditate on the promises, and thereupon have a flame of love kindled, this is
sure a man may say, the word did stir it up: if it be Gods Comfort, God will
have his word to make way unto it, some there are who find no sweetness in the
word, what is the cause thereof? Because they chew not the word to imprint it
on their memories and in their heart. If comfort come whilst a man meditating
on the promises does wedge it home upon his heart; it is of God, otherwise it
is counterfeit and false. These are the forerunners to this seal.

In the next place, there are three things that follow after this sealing which
the Spirit leaves behind it. As,

First, (humility) as in his knowledge, so in his sense, it makes a man more
humble. There is naturally in all a certain pride, which must be overcome:
(says the Apostle) What have thou that thou have not Received? But by the
contrary the nearer a man comes unto the glory of God, he finds so much the
more rottenness in his bones, as we see in Job, I have heard of thee (say he
unto God) by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, his inference
is therefore I abhor my self and Repent in dust and ashes.

Secondly, another thing the Spirit leaves behind it (if it seals rightly) is a
prevention of security for time to come. In this case we must look for a new
encounter, a false persuasion makes a man to fall into security because Satan
is then most malicious and busy, a man must stand faster then ever. The Devil
hates them most that are most endued with Gods Image, whom because he cannot
reach he persecutes in his members. And therefore in this case it must be with
us as it was with Elias. 1 Kings 10.8. After such an enlightening a man must now
think that he has a great Journey to go, and so walk on in the strength of
that a long time. The Devil we see watches a man, and when he is at the best
then endeavors to overcome him. As we may see in Adam and Eve, no sooner were
they placed in that estate of Innocence but he tempts them, how much more a man
having a sweeter taste of the Spirit, and less strength now, may he look to be
set upon. And therefore in these feasting days he had need to be more on his
watch and pray more: for we have more given us then Adam had, we have a new
Name given us, a secret Love token, further we see Christ says Rev. 3. Behold I
stand at the door and knock, if any man will open unto me, I will come in and
sup with him and he with me. Now in this case if we be such persons who let our
hearts fly open to let him in, we are safe; as if he should say, if you would
be sure of reconciliation to be at peace with me, sup with me and I will sup
with you: For we know if men who were enemies be once brought to keep company
together and to eat and drink one with another, we use to say all is done and
wrapped up in the table cloth, all old reckonings are taken away, now they are
certainly become friends. But if like the spouse in the Canticles, we let him
stand knocking and will not let him in, we also may have great and sound knocks
and blows our selves before we find him again; as we read it befell the Church
there, whom the Watchmen found, beat and took away her veil, as she was seeking
Christ. If we would have comfort therefore, let us mark the knocking of the
spirit, and not grieve him by withstanding holy motions; and then we shall find
him sealing up our salvation, witnessing with our spirits that we are the
children of God. Men you see wait for the wind, and not the wind for them,
otherwise they may wait long enough before they reach home: so must we watch
the knockings of Christ, and let him in, that his spirit may seal us up to the
day of Redemption.

Thirdly: Another thing the true witness of the spirit leaves behind it is
Love. It makes a man more inflamed with love to God. If a man do not love God
more after such an enlightening it is false and counterfeit, Psalm 116. I will
love thee dearly, O Lord my God, because thou have heard my voice. And says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us. And therefore if we
be obedient Sons, we will show it in loving and honoring our Father more and
more, as the Prophet speaks, Malach. 6. A Son honors his Father, and a
servant his Master, if then I be a Father, where is mine honor? These are the
trials before and after a true illumination to try it from the counterfeit,
which that we may always find and observe in our selves, Let us pray, O Lord
our God, etc.

FINIS.
A TABLE TO THE SERMONS.
A
Acceptance and Affiance two acts of Faith 95 Active Obedience, See Obedience
Aggravations of sin, 37 A temporary Believer desires Christ only in Affliction.
119, 120 Assurance no part of justifying faith, 97. It is attainable, 150. Why
so many Christians want it, 141
B.
BAptism, what it obliges to, 23. It has not its full effect till the day of
our death, ibid. To believe is a hard matter, 22, 96 To believe is our duty, 88
Five words (or Scripture-ways) that God uses to persuade sinners to Believe in
Christ, viz. General Proclamation, 86. Special invitations, 87. Entreaties, 87.
Commands, 88. Threatenings, 89 To Believe is to come to Christ, 111 It is
expressed by Hungring and Thirsting, 113 A Believer's case like the Beggars, 114
A true Believer distinguished from a Temporary, ( 1.) by the ground of his
desires, 119. (2.) by his desiring Grace as well as Mercy, 122. (3.) by his
Love to God. 122 A Believer's privilege. 150
C.
GOd Calls sinners to Christ by five words, 86 Christ's equality with God, 68.
It renders his Humiliation the greater and more meritorious, 68 Christ's
Humiliation; the extent, degrees and particulars of it, 69, 72. Part of his
Humiliation to be God's Servant, 74. He was a Servant on earth in respect of
men, 70. Used and valued at the rate of a bondsman, 71 Christ's sufferings the
more meritorious because voluntary, 74 Christ's Active Obedience in the course
of his life, 74. his Humiliation and sufferings from his Conception to his
death described, 75, etc. Christ's death described in the Accursedness of it,
78. in the shame of it, 78. in the painfulness of it, 78 Christ suffered not
the pains of Hell, proved, 80. yet he suffered in his Soul immediately from
God, 80 Whether Christ takes away all the sins of the world, 83 Christ's being
offered for us, no comfort unless he be offered to us, 66 That Christ died
sufficiently for all, is an improper speech, 66 To receive Christ what, 84.
Christ offered freely, 83, 86. He that has a will to receive Christ has a
warrant to receive him, 86 Christ the proper and immediate Object of justifying
Faith, 93. Christ loved and valued above all by true believers, 96. Christ and
the Cross go together in this life. 96 Christ very compassionaee, 111 Christ is
our peace, 149 To be a Christian indeed is no easy ma^ter, 96 Civil
Righteousness, See Morality. Men deceived by Comparing themselves with others,
20. and with themselves, 20 The Conditions of Faith and Obedience required
hinder not the freedom of Gospel Grace, 80, 92 Confession of sin necessary, and
why, 114 Carnal Confidence as to our spiritual estate dangerous, the vain
grounds of it discovered, 19 Conscience one of the Tormentors in Hell, 62 Peace
of Conscience, See Peace, Conviction necessary to Conversion, 17, 33 Conviction
a work of Gods Spirit. 109 Two hindrances of Conversion, 2 A limited time for
it. 4 Crucifying a Cursed, Shameful, Painful death, 77. The manner of it, 79
The Curse follows sin, 40 The Curses attending an unregenerate man in this
life, 48, etc. The Curses on his Soul, 51 The Curses at his death, 53 Custom in
sin hardens the heart, 12
D.
DAy of grace limited, 45, 15. The folly and danger of neglecting it, 13 Death
the wages of sin, 45. The comprehensiveness of the word Death, 48 Death
terrible, 45. The terribleness of Bodily Death set forth in three particulars,
53, etc. What the first and second Death is, 48 The Death of Christ described,
78, etc. Deathbed Repentance, See Repentance. Deferring Repentance dangerous,
7. The reasons of Carnal men's Deferring R^pentance, 9, etc. The vanity of them,
ibid. Desires after Christ may be stronger in T^mporaries, than in true
believers, 119, 120 The Devil takes possession of those whom God leaves, 43, 44
The Reason of Christians Doubting, 141
E
WHat use to make of the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, 15
Encouragements for sinners to come to Christ, 86 Examination of a man's self.
See Self-Examination.
F.
FAith why required to the receiving of Christ, since he is a free gift, 84
Faith consists not in a man's being persuaded that God is his God, and that his
sins are pardoned, 86, 91. Its proper and immediate Object is not that
forgiveness of sins, but Christ, 93 Faith must have a ground for it out of the
word, 91. What Faith justifies 118, etc. Faith justifies not as a virtue, but
in respect of its object, 93. Faith justifies not as a Habit, but as an act,
132. The Acts of Faith, 94. By what sins the Acts of Faith are hindered, 92. How
those obstructions are removed, ibid. Faith an instrument to receive
Justification, not to procure it, 135, 140 Why Faith chosen for an instrument
of justification, rather than any other grace, 141. A weak Faith justifies as
much as a strong, 140. yet a strong Faith is to be labored for, and why, 140
How Faith alone justifies, 140 Faith may be certainly known. There may be Faith
where there is no feeling, 90, 96, 113 128. Faith strongest when sense least,
147 Encouragements to Faith. 86 Carnal Fear its sinfulness and danger, 56, 57
Men apt to Flatter themselves as to their spiritual estate, 18 Five false
glasses that cause this self- Flattery, 18, etc. Forgiveness of sins not a
distinct thing from Imputation of Righteousness, 85, etc. Forgiveness is
properly of sins past only, 125. It is one continued act, 131. and therefore
may be prayed for by a justified person. ibid. Forgiveness frees from guilt and
punishment, 133 God forsakes none till they forsake him, 44 True believers
forsake all for Christ, 96, 97 Free grace in bringing sinners to Christ, 84 No
Free will to good* 86
G.
TO be given up to our selves a more fearful thing than to be given up to
Satan, 44, 52 The Gospel not seasonable, nor savoury, till the Law has been
preached, 33. How the Gospel differs from the Law, 36 The fullness and freedom
of the Grace of the Gospel not hindered by the conditions of Faith and
Obedience, 84, 85 Guilt of sin taken away in Justification, 133, 134
H.
HArdness of heart a hindrance to Conversion, 2, 3 Hell for whom provided, 56
Hell described, 157, etc. That Christ suffered not the pains of Hell proved, 80
Christians rejoice in Hope, 151 The Humiliation of Christ, v. Christ.
I.
IMputation of Righteousness. See Righteousness. To be given up to
Insensibleness a woeful thing. 52, 53 Joy in the sense of God's love surpasses
all worldly joy, 98. It is attainable, ibid. The reason why many believers are
strangers to it, 98. Some Joy may be in a Temporary, 121. How to try true Joy,
151. Means to get it. 151, 152 Justification, what it signifies, 123. How the
Fathers used the Word, 123. Justification one simple act of God, 124 How we are
said to be justified by Faith, and how by Christ's blood, 93, 134 In what sense
we are Justified by Faith according to Paul, and in what sense by Works
according to James, 124 Impossible to be justified but by imputed
Righteousness, 125, 129, 130. In the instant of Justification, no sins are
remitted but those that are past, 130. A twofold Justification, 127 Why a
justified person may and must pray for the remission of sins past, 131
Justification frees from the punishment and guilt too, 133, 134 Justification
confounded by the Papists with sanctification, 125. The difference between
them, 135, 137 No Justification before Faith, 142 How we are Justified by Faith
alone, 141 Judgment in Scripture sometime taken for Righteousness inherent, 139
How men are deceived in Judging of of their spiritual estate, 18
K.
KNowledge one act of Faith, 95
L.
THe use of the Law, 33, 65, 112 It is necessary to be preached before the
Gospel, 33, 112 Men are under the Law till they come to Christ, 35. how fearful
a thing it is to be under the Law, 35, 36. the difference between the Law, and
the Gospel in three particulars, 36 Love of God twofold, 91. No temporary
believer loves God, 123 To be given up to our own Lusts a more fearful thing,
than to be given up to Satan, 43, 44
M
WAnt of Meditation one cause most believers have so little joy in God, 98
Mistakes in judging our spiritual estates. See Judging. Morality too much
trusted to, 21. It Is insufficient to bring men to heaven, ibid.
N.
NAtural reason not to be trusted to, 21. Too short to convince of sin
thoroughly, 22 Man's condition by Nature described, 25. The Natural man dead in
sin, 29. His best works cannot please God, and why, 29.30 The Curses attending
a Natural man in this world. 49, and:c. Two blows that God gives a Natural man's
soul in this life, the one sensible, 51. the other insensible, 52. The Curses
attending him at Death, 53, and:c.
O.
Christ's active Obedience mixed with his passive, 73 Wherein his active
Obedience consisted, 74, etc. Wherein his passive, 75 Partial Obedience a false
glass to judge our estates by. 21 To design only our Old age for God is
dishonorable to him, 9, 10 Old age most unfit for Repentance, 11, 12 Men apt
to have too good Opinion of themselves, 17. The causes of it, 1^, etc. Men
deceived in judging of their estates by the good Opinions of others, 19
P.
PArtial Obedience see Obedience. Passive Obedience see Obedience. Peace a
fruit of Faith, 143, 147. Why many Christians want the sense of it, 143, 144,
147 The differences between a true and a false Peace, 148 The Causes of a
Carnal Peace, 147, 148 Christ is our Peace, 149 Spirit of Prayer what, 115, 116
1. The Importunity and efficacy of it, 116 Why a person already justified may
and must Pray for the forgiveness of sins past, 130, 131
R.
NAtural Reason see Natural. To Receive Christ what, 85 What Reformation may be
in a natural man, 120, 121 Repentance prevents ruin, 3 Repentance not in our
own power but in Gods gift, 6. The sinfulness of deferring it, 5 Deathbed
Repentance, the hindrances of it, 13. Not to be trusted to, 14. Hard to prove
it sound, 14 Superficial Repentance is vain. 24 Repentance in what respects
necessary to justification, 132 Remission of sin. See Forgiveness. Resting, or
Relying upon God, a proper Act of Faith, 96 Righteousness two fold, 123, 129
Imputative Righteousness what it is, 125, 129. Impossible to be justified
without it, and why, 129, 130
S
Sanctification a distinct thing from Justification, 127 Satan. See Devil. A
difficult thing to be Saved, 22. Sealing a distinct thing from Faith, 137. The
Causes of Security, 149. Self-Examination, necessary to Conversion, 17. a mark
of a sound believer, 128. Self flattery: See flattery. Self-Love, how it
deceives men in judging their estates, 18. Sin continued in, hastens Gods
judgments, 2.3, Sin compared to a weight, 11. to Cords, 12, Sin gets strength
by continuance. 12. The Sinfulness of Sin set forth in 6. considerations,
37.38. etc. The dreadful fruits and consequence of Sin. It pollutes the Soul,
41. It makes men loathsome to God, 42 It brings the Devil into the heart, 43. It
calls for wages, 45. The greatness of Sin, should be no bar against believing
in Christ, 85. No Sin overtops the value of Christ's blood, ibid. Encouragements
for Sinners to come to Christ, 85. Sin not discovered thoroughly but by the
spirit, 109 Sin may be cast away, and yet no true Conversion, 121 Sin is only a
Privation and no positive being. 124 Sins not pardoned before they be
committed, 115. The guilt and punishment of Sin taken away in Justification,
133 Spirit of Bondage what, 109 Spirit of Prayer see Prayer.
T.
A Temporary Faith how far it may go, 117, etc. How to know it from true faith,
120 Temporary Believers desire Christ only in affliction, 120. They do but only
taste of Christ, 121. They desire mercy but not grace, 122. They do nothing out
of love to God, 122 The sinfulness of thoughts, 42 The end of Gods Threatenings.
3
U.
UNregenerate Men See Natural. Our unworthiness should not keep us from coming
to Christ. 84
W.
THe Will wrought by God, as well as the deed, 112. The Will more than the
Deed, 112. How God takes the Will for the deed, 113 He that has a Will to
receive Christ, has a warrant to receive him, 86 God alone enclines the Will
to receive Christ, ibid. A woeful thing to be suffered by God to have our own
Wills in this world, 66 Our Wills must be crossed here, or for ever hereafter.
ibid. The Willingness of Christ's sufferings rendered them the more meritorious,
74 The Word presented to our faith under a double respect, viz. (1) as a true
Word, 94. (2) as a good Word, 95 Works spiritually good cannot be performed by
an unregenerate man, and why, 29, 30 In what sense we are said by James to be
justified by Works, 124 Wrath a Consequence of sin, 40
Y.
YOuth the fittest time to Repent and break off sin in. 9, 10, 13,
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Nathanael Ranew, at the
King's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio's.
THe Works of Josephus, with great diligence revised and amended according to
the excellent French Translation of Monsieur Arnauld d' Andilly. Also the
Embassy of Philo Judaeus to the Emperor Caius Caligula, never translated
before; with the references of the Scripture. A new Map of the Holy Land, and
diverse Copper Plates serving to illustrate the History.

The Principles of Christian Religion; with a large Body of Divinity, or the
Sum and Substance of Christian Religion, Catechistically propounded and
explained by way of Question and Answer, Methodically and Familiarly handled.
Whereunto is added Immanuel, or the Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of
God. Composed by the Right Reverend James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh. To
which is now added twenty Sermons, preached at Oxford before his Majesty, and
elsewhere. With the life of the Author, containing many remarkable passages;
and an Alphabetical Table, never before extant.

Quarto's.
The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses wherein is showed, how
the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God, are Glorified in
that great and blessed Work: By William Bates, D. D.

Of Wisdom, three Books written in French; by Peter Charron, Doctor of Law in
Paris: Translated by Sampson Lennard.

A Sermon preached at High Wickham, in the County of Bucks: wherein the
Minister's Duty is Remembered, their Dignity Asserted, Man's Reconciliation with
God urged. By Samuel Gardner, Chaplain to his Majesty.

The Norfolk Feast: A Sermon Preached at St. Dunstan's, being the day of the
Anniversary Feast for that County. By William Smythes, Minister in that County.

The Speech of Sir Audly Mervyn Knight, His Majesty's prime Sergeant of Law,
and Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland: delivered to his Grace the Duke
of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the 13th. of Febr. 1662. in the Presence
Chamber in the Castle in Dublin.

Octavo's.
A Worthy Communicant; or a Treatise showing the due order of Receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By Jeremiah Dyke.

The Way to Salvation, or the Doctrine of Life Eternal: laid down from several
Texts of Scripture, opened and applied; fitted to the capacity of the meanest
Christian, and useful for all Families. By John Hieron.

Solitude Improved by Divine Meditation; or a Treatise proving the Duty, and
demonstrating the Necessity, Excellency, Usefulness, Nature, Kinds and
Requisites of Divine Meditation. First intended for a Person of Honor, and now
published for general use. By Nathanael Ranew some time Minister of Felsted in
Essex.

Moral Virtues Baptized Christian, or the Necessity of Morality among
Christians. By William Shelton of Bursted Magna in Essex.

The Burning of London in the Year 1666. Commemorated and Improved in an
hundred and ten Meditations and Contemplations. By Samuel Roll Minister of the
Gospel, and sometime Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

Natural Theology, or the Knowledge of God from the Works of Creation:
Accommodated and Improved to the Service of Christianity. By Matthew Barker.

Christ and the Covenant, the Work and Way of Meditation; God's Return to the
Soul or Nation, together with his preventing Mercy. Delivered in Ten Sermons by
William Bridge, sometime Minister of Yarmouth.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ: Delivered in two Sermons by
the same Author.

The Vanity of the World. By Ezekiel Hopkins.

The Soul's Ascension in the state of Separation. By Isaac Loeffs.

An Explication of the Assemblies lesser Catechism. By Samuel Winney.

Iter Boreale, with other select Poems: Being an exact Collection of all
hitherto extant; and some added, never before Printed. By Robert Wild, D. D.

A Synopsis of Quakerism, or a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the
Quakers. By Thomas Danson.

A Poetical Meditation; wherein the Usefulness, Excellency, and several
perfections of Holy Scripture are briefly hinted. By John Clark.

Twelves.
Correction, Instruction, or a Treatise of Affliction: first Conceived by way
of Private Meditation, afterward digested into certain Sermons, and now
published for the help and Comfort of humble suffering Christians. By Thomas
Case.

The Poor doubting Christian drawn to Christ. By Thomas Hooker of New England.

Ovid's Metamorphosis, in English Verse. By George Sandy's.

Aesop's Fables, in Prose, with Cuts.

The Principles of Christian Religion, with a brief Method of the Doctrine
thereof. Corrected and Enlarged by the Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Armagh.

A plain Discourse of the Mercy of having Godly Parents, with the Duties of
Children that have such Parents. By M. Goddard.

(...), Novum Testamentum; huic editioni omnia Difficiliorum vocabulorum
Themata, quae in Georgii Passoris Lexico Gramatice resolvuntur in Margin
apposuit Carolus Hoole; in eorum scilicet gratiam qui primi Graecae Linguae
Tyrocinia faciunt.


