A Geographicall and Historical DISQVISITION, TOUCHING The ASIA properly so
called, The Lydian Asia (which is the Asia so often mentioned in the New
Testament) the Proconsular Asia and the Asian, Diocese. BY JAMES USSHER,
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all IRELAND.

ACT. 19.10. All they which dwelt in ASIA, heard the Word of the LORD JESUS,
both Jews and Greeks. 1 CORINTHIANS. 16.19. The Churches of ASIA salute you.
REVEL. 1.4. JOHN to the seven Churches in ASIA. Grace be unto you and peace.
OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL, 1643.

To the READER.
FInding much perplexity in the several acceptions of the name of Asia, even
taken in the stricter sense, for that which was but a Member of Asia the less:
for mine own better satisfaction, in reading as well of the new Testament as
of other Ecclesiastical and Civil Histories; I endeavored to try whether, by
a fit distinction of places and times, some help might be found for the
resolving of those difficulties. Where I learned withal, both how wide he
should err in matters of this kind, that would trust only to Ptolemies
Tables, without further consulting with the ancienter Historians and
Geographers; and what use might be made of the Imperial Laws, not only for the
furtherance of Civil prudence, but also for the bettering of our knowledge in
other parts of good learning. Which brief Observations of mine, now the
second time revised, enlarged, and much amended (the former Edition being but
suddenly thought upon) I here again present to the favorable view, and submit
to the riper judgment of the more intelligent Reader.

Trist. lib. 1. e. leg. 6.
Et veniam pro laud peto: laudatus abunde,
Non fastiditus si tibi, Lector, ero.
A DISQVISITION, TOUCHING The ASIA properly so called, the Lydian Asia, the
Proconsular Asia, and the Asian Diocese.
CHAP. I. Of the Asia which by the Romans was first properly so called; and
the several members thereof.
AS the lesser Asia (now called Natolia or Anatolia) was a part of the great,
and Asia properly so called a part of that lesser; so the Lydian Asia was a
parcel of that Asia which was properly so called. For the fuller understanding
whereof, we are to call to mind, that the Romans having possessed themselves
of the Countries which had formerly belonged unto the Pergamen Kings, reduced
them into the form of a Province; which they called, (...). Strabo, Geograph.
lib. 13 page 624. ( edit. Graeco. latin. an 1620)
by the name of the great Continent, Asia.

This is by Cicero Namque, ^t opinor, Asia vestra constat ex Phrygia, Mysia,
Ca^ia, Lydia. Cicero, in orat. pro Flacco: ad ipsos Asianos ve^ba facien^.
distinguished into four members: Phrygia, Mysia, Caria, and Lydia. The first
whereof is by Dionysius Afer, Strabo, lib. 12 page 571.
Strabo, Ptolem, Geograph. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Ptolemy and others, divided into the greater and the lesser Phrygia. Within
the greater those two Phrygia's were comprehended, which in after ages, were
known by the names of Pacatiana and Salutaris: the former of which (mentioned
in the subscription, added by the Greek Church unto the former Epistle of S.
Paul unto Timothy) being the more Southern part of the greater Phrygia, is
thought to have received that appellation from Pacatianus: who in the days of
Constantine the great, bore the office of the Cod. Theod. lib. 10. tit 15. de
advocato fisci. l. 2.
Prefect of the Praetorium of the East, having not long before been at the
same time Ibid. l 3. tit. 5. de sponsal. l. 4.
both Consul and Prefect of the City of Constantinople; and (as it may seem)
diverse years before that, began his preferments here in the West, with the
Vid. Cod Theod. l 11. tit 7 de exact. leg. 2. ad Pacatianum Vicarium
Britannia^um.
Lieutenantship of our Britain.

Of the latter, there is mention made in a certain L. Cum appellatio. C. de
appellationib.
Constitution of Constantius the son of Constantine, and in the Subscriptions
both of the fourth general Council held at Chalcedon, and of the fifth held
at Constantinople; in which last Severus Episcopus Synnadensium, Metropoleos
Phrygiae Salutaris. Council. 5. Collat. 8.
Severus subscribeth as Bishop of Synnada, the Metropolis of Phrygia Salutaris,
(however Socrat. Histor. Ecclesiastic. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Socrates, by some lapse of memory, and Nicephor. Callist. histor. lib. 14.
cap. 11.
Nicephorus blindly following him, have made this to be a City of Phrygia
Pacatiana:) as in that of Chalcedon, (...). Council Chalcedon. Act. 16.
Abercius, as Bishop of Hierapolis, a City of the same Phrygia Salutaris.
Where it may be noted; first, that besides that more known Hierapolis in
Phrygia Pacatiana (of which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter) there
was another of less note in Phrygia Salutaris: the one whereof in Plin.
Histor. natural. l. 5. c. 29. and 30.
Pli^yes days (before this new distinction of the parts of the greater Phrygia
was brought in) belonged to the Laodicean, the other to the Pergamen
jurisdiction. Secondly, that before this Abercius, who was present at the
Council of Chalcedon; there were two other Bishops of the same name, who
succeeded one another in the same See, about the time of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, whose Episcopal seat is by (...). and post. (...).
Metaphrast. in Actis Abercii, October. 22. ( M^. in Bibl. other. Colleg. Corp.
Christi, Oxon.)
Symeon Metaphrastes placed in that little Phrygia, whereof Synnada was the
Metropolis: whereas the other Greeks more consonantly to the truth do relate,
that (...). Menaun^^ Graec. MS. O^tob. 22.
Abercius was Bishop of Hierapolis in Phrygia Salutaris.

For the greater Phrygia (whereof this Salutaris was a part) both by the
forenamed Geographers, and by (...). Diodor. Sic lib. 18.
Diodorus Siculus and In Asia Phrygiam utramque, alteram ad Hellespontum,
majorem alier^m vocant, Live. lib. 38.
Livy, is opposed to that which lay upon the Hellespont: and had in it the
Cities of Ilium (called by Herodot. lib. 7.
Herodotus, the Pergamus of Priamus, upon the river Seamander) and of Troas;
which is often mentioned in the Act 16.8, 11. et 20 ^, 6. 2 ^or. 2 12. 2 Timothy
4.12.
New Testament, and by others named T^oi^, Antigonia dicta, nunc Alexand^ a
Col^nia Rom Pl^n. lib. 5. cap 30
Antigonia, Alexandria, and the (...) Strabo, lib. 13. page 581. Ptolem lib. 5.
c^p. 2. Galen. de simplic medic^m facul^. lib. 9.
Alexandrian Troas: from whence the whole Country retained the name of Troas;
as well as the other appellations of Strabo, lib. 2 page 129 and lib. 12. page
563.571.
Epictetus, the Hellespontian and the lesser Phrygia: beginning northward, Vid.
Strabon. li. 13. page 582, 583, 586.
according to Homer, from the river Aesepus, or Ibid page 583. init:
according to Damastes from the city Parium, not far from thence, and,
according to both, extending it self from thence, along the water si^e,
Southward unto the Promontory Lectum.

Betwixt this lesser and the greater Phrygia was Mysia interposed: the borders
of each other being so confusedly intermingled together, Id. lib. 12. p^g. 571,
572.
that it was a very difficult matter to distinguish them. And as the lesser
Phrygia was called the Hellespontian, and a difference thereby put betwixt it
and the greater: so this Mysia likewise, being in the country (although
further removed from the Fretum or Strait) of Hellespont, had the like name of
the Hellespontian Mysia given unto it; thereby to discriminate it from the
^strian De qua Macer l C. est capi cudus, in D. de offic. adsessor l. 3. and
Ulp^anus in D. de captiv. and postlimin. and redempt. l. 9 Vid. et Strabonem,
l. 12 p^g. 57l. ex Art midoro
Mysia or Moesia: the Hellespontian Mysia and Phrygia jointly making up that
entire Province, which in the division of the Empire made by Constantine
(because it was settled under the government of a Noritia utriusque Imperii.
Consular President) had the name of the L Offic. H^llesponti. C. de offic.
com. sacr. patrimon. vel potius (...) proconsulis and legati.
Consular Hellespont bestowed upon it.

Thus Galen, having occasion to prescribe the use of Mysian Wine, declares
that he meant thereby, (...). Galen. de sanitat, tuend. lib. ^.
not that which was from the Mysia about the river Ister, but from that which
is named the Hellespontian; which (says he) is about our Asia, and
conterminous unto Pergamus. For that the greater Mysia reached Southward unto
the Pergamen Territory, and the plain of Caicus, is by (...), Herodot. lib.
6.. 28. (...). Id. lib. 7. 42.
Herodotus and (...). S^rabo. lib. 12. page 576. (...). Id ibid. page 571.
(...), etc. Ibid. Et add ex Pausama in Atticis ( page 4. et 10.) ips^m u^bem
Pergamenam d^ctam fuisse olim Teuthraniam.
Strabo in like sort testified: as it reached from thence Northward unto the
Mountain Olympus; which from the Mysians was called Mons Olympus, Moesius (
al. Mysius) dictus; civitas Oly^pena. Plin lib. 5. cap. 32.
Moesius or Mysius, and the (...). Herodot. lib. 7.. 74. vid. Strabon. lib. 12.
page 571.574.576
Mysians from it again received the surname of Olympeni. that which (...) Iem.
lib 5. cap 2.
Ptolemy calls the lesser Mysia (the chief City whereof was Cyzicus)
reaching from that mountain westward unto the river Aesepus, and there joining
with the Northern part of Epictetus or the lesser Phrygia.

Caria was parted from Lydia by the winding currents Maeander: from the
receiving of the river Lycus into it, unto the emptying of it self into the
Myrtoan sea. For howsoever Ptolemy takes all that lies betwixt this and the
river Cayster from Lydia, and adds it unto Caria: yet (...). Strab. lib. 12*
page 517.
Strabo makes Maeander to be the limit betwixt those Provinces; and as well by
Scylax Caryandensis in his Periplus, as by Lydia perfusa flexu^ si amnti
Maeandr^ recursibus, super Ioniam proced^r.. Plin l. 5. cap. 29*
Pliny, (...). Maxim. Tyr. disse^t. 38.
Maximus Tyrius, and (...). Stephan. de Vrbib.
Stephanus Byzantinus, it is reckoned among the rivers of Lydia.

Lydia contained, beside the inland region, commonly known by that name, the
adjoining countries also, as well of Ionia, lying on the Sea side betwixt the
mouths of the river Hermus and Maeander, as of Aeolis, reaching up from
Hermus, either unto the River Caicus as Ptolemy, or, as Strabo would have it,
unto the very Promontory of Lectum, the ancient bound betwixt Troas and the
Seacoast of the greater Mysia. For that Mysia reached unto the mouth of
Caieus, is acknowledged not only by Ptolem^ lib. 5. cap. 2. cujus Graecus tamen
textus in mari^ima hujus orae descriptione manifesto librarii errore, (...)
nomen habe^, pro (...).
Ptolemy, but also by Strabo. lib. 12. page 571.
Strabo himself: and yet, because that in his time it was possessed by the
Aeolians, he declares withal, that (...). Id. lib. 13. page 586.
Aeolis, then properly so called, did extend from Hermus unto Lectum, and that
(...). Id. i^id. page 605.
when one turns about from Lectum, the renowned Cities of the Aeolians, and
the Adramyttian bay, do receive him.

So does Pliny likewise affirm, that Promontariam Lecton disterminan^ Ae^lida
and Troada. Plin. lib. 5: ^ap. 30.
the promontory Lectum did disterminate Aeolis and Troas: although elsewhere,
following other Authors, he places Assos (the first City that occurreth after
the doubling of the Cape of Lectum, and whereof there is mention made Acts
20.13, 14.) in Id. lib. 2. cap. 96. and lib. 36. cap. 17.
Troas, as Ptolemy does. But (...). Strab. lib. 15 page 7^5.
Strabo, and (...). Id. lib. 13. page 610.
Hellanicus before him, makes it a city of Aeolis: as Stephanus Byzantinus
after them, where he says, it (...). Stephan. in (...).
is a City of Aeolis about the Hellespont: from which the authority of
Alexander Cornelius (subjoyned hereunto by him) saying that Assos in Mysia was
a Colony of the Mitylenaeans (in the Island of Lesbus, which lay next opposite
unto this Mysia) swarveth little or nothing at all: Mysia, after it came unto
the possession of the Aeolians, having gotten the name of Aeolis; as by Ex quo
ab Aeolus incoli coepit, Aeolis facta. Pompon. M^la. ^ib. 1. cap. 18.
Mela and Aeolis proxima est, quondam Mysia appellata. Plin. lib. 5 cap. 30.
Pliny is fully testified. The not observing whereof caused Stephanus to make
the Assos of Aeolis a different city from the Assos of Mysia near unto
Antandrus: for so do I read the place in him; (...). and not, as the vulgar
books have it; (...).

The principal sea-townes of this part of Mysia or Aeolis (...). Strabo, lib.
13. p^g. 581.
from Lectum to Caicus, over against Lesbus, are by Strabo reckoned in this
order: Assos, Adramyttium, Atarnus and Pitane. That Adramyttium (mentioned in
Act. 27.2) was (...). Stephan.
a city of that Mysia which is by Caicus, and (...). Id.
Atarna a city betwixt Mysia and Lydia, near unto Lesbus; and (...). Id.
Pitane a city of Aeolis, is affirmed by Stephanus. So as, reckoning Atarna it
self (as (...). He^odot. lib. 1.
Herodotus does) among the cities of Mysia, the rest of Aeolis downward will
fall within the limits of Lydia. wherein we find, that as well (...). Id. ibid.
Phocaea (which is within Aeolis) as Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedus, Teos and
Clazomenae, the most known cities of Ionia, are expressly placed by Herodotus.
Neither is there any reason to be given, why Cicero in his enumeration of the
countries of Asia, should wholly praetermit the mention of Aeolis and Ionia;
but that he comprehended them under the names of Mysia and Lydia: in which we
see Adramyttium, and all the other cities downward unto Ephesus, to be placed
by Scylax in his Periplus.

CHAP. II. Of the Lydian Asia, and the seven Metropoliticall Cities thereof.
THat heretofore Lydia was called Meonia, and the Lydians termed Meonians: we
read in (...). Herodot. lib 7. 74. (...). Id. lib. 1.. 7.
Herodotus, (...). Diodor. l^b. 4.
Diodorus Siculus, (...). Dionys. in Pe^^egesi.
Dionysius Afer, (...) Strabo. lib. 13 page 586.
Strabo, Lydia, Mae^nia ante app^llata. Plin. lib. 5. ca^. 29.
Pliny, (...). Stephan. and vice verta, in G^aecolati^o Cyrilli Glossario.
(...), Maeonia.
Stephanus Byzantinus, and others. And that (...). S^r^bo, lib 13. page 6^7.
Meonia was in the days of Homer named Asia, and the inhabitants thereof by
Callinus (another Poet, Id lib. 14. ^ag. 648.
elder then Archilochus) in the Ionian dialect termed for (...), for (...) or
Asians; we find to have been the opinion of Demetrius Scepsius, Id. lib. 13.
page 609.
who was equal in time unto Crates and Aristarchus the Grammarian. Whereunto
we may also add that of Euripides, in his Bacchae; (...). together with that
which is related by (...). Ste^h^n. de V^b^b. in (...).
Stephanus Byzantinus, (...). S^d in (...), and Etymologic. in (...).
Suidas, and the great Etymologist; that upon this Tmolus there was a city of
Lydia seated, which had the name of Asia: and by Strabo (...) (leg. (...).
S^^abo, lib. 13. page 629. (...). Id. lib. 14. page 650. (...). Ver. Scholiast.
Aristophanis, in Ach^rnen.
, that betwixt the two Lydian mountains of Tmolus and Messogis lay the great
Caystrian plain, which Homer calls the Asian field, in that verse of the
second of the Iliads; (...). to which Virgil also has relation in that of the
first of his Georgicks; -- and quae Asia circum
Dulcibus in stagnis rimantur prata Caystri:
and in the seventh of the Aeneids; -- sonat amnis, and Asia long
Pulsa palus.
Whereunto the testimony of Eunapius may be referred likewise, who speaking of
that admirably learned Gentlewoman Sosipatra, says that (...). Eunap. Sardian.
in vita Aed^sii,
she was of that Asia which is about Ephesus, where the river Cayster running
through the country, gives his name to the plain by which it passes.

It is further also reported by Strabo, that (...) Strabo, lib. 14. page 650.
(...). E^^^ath. in Iliad. ^ page 254. edit. Roman.
in this plain near unto the banks of the river Cayster, the inhabitants used
to show the Chapels dedicated to the honor of Caystrius, and of one Asias;
whom the Etymologist (...) Etymologic* magr. in (...).
notes to have been sometime King of Lydia; and to have given the name unto
this Asian field. ^r, as (...). Herodot. lib. 4.. 45.
the Lydians themselves would have it, to the whole land of Asia: alleging
further, that from this Asias, the son of Cotys, the son of Maneus, they
had a tribe in their head-city Sardis, which they called (...), as is recorded
by Herodotus.

Whether (...). Steph^n. de Urbib. in (...).
from this Asias the continent of Asia did take his denomination, or from the
forementioned city of Lydia, or from Asia the wife of Prometheus, or from some
other original; Stephanus Byzantinus leaves us to enquire. But beside that
the first vowell in Homers Asia is long, and in the greater Asia (which (...).
Id. ibid.
Stephanus acknowledges him to have been ignorant of) is of a Yet it is long
in (...): whereof Stephanus, in (...). for so the place is to be restored out
of Dionysius: whose verse this is, in his Periegesis. as those others also of
the river Tanais. (...). So Ovid likewise lib. 5. Metamorphos. Iam super
Europen sublimis and Asida terram. and lib. 9. of Miletus -- et in Asideterra
Moenta constituis.
short quantity: no man can doubt, but the derivation of the name of Asia from
a Lydian city, or from a Lydian King and Heroes, is far more properly
applyable to Lydia it self, then to the whole continent either of the greater
or the lesser Asia. For that Lydia was (...). Scholiast. Apollon. Argonaut.
lib. 2.
formerly called Asia, is directly affirmed by the ancient Scholiast of
Apollonius Rhodius: and that the Asia mentioned in the New Testament was
comprehended within the bounds of Lydia (containing in it, according to the
above confirmed description, Aeolis and Ionia) will quickly appear to those
that carefully compare the Acts of the Apostles and the book of the Revelation
together.

In the 16. chapter of the Acts, the journey of S. Paul and his company is by
S. Luke thus described. When they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of
Galatia, and were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in ASIA; after
they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit
suffered them not. And they passing by Mysia, came down to Troas. Where it may
be observed, that the greater Phrygia, (through which they passed into Galatia)
and Mysia Olympena (which was next adjoining unto Bithynia) and Hellespont
wherein Troas was situated, being all of them parcells of the Asia by the
Romans properly so called; are yet expressly distinguished from Asia, in this
more strict sense so denominated as Caria likewise, wherein Miletus stood,
appears to be by what we read in Acts 20.16, 17.

And as these are thus exempted by S. Luke; so the rest that remain of the
proper Asia, together with the seven Churches of Asia mentioned in the
Revelation of S. John, a^e all of them comprehended within the limits of that
Lydian Asia, whereof we have spoken. For, that Pergamus was a city of Lydia, is
plainly affirmed by (...). Xenoph. de exped. Cyri. lib. 7.
Xenophon: to whom Aristotle also may be added, in his book (...), where he
speaks of a war sometime raised (...). That Smyrna at first was poss^ssed
by (...). Aristot. lib. 3. de Poetica: apud Pluta^ch. in lib. de vita and poesi
Homeri.
the Lydians, is testified also by Aristotle, treating of the birth and
education of Homer: who seems to have had the surname of Maeonius, either
from Maeon the king, or Maeonia the country it self of Lydia; among the
cities whereof, Smyrna (the most likely place of that famous Poets nativitie)
is by Scylax Caryandensis reckoned. as Ephesus likewise is, both by him and
Herodot. histor. lib. 1.
Herodotus; Sardis, Philadelphia and Thyatyra by Ptolemy: and (...). St^phan.
de Vrbib. in (...).
Laodicea by Stephanus Byzantinus.

Yet is Laodicea by Ptolemy referred unto Caria, and by others unto Phrygia.
The reason of which difference we may lea^ne from Strabo, (...). Strabo, lib.
13. page 628.
who shows that the confines of Phrygia, Lydia and Caria were so coincident,
that they were hardly to be discern^d the one from the other. which is the
cause, that though Id. lib* 12. page* 576. and lib. 14. page 663.
he does reckon Laodicea among the cities of Phrygia; yet Hierapolis, which was
(...). I^. lib. 13. page ^29.
opposite to it (toward the East) is by Stephanus (...). Steph^n. de Vrbib.
said to be seated betwixt Phrygia and Lydia: it by that means being placed
in, and Laodicea without the borders of Phrygia.

This also does Strabo assign for another reason, (...). Strab. lib. 13. page
629.
why the bounds of the Provinces hereabout were confounded: because that the
Romans did not divide these places by the nations; but ordered them after
another manner, according to the circuits wherein they kept their Courts, and
exercised judicature. Five of these tribunals were seated in the cities of
Plin. lib. 5. cap 29. and 30.
Laodicea, Sardis, Smyrna, Ephesus, and Pergamus: Philadelphia was within the
Sardian, and Thyatira within the Pergamen circuit- although that (...). Ptolem.
l. 5. c. 2
Thyatira was a Metropolis also of it self, as Ptolemy declares in his
Geography; and in all likelihood Philadelphia also, the only city remaining of
those seven famous ones singled out, as the seats of the most eminent Churches
of all Asia, in the book of the Revelation.

For that Philadelphia was herein no whit inferior unto Thyatira; may easily
be gathered by the respect which it still retained, after that Lydia (as we
shall hear) was separated from the Proconsular Asia, and each Province
ordinarily permitted to have but one Metropolis. For Sardis being then the
prime city of Lydia, the next in account after it was Philadelphia, another
also being placed betwixt it and Thyatira: as appears by the order of them
constantly observed as well in the Hieroclis. Notit. Orientalis Imperii; in
Appendice Geographiae sacrae Caroli a Sancto Paulo ed^t. Paris. an. 1641. page
29.
Civil as in the Ordo M^tropolitar. ibid. page 13, and 45. and in to^o 1.
Juri^ Graeco^ Roman^. page 90.
Ecclesiastical Catalogues of the cities belonging to that Province. Whereupon
in the Acts of the Constantinopolitan Council held under Mena^, we see that
Eustathius subscribeth himself, in express terms, (...). Council.
Constantinop. sub Mena, Act. 5.
Bishop of the METROPOLIS of the Philadelphians, of the Province of the Lydians.

CHAP, III. Of the Proconsular Asia, and the several alterations of the limits
thereof.
I Come now from the Lydian Asia, and the seven Metropoliticall cities thereof,
unto the Proconsular: which, according to the condition of (...). Strabo, lib.
17^ page 840.
other Provinces, had in several times it is several alterations. For in the
distribution of the Empire made by Augustus Caesar, it appears to have been
the same with that former Asia of the Romans, which we described in the
beginning out of Cicero; but in that which was afterward brought in by
Constantine, to have been confined within the bounds of the Lydian Asia. the
greatness of the one above the other being sufficiently intimated in those
verses of Statius, touching the year of the Proconsulship of Vectius Bolanus;
who, before that, had been Proconsul here in Britain: Stat. lib. 5. Sylvar.
in Pro^reptico ad Crispin.
-- quantusque potentes
Mill urbes Asia sortito rexerit anno;
Imperium mulcente Toga.


That same year, Dio, lib. 53.
wherein Caesar obtained first the surname of Augustus, himself being then the
seventh, and Marcus Agrippa (who married his sisters daughter) the third time
Consul; was this political division of the Provinces ordered by him: far
diffe^ing from that Geographicall partition of countries delivered by his
nephew Agrippa. whom Solin. Polyhist. cap. ^3.
Solinus following in his Geography, begins Asia from Telmessus of Lycia and
the Carpathian bay: and boundeth it on the East with Lycia (or Lycaonia, as
Plin. lib. 5. cap. 27.
Pliny has it) and Phrygia; on the West with the Aegean, on the South with the
Egyptian sea, and on the North with Paphlagonia. which being made the limit of
Agrippa's Asia on that side (and not Pontus or Propontis) does necessarily show
that Pontus and Bit^ynia we^e included therein. whereas it plainly appears by
Strabo and Dio, that in Augustus his platform these were a province by
themselves. Strabo, lib. 17. page 8^0.
they being made by him a Praetorian province, and Asia a Consular; containing
in it (as Strabo witnesses) all that Asia which was on this side the river
Halys and the mountain Taurus, excepting Galatia, the countries that had been
lately under the government of King Amyntas, together with the province of
Bithynia and that of Pontus and Propontis adjoined thereunto. All which being
deducted; those countries will remain, which by Onuphr. Panum. Commentar.
Reipubl. Roman. lib. 3. page 378. (edit. Francof^rt. an. 1597.)
Onuphrius are assigned unto Augustus his Proconsular Asia: to wit, Lydia,
Ionia, Caria, Mysia, Phrygia, and the Proconsular Hellespont. In provincia Asia
duae sunt juris I^alic^, Tria^ and Parium. l. In L^si ^an. D. de Censib.
the two Roman colonyes whereof, Troas and Parium, are by Paulus the Lawyer
particularly noted to have been seated in the province Asia.

And this is it indeed, which Ptolemy proposes unto us, as that which was
accounted (...). Ptolem. lib. 5. cap. 2.
the Asia properly so called in the days of Antoninus Pius; who himself, as
Jul. Capitolin. in Antonino Pio.
Proconsul, had sometime Provinciae Asia praerat. Marcianus ^ C. in L, D^ vus
Hadrian. D. de custod. and exhibit, reor.
governed this province. Where, in the Breviat of the first Table of Asia, it
is not to be passed by, that mention is made of (...). ad sin. libri 8.
Geograph Ptolem.
Asia properly so called, wherein was Phrygia. For howsoever that were no part,
either of Agrippa's Asia (from whence by Asiam excipit Ph^ygia. Solin*
Polyhist. cap. 43.
Solinus it is excluded) or yet of the Lydian Asia (from which in Act. 2.9, 10.
and 16.6.
the Acts of the Apostles, as also in (...). E^seb. lib. 5. hist. (...).
the Letters of the Church of Vienna and Lions, and Pacem Ecclesi^^ Asiae and
Phrygiae inferentem. Tertullian.
Tertullians book against Praxeas, it is clearly distinguished:) yet
Hierapolis, the chief city thereof, by Polycrat. in epistolia Synodica, apud
Eusebius: l^b. 5. hist. (...).
Polycrates, and Ulpian. in D. de Aqua quotidian. and aest^v. l. 1.. 13.
Vlpian, and Julius Africanus (as far as we have him in (...). Eusebius. Chron
ad an. 10. Neronis.
Eusebius his Chronicle) is placed in Asia; as being contained within the
limits assigned by Strabo to the Proconsular Asia, as it stood in the time of
Augustus and the heathen Emperors after him.

But in the days of Constantine, and the Christian Emperors that succeeded
him, the circuit thereof was much abbridged, and a distinction brought in
betwixt the Proconsular Asia and the Asian Diocese; the one being put under the
command of the Proconsul of Asia, the other under the government of the
Vicarius of Asia or the Asian Diocese: for so in the Imperial Constitutions is
he indifferently nominated. Thus in the CCCLXV. year of our Lord, two
Rescripts were given out by the Emperor Valens: the one Cod. Theodos. lib. 5
tit. 11. Ne c^lon. insciodom.
dated the 27th. of January (in the latter end of the first year of his
reign) to Clearchus the Vicarius Asiae; the other, Ibid. lib. 12. tit. 1. de
Decu^ionib. leg. 69.
the 6th of October following, unto his successor Auxonius, under the style of
Vicarius dioeceseos Asianae. This Auxonius G^id. Pancirol. Commentar. in Notit.
Orient. I^ per. cap. 122. Vid. and Jo^. Scaliger. Ausonian. lection. lib. 2,
cap. 17.
some do imagine to be the same with Ausonius the Poet: without all ground of
authority or reason, removing him out of the Western into the Eastern empire.
But of his predecessor we are sure, that he is the same Clearchus, whom
Eunapius mentions to have been in his time preferred unto this government;
before he was by Valens promoted afterward unto the Proconsulship of the other
Asia.

Concerning this first preferment of his he declares, that he was made (...).
Eunap. in vita Maxim^.
governor of all that Asia, the jurisdiction whereof did extend from
Hellespont, through Lydia and Pisidia, unto Pamphylia. which is as much to say
(if my second thoughts do not here deceive me) as that it contained in it the
Consular Hellespont and Phrygia Salutaris adjoining thereunto; together with
Phrygia Pacatiana, descending from thence downward, by Lydia on the west side
and Pisidia on the east, unto Pamphylia. For howsoever in the alterations that
followed this (as we shall hear anon) the greater part of the inland Lydia
was brought under this Vicarian regiment (as, not Pisidia and Pamphylia only,
but Lycaonia, Lycia and Caria also were:) yet that in Clearchus his time this
part of Lydia was parcel of the Proconsular Asia, is sufficiently intimated by
Eunapius, extending it unto Tmolus (...). Strabo. lib. 13 page 629
a mountain placed in the Eastern border of Lydia.

For touching the advancement of Clearchus unto the Proconsular government he
writes thus. (...). Eunap. in vita Maxim.
Things prosperously succeeding, Valens was wonderfully well pleased with
Clearchus, and was so far from depriving him of his former charge, that he
advanced him unto a greater government; appointing him to be Proconsul of Asia
now properly so called. This from Pergamus downwards taking the seacoast into
it, toward the adjacent continent reaches unto Caria; the mountain Tmolus
circumscribing that of it which belongs unto Lydia. Of the governments it is
the most honorable; and is not subject to the Praefectus Praetorio. saving
that now, by reason of these late commotions, (...).

(...). Euripid. in Bacchis.


all things are again confounded and disturbed.

Where touching the limits of this Asia NOW properly so called, it may be
noted; that as Galen (in the place before alleged) makes the Hellespontian
Mysia (which in the old dist^ibution of the Empire was within the precinct of
the jurisdiction of the then Proconsular Asia) to be conterminous unto
Pergamus, where he himself was borne: so Eunapius from the same Pergamus
begins the bounds of the now Proconsular Asia; extending the length thereof
from thence downward unto Caria, and the breadth from the Sea unto the
mountain Tmolus, which is by Euripides, in his Bacchae, called (...) the
fortress of Lydia; and on the side whereof Sardis (a chief city of that
province, and Eunapius his own country) is not only by him, but also by
Herodot. lib. 1.. 84. and lib. 5.. 101.
Herodotus, (...). Strabo. l. 13. page 625.
Strabo, and Lydia celebratur maxim Sardibus, in latere Tmol^ montis, qui ante
Timolus appellabatur. Plin, lib. 5. c. 29.
Pliny (how soever Ptolemyes Tables do misplace it) sufficiently proved to
have been situated. that ridge of the mountain, on which Sardis was seated,
bounding that part of Lydia toward the East (as we have said) and the other
tract thereof reaching from thence unto Hypaepa, a city of less name within
the same country: as Ovid declares in those verses; Ovid. Metamorph lib 9^.
Nam freta prospiciens late riget arduus alto
Tmolus in ascensu, clivoque extensus utroque,
Sardibus hinc, illinc parvis finitur Hypaepis.
By which description it appears, that this Proconsular Asia was little or
nothing different from the Lydian Asia; called Lydia, not only by Herodotus and
Scylax, but also (if I mistake not) by L. Cum appellatio. C. de appellatio nib.
Constantius the Emperor himself.

To Valens, the elder Theodosius succeeded in the Eastern Empire: who took away
L. Offic. Hellesponts. C. de offic. comi^. sacr^ p^trimon. vel potius,
proconsulis et legati.
the Consular Hellespont from the jurisdiction of the Vicarius of the Asian
Diocese, and put it under the command of the Proconsul of Asia. Which state of
the then Proconsular or proper Asia that Greek Geographer might seem to have
respected; who begins his enumeration of the XLVIII. Provinces of the
continent of Asia, with Pontus and Bithynia. Asia properly so called. Great
Phrygia. Lycia and Caria. Galatia, etc.
as we have it presented unto us by that most curious searcher of all such kind
of rarities, Salmas. Plinian. exercitat. in Solin. page 803.
Claudius Salmasius. Wherein it is observable, that Hellespont, Aeolis, Ionia
and Lydia are included in, as well as the greater Phrygia and Caria are excluded
from the Asia then properly so called. Whence that new addition of Hellespont
being put aside; the remain will prove to be the same with that which a little
before was styled by Eunapius, the Asia now properly so called.

In the days of Arcadius (the son and successor of the foresaid Theodosius)
this addition of Hellespont to the jurisdiction, was much abated by the
detraction of the maine inland part of Lydia from the body of the Proconsular
Asia. Which is the cause why Pallad. in vita Chrysostomi: and ex eo Georgius
Al^xandrinus, tomo 8. edit. Savilian oper. Ch^ysost. page 202. (...).
Palladius, speaking of the Asian Synod of seventy Bishops held by Chrysostom
in the CCCCII. year of our Lord, does separate the Bishops of Lydia from the
Bishops of Asia. for as for the subscriptions of the first Council of Nice,
both those which are found in some Latin books, and those Greek ones that have
been lately published In Commentario Jo. Seldeni ad Eu^ychu Origin^s ubi
rectissin e monuir, Subscriptiones has Graecas recentiores multo esse commatis
quam Co^stantini temporae admittunt. (page 128.)
out of Sambucus his copy: they being quite dissonant the one from the other,
and having in both of them diverse manifest tokens of forgery and corruption,
do deserve here no regard at all.

Yet in this distraction of Lydia from the Proconsular Asia, it appears
as well by Hie^oclis No^itia Oriental* Imperiis in Append. G^og^aph sacr. page
27.
the Civil and Photius, de ordine Metropolita^. ibid. page 43. et in tomo. 1.
juris Graeco Romani, page 90.
Ecclesiastical lists of the Provinces of the Eastern empire, recorded by the
Grecians, as by the Subscript. Council. Chalced, Act. 6. Council. Constantinop.
VI. Act. 18. etc.
subscriptions of the Council of Chalcedon and other of the Eastern Synods;
that the Southern part of Lydia, lying betwixt the rivers of Maeander and
Cayster, which we noted to have been attributed by Ptolemy unto Caria (and
wherein were the cities of Priene, Magnesia, Trallis and Nysa) was still
reserved unto Asia: together with all that lay upon the seacoast from Ephesus
upward, not only unto Pitane and the mouth of Caicus (which we showed to have
been a parcel of the Lydian Asia) but also unto Assos and the promontory of
Lectum; which was possessed first by the Mysians, then by the Lydians, and
lastly by the Aeolians. for that this also, at least wise from Antandrus
downward, was sometimes accounted as an appendant unto Lydia, may be gathered,
partly from the words of (...) S^ylax in Per^plo.
Scylax Caryandensis (though here corrupted) partly from the testimony of
Xenophon; who tells us that he and his company, (...). X^noph. de exped.
Cyri, lib. 7.
departing from Antandrus, passed by the sea side of Lydia, unto the plain of
Thebe, and through it unto Adramyttium. compared with Strabo, relating to the
same purpose, that the former Strabo, lib. 13. page 586. (...). Id. ibid. page
613.
inhabitants of the plain of Thebe were the Lydians, then called Meones: and
that t in his time the name of the Lydian gates was still preserved in
Adramyttium, as a memorial of the building of that city by the Lydians.
Although yet, by the authority of Galen and Eunapius, we begin our Lydian Asia
from the river Caicus and Pergamus: those other places of Atarna, Thebe,
Adramyttium and Antandrus, being by Herodo^. lib. 7. de Xerxi^ exercitu. (...).
Simplic. in Aristot. Phys^c. lib. 5.
Herodotus also referred to Mysia, and not to Lydia.

To conclude therefore the various alterations of the limits of the Proconsular
Asia: as we have referred Ptolemies Asia properly so called to the Proconsular
Asia, as it was ordered by Augustus; and Eunapius his Asia now properly so
called, to that which was by Constantine; and the namelesse Geographers proper
Asia, to that which was by the elder Theodosius: by the like reason also, what
Simplicius writes in the days of Justinian touching x his Asia now so called,
and Symeon Metaphrastes long after him (though concerning elder times, wherein
these provinces stood in a far different posture from that which he presents
unto us) (...). Metaphrast. in Actis Aberc^^, October. 22.
of the confluence of the inhabitants of Asia unto Abercius; we may well
suppose to have relation unto this last settlement, which was made in the days
of Arcadius and the younger Theodosius.

CHAP. IV. Of the Asian Diocese, and the Metropolitan cities thereof; with the
Civil and Ecclesiastical government settled therein.
A Diocese, in the language of the times whereof we speak, was (...),
Balsamon, in Council. Chalcedon. can. 9.
a circuit comprehending within it many provinces: and the Asian Diocese in
that sense, sometimes taken more strictly, as it was distinguished from the
Proconsular Asia and the provinces subject to the jurisdiction of the Proconsul
thereof; and sometimes more largely, as containing those Proconsular provinces
also under it. The former acception has place in that Constitution of
Theodosius the elder, where Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 1. de fide Cathol l. 3.
Nec non etiam in Asia Proconsula^s atque Asiana diocesi, Amphilochio etc. Ita
enim ex MS. Malmesburiensi (quem mihi communicavit V. C. (Jo Seldenus) locus
resti^uendus est.
the Proconsular Asia and the Asian Diocese are both nominated together: and
generally where ever the office of the Vicarius or Imp. Const^ntin. ad
Tertullianum P. V. Comitem dioeceseos Asianae. Ibid. lib. 2. tit. 26. finium
regundor. l. 1. Impp. Arcad. et Honorius A A. Nebridio Comit^ Asia. Cod.
Justinian. lib. 11. In quib. cause. colon^. censiti. l. 2.
Comes (for these two titles are used Imp. Constantinu^ ad Tiberianum Vica^ium
Hispaniarum. in l. Si a sponso. C de donationib. ante nupt. et ad Tiberianum
Comitem Hispaniarum. in l. Cum servum. C de serve. fugitiv.
to signify the same dignity) of Asia or the Asian Diocese (or Vicarius
Asiana regionis. Julian. Epitom. Novel. 8. sive Constitut. 15.. 56* (^dit.
Lugdun. an. 1567.) quam idem ibid. paulo post Asianam dioecesim appellat.
Simili^er and in Constitut. 24.. 98. Asianam regionem vocat; quae in Authentic.
C^llat. 4. tit. 2. (de appellationib.. Similique modo) nomine Asiana diocoeseos
designatur.
Region, as Julianus Antecessor renders it) is made mention of. The latter,
when the Asian is rehearsed joinctly with other Dioceses of the Eastern Empire:
as in L. Si quis post hanc. C. Ut nemo ad suum patrocin. and L. Provinciae
Thraciar^ C. de militari vest.

According to which acception, whole (...). Theodore^. histor. Ecclesi^stic.
lib. 5. cap. 28.
Asia, as Theodoret calls it, in the days of the younger Theodosius did
consist of eleven Provinces. Subdisp^sitione vt^^ Spectabilis P^oconsulit ^sia,
Provincia infra scripta: Asia, Insula, H^llespontus. Notitia Provinciar. and
dignitat. utriusque Impetu.
three whereof appertained to the disposition of the Proconsul of Asia: the
proper Proconsular which he governed by himself, the Consular Hellespont, and
that of the Rhodes, and the other scattered Islands called Cyclades; which were
first Sub Vespasiano principe Insularum provine a facta est. Sext. R^fus, in
Breviario.
made a Province, and placed under a L. Iamdudum. C. Vbi ^ausa.
President, by the Emperor Vespasian Sub despositione viri Spectabili^ V^^arit
Dioeceseos Asiana, Provincia inf^ascr^pta. Pamphyli^, etc Notit. Provinciar^
eight were under the Vicarius or Lieutenant of Asia: Lydia, Caria, Phrygia
Pacatiana and Phrygia Salutaris, with those four other which were superadded
to that proper Asia of the ancient Romans, whereof we made mention in the
beginning out of Strabo and Cicero; namely Pamphylia, Lycia, Lycaonia and
Pisidia.

This distribution is to be seen in the Latin list of the Provinces and
Dignities of both the Empires; called by Alciat: Pa^erg. lib. 5 c. 13.
Alciat the Breviary of Theodosius the younger. (...). Jo. Malel. Ant^ochen.
Chronic. M.S. lib, 14.
by whom Lycia was divided from Lycaonia and made a Province by it self; Myra
being appointed the Metropolis and place of the residence of the President
thereof: as Johannes Malela sets down in his Chronicle. Which report of his
if we admit for authentic; we must withal say, that Theodoret, in the place
even now alleged, had relation to the state of his own time, when speaking of
the care which Chrysostom had of Asia, he says that it was governed by eleven
Presidents. joining the three Provinces which were under the Proconsul of Asia,
with the other eight that were under the Vicarius of the Asian diocese; which
otherwise, if Lycia and Lycaonia had been conjoined, would have been but seven
Provinces.

Indeed, Asianae X. Pamphylia, Hellespontus, Lydia, etc. Notit, utriusque
Imperii.
in the general enumeration of the Provinces of the Eastern Empire, which we
meet withal toward the beginning of the foresaid Theodosian Breviary, there
are but ten Provinces numbered of the whole Asian diocese: the first and
principal of them all, to wit Asia it self, by some error (wherewith Onuphr.
Commentar. Reipub. Ro^a^. lib. 3. page 424.
Onuphrius also and Cont. (...). in Justinian. Novell. 8. cap. 2.
Contius was misledd) being omitted. Which was nothing amended by Isidorus
Mercator, but increased rather; when he reckons up In Asia XII, prima ipsa
Asia. Vid. Salmasii Eucharistic. de Eccles. suburbicar. page 347.
twelve Provinces in this Asia: the first and chief whereof he makes to be
Asia it self; Asiae Provincia XII. Asia ipsa, in qua est Ilium, id est, Troia,
Lydia, Galatia, Ly^ia, Caria. hellespontu^. etc. Provinciar. Romanar. libell.
ab Ant. Sconhovio and Andr. Schotto edit. ex Isidori Collect. Epistolar.
Decretal, MS.
in which (says he) is Ilium, or Troy; the second Lydia, the third Galatia.
Whereas Ilium was situated not in this, but in the province of Hellespont: and
Galatia appertained to the Pontican, and not to the Asian Diocese. Whence, by
the way, we may correct an error that has crept into the Greek edition of the
subscriptions of the 6. Action of the Council of Chalcedon: wherein, though
Theosebius Bishop of Ilium had put to his name, yet Stephen the Metropolitan of
the Ephesians, among those absent Bishops that were under his jurisdiction,
does nominate Rufinus Bishop, not Timi (as the Latin books have it) but Ilii.

Guide. Pancirol. Commentar. in Noti^, O^ient, Imper* cap. 210.
Some do think, that the Emperor Justinian did take away Hellespont from the
government of the Proconsul of Asia, and joined it with Pontus Polemoniacus.
But that error arose from the old Latin translation of the XXth. Novell of
Justinian; Au^hentic. Collat. 3. tit. 7. de administra. offic. in sacr.
appellat^on.
Hellespontus being therein put for Helenopontus, in the Pontican diocese: as
appears not only by the Greek text and Julian. Constit. 25., 102.
Iulians Latin Epitome thereof, but also by the Latin it self (acknowledging
afterward, that this mutation was made in Galatia and the Pontican, not the
Asian diocese) and by the XXVIIIth. Novell most evidently. Though sure it is,
that Justinian. Novel. 8. cap. 2. Nov. 20, c^p. 6. Nov. 24. cap. 5. and Nov.
27. init.
he took from the Lieutenant or Vicarius the government of the Asian diocese,
and confined him within the limits of Phrygia Pacatiana, whereof he constituted
him Count or Comes.

By that which in the second chapter has been delivered, it appears, that
under the first Emperors there were many metropoliticall cities within one
Province; and some chosen out of them wherein Courts of justice were erected,
unto which the next adjoining circuits might upon all occasions have recourse.
Whereupon those contentions afterward did arise betwixt the cities of the
Proconsular Asia, touching each ones dignity and precedence: for the composing
whereof Aristides made that Oration of concord unto them, which is still
extant. Wherein yet the common desire of all the Asians accorded in this;
Impe^ator noster Antoni^u^ Augustus ad desideria Asianorum resc^i^sit;
Proconsuli ^ecessitatem impositam, per mare Asiam appli^a^e (...). primam
attingere Ulpian in
that the Proconsul, at his first coming into the province, should pass into
Asia by sea, and among the other Metropoles first arrive at Ephesus: as by the
Rescript of the Emperor Antoninus (vouched by Ulpian, in his first book of the
Proconsuls office) most manifestly appears.

But in the disposition of the Empire made by Constantine it was ordered, that
in every Province there should be but one chief city held for the Metropolis:
and that unto it, Observa^e. D. de offic. Procons.
all the Provincials should resort for the administration of public justice.
Whereupon Ephesus, being by the former Imperial Constitution, grounded upon
the joincte consent of the Asians themselves, (...). Eus^b. lib. 4 hist. (...).
preferred before all the rest (as being the ordinary place of the convention
of the Common Council, and it self held to be (...). Aristid. or^t de
concord^a, ^d civitat^^ Asi^t^c^s.
the common treasury of Asia) was appointed to be the sole Metropolis of this
new Proconsular Asia; and withal retained the preeminence which formerly it
had above all the cities of the old. Whereof, we may see the testimonies,
as well of (...). Ch^ysost. in argument. epist. ad Eph^s.
Chrysostom and others of the ancient who wrote upon the Epistle of S Paul to
the Ephesians; as of the Emperor (...). Th^odos. ^un. epist. a^ Dioscor. in^er
Acta Council. E^h^sin. (...). (inser^a Actioni 1. Council. Chalcedon.)
Theodosius, in the letters whereby he summoneth Dioscorus and other Bishops to
appear at the second Council at Ephesus, assembled by him in the year of our
Lord CCCCXLIX.

Whence he that wrote the book of the places mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles (falsely fathered upon S. Hierom) saying that ^p^cialiter ubi E^hesu^
civitas est, Asia vocatur. Lib. de locis Act. Apostol. inter H^eronymi and
Bedae o^era.
where the city of Ephesus is, there is the Asia specially so called; may seem
to have meant no other thing thereby, but that the province which had Ephesus
for it is Metropolis, was that which had the name of Asia in a singular manner
appropriated unto it. if therein he looked any further then to the ba^e words
of the text; wherein it is said, that Paul Act. 19.10.
continuing at Ephesus by the space of two years, all they which dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord. and that afterward Act. 20 16, 18.
he determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in
Asia: and thereupon sending for the Elde^s of the Church of Ephesus, he said
unto them; Ye know from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner
I have been with you at all seasons. Out of all which it was no hard matter
for him to gather at large, as Erasm A^no^. in A^t. 16. and Romans 16*
Erasmus did after him; that Asia in the new Testament denotes that part of
Asia minor, in which Ephesus stands.

It is here also further to be noted, that as in the state of the civil
government, the jurisdiction of the annual Presidents (by Aristides styled
(...). Arist^d. in orat. citat. quum antea dixister. (...). qu^ ^st ille
sortitus annus; de quo St^ti^^, supra p^g. 13.
Bishops) was extended unto all the cities that were contained within the
limits of their several provinces; and when but one Metropolis was appointed
unto every province, wherein the Governor was to keep his ordinary residence,
the Provincial Presidents had from thence the appellation of (...) (or
M^tropolitan Judges, as, at the end of the first Novell of Justinian, the
(...), are with him Iudices p^ovinciarum, in N^vell 69.
old Latin Interpreter rendr^th it:) so, in the Eastern empire especially, the
Ecclesiastical r^giment was herein conformed unto the civil; there being but
one Metropolitan Bishop settled in every Province, unto whom the Bishops of all
the rest of the cities were subordinated. By which means it came to pass.
that of the seven Churches in Asia, spoken of in the book of the Revelation,
Ephesus alone in the days of Constantine had the Metropoliticall dignity left
unto it. Then after the days of Valens the Emperor, the inland Lydia being
separated from Asia, the Bishop of Sardis (which had been the (...).

S^rabo, lib. 13. page 625.


ancient seat of the Lydian Kings) became the Metropolitan of that province:
the sees of Philadelphia and In the Latin edition of the subscriptio^s
adjoined unto the 9. Action of the Council of Chalcedon, Thyatira is made
subject to Synnada. but the Greek reads the^e, not (...), but (...) rather;
a se^ well known to be suffragan to Synnada, the Metropolis of Phrygia
Salutatis.
Thyatira being made subject to him; as Smyrna and Pergamus were to the Bishop
of Ephesus.

There remained then of the seven, only Laodicea: which got the honor of being
the Metropolis of Phrygia Pacatiana; as we read in the Greek subscription of
the first epistle unto Timothy: the although it be elde^ then those middle
times, wherein Phrygia Pacatiana, by a meta^hesis of the first syllabl^s, was
called Capatiana: as may be seen in Hie^ocles his Civilla a (...) his
Ecclesiastica^l list of the provinces. in Appendic. Geographiae sacrae. p^g.
27.39, 41.49.53.
latenesse whereof is thence rightly collected by the learned Vnde satis
liquere potest, de sub^criptione primae epistolae ad Timotheum, recentio^em eam
esse. Cujac. in exposit. Nove^l 145.
Cujaicus. For as the distinction of Ph^ygia Pacatiana and Salutaris is no
where to be found before the distribution of the provinces made by Constantine:
so at that time also, when but one Metropolis was allotted unto every Province,
it is a question, whether of those two Lao^icea and Hierapolisa^ they were near
one onether (and so conjoined by ^he Apostle, in Coloss 413.) so have they the
first place also assigned unto them among the cities of Ph^ygia Pacatiana, by
Hie^ocles in the civil list of the Provinces: Append. Geogr. sacr. page 21.
prime cities that were so nea^e together, Hierapolis, which without all
controversy was acknowledged to belong unto Phrygia, was not rather chosen to
be the mother city therein, then Laodicea, which by reason of the doubtful
situation thereof (as we have heard) was indifferently challenged to appertain
unto Phrygia, Caria and Lydia.

In the days of the succeeding Emperors indeed, (...). Council. Chalcedon.
Can. 12.
who yielded so far to the ambition of some Bishops, that they were content
there should be two Metropolitans in one Province, both these cities were
accounted for the Metropoles of Phrygia Pacatiana which is the cause, why in
the fourth general Council, assembled at Chalcedon, as well Subscript. Council.
Ch^lced. Act. 6. and 16.
Nunechius Bishop of the Metropolis of Laodicea, as Stephen Bishop of the
Metropolis of Hierapolis, do subscribe for themselves and the absent Bishops
which were under them. as also in the fifth general Council held at
Constantinople, there is mention made at the same time of Council. V. Collat. 8.
John Bishop of the Metropolis of the Laodiceans, and Auxanon Bishop of the
Metropolis of the Hierapolitans: and in the sixth, of Tiberius Bishop of the
Laodiceans and Sisinnius of the Hierapolitans, either of them giving unto his
seat the title (...). Council. VI. Constantinop. Act, 18.
of the Metropolis of the Pacatian Phrygians.

And although by a Canon of the said Council of Chalcedon it was provided,
that any Bishop which afterward (...). ^oncil. Chalced. c^n. 12.
would attempt to make such divisions to the derogation of the rights of his
own Metropolitan, should be deprived of his dignity; and that (...) etc.
(...), Ibid.
the new Metropoles formerly constituted by the Imperial Charters should so
content themselves with this honor, that the proper rights should still be
preserved unto that which was the Metropolis indeed: yet we see for all this,
that Notit. Graec. in appendic. Geograph. s^cr. page 16. and 18. it^m 48. and
52. Jur. Graeco. Roman. tom. 1. page 94. and 98.
in the lists of the Bishoprics of the East made in the succeeding times,
there are still distinct suffragans reckoned under these two Metropolitans of
Laodicea and Hierapolis; and that diverse other private Bishops were not hereby
restrained from aspiring unto a Metropoliticall dignity. among whom (to speak
only of those who were within the compass of the Lydian Asia) was the Bishop
of Smyrna; who found the means to be made first (...) or independent, and then
Jur. G^aeco^ Roman. tom. 1. page 88. and 245.
a Metropolitan with Ibid^ page 100.
seven suffragans depending upon him. Georg. Co. din. Curep^lat. de Offic.
Constantinop. page 221, and. 237. edit. Fr. Junii.
the Bishop of Pergamus; who was exempted likewise from his subordination to
Ephesus, and made a Metropolitan by himself. and the Bishop of Philadelphia:
Notit. Graec. in Append. Geograph. sacr. p^g. 8. and 40
Ibid. page 219. and 231. Vid. S^lmas^i Eucharistic. de Eccles. suburbicar.
page 383.
who by Andronicus Palaeologus the elder was substituted into the place of the
Bishop of Sardis, and made Metropolitan of all Lydia. So as of the Bishops of
the seven Churches mentioned in the book of the Revelation, he of Thyatira only
excepted, all at the last became Metropolitans, as they were at the first.

But among all these, the Sea of Ephesus had evermore the preeminence. And as
it was the mother city of the Proconsular Asia: so was that Asia likewise the
prime Province of all the Asian Diocese; and had in such esteem, that the
Proconsul thereof was exempted from the jurisdiction of the Praefectus
Praetorio Orientis, (as before we have heard out of Eunapius) unto which the
Vicarius or Lieutenant of the Asian Diocese was subject. Conformably whereunto
in the Ecclesiastical government, the Bishop of Ephesus was not only held to
be the Metropolitan of the Proconsular Asia, but also the Primate of all the
provinces that were contained within the compass of the whole Asian Diocese.
Upon which ground it was, that among those Bishops which Palladius (in the life
of Chrysostom) mentions to have been ordained by Antoninus Bishop of
Ephesus; (...). Sozomen. hist. lib. 8. cap. 6.
some were of Lycia and Phrygia, as well as others of Asia: the ordination of
these latter being challenged by virtue of his Metropoliticall, of the others
by his Patriarchicall jurisdiction.

In the Arabic Acts of the Council of Nice (which that worthy Knight Sr.
Thomas Roe, among other rare monuments, brought with him from the East and
bestowed upon the famous library of the University of Oxford) it is affirmed
that Ca. 35. and. 32. quorum indicium debeo D. Edovardo Pocolcio linguae
Arabicae in Academia Oxoniensi professori doctissimo.
the Patriarchship of Ephesus was translated unto the Bishop of Constantinople,
and that he was then made the second in order, and the Patriarch of Alexandria
the third. and a Constitution is therein recited, that the Patriarchall see
should be translated from Ephesus to the Imperial city; that so honor might
be done both to the Empire and Priesthood together: and, to the end the other
Bishop might be honored (and not lightly set by, because of the transferring
of the Patriarchall chair from him) that he should enjoy the eminent title of
Catholicus. for proof whereof, the testimony of one Dionysius is there
alleged.

But neither the authority of this obscure Dionysius, nor of the latter
Arabians following him, is of sufficient weight to gain credit to this
relation: especially seeing it is well known, that the title of Catholicus,
taken in this sense, Cathol^ci nomen infirma imperti atate natum. Salmas.
Eucharistic. de Eccles. suburbicar: cap. 3. page 511.
is of a very late original, and (for ought we can find) at no time attributed
unto the Bishop of Ephesus; and that the Bishop of Constantinople had the
second place among the Patriarchs first assigned unto him, not in the Council
of Nice, but Council* Constantinopol. I. ^a^. 3.
in the second general Council held at Constantinople in the year CCCLXXXI.
After which advancement, the first Bishop of that see we read of, that extended
his jurisdiction beyond the sea unto Theodoret. lib. 5. histor. cap. 28.
the Pontican and Asian dioceses, was John Chrysostom, Pallad. and Georg.
Alexandrin. in Vita Chrysostomi. Sozomen. lib. 8. histor. cap. 6.
who passing over unto Ephesus, and holding there the foresaid Synod of the
LXX. Asian Bishops, placed Heraclides in the Bishopric of Ephesus, then vacant
by the death of Antoninus; and deposing XIII. Bishops, who were charged to have
been simoniacally ordained by him, placed others in their room.

And, although within four years after, as well Heraclides as the other
thirteen Bishops of Chrysostoms ordination were removed again, and the former
Bishops restored to their places: yet it appears by the acknowledgement of
the Pontican and Asian Bishops in the XVIth. Action of the Council of
Chalcedon, that his successors continued their claim, and challenged still a
right at leastwise in the ordination of the Metropolitans of both those
Dioceses. Which power of ordaining Metropolitans, not only in the Thracian but
also in the Pontican and Asian diocese, being thereupon confirmed unto the
Bishops of Constantinople by a Council. Chalcedon. Act. 16. and Canon. 28.
special act of that Council (beside Ibid. Can 9. and 17.
a liberty given to all clerks that had any suit with their Metropolitan, to
prosecute the same either before the Primate of the Diocese or the Patriarch of
Constantinople, at their own election) gave occasion unto Euagrius to write,
that (...). Euagr. histor. lib, 3. cap. 6.
the Council of Chalcedon took away the Patriarchicall right from the Church
of the Ephesians; and that by Timothy of Alexandria (the deadly enemy of that
Council) it was restored thereunto again.

After which time we see, that the Bishop of Ephesus, as Metropolitan of the
Asian province, subscribeth thus unto the Constantinopolitan Synod held under
Menas. (...). Council. CP. sub Mena; Act. 5.
I Hypatius, by the mercy of God Bishop of the Metropolis of the Ephesians of
the Asian province, have defined and subscribed. and as Patriarch of the Asian
diocese, to the letters sent by the sixth Council of Constantinople, unto Pope
Agatho, thus. (...). Synod. VI. Constantinop. Act. 18.
I Theodorus by the mercy of God Bishop of the Metropolis of the Ephesians,
and Primate of the Asian Diocese, both for my self, and the Synod that is under
me, have subscribed.

For although in the times of the latter Emperors also, he still retained the
title of Primate or (...). In ordine thronor. Metropolitan. ad calcem Codini.
de officiis Constantinopol, Vid. Salmasii Eucharistic, de Eccles. Suburbicar.
cap. 2. page 385, 408, 409.
Exarch of all Asia; yet all Asia did not import therein the whole Asian
Diocese, but the Asian Province only: the exarchate of the Diocese, having been
wholly engrossed into the hands of the Patriarch of Constantinople. Which is
the cause, why Balsamon notes, that (...). Theod. Balsam. in Council.
Chalcedon. can. 9.
the privilege heretofore granted unto Exarches by the Council of Chalcedon,
was in his days of no force at all. For although some of the Metropolitans
(says he) are named Exarches; yet have they none of the other Metropolitans
within the Dioceses any ways subject unto them. and (...). Subscript. Council.
Constantinopol. sub. Gregorio Patriarcha habit. Vide Sirmondi Propemptic. lib.
2. cap. 5. page 214. and 218.
John, in a late Synod held after the time of the Council of Florence,
subscribeth himself Bishop of the Metropolis of the Ephesians, and Exarch (or
Primate, not of the Diocese, but) of the Province of the Asians.

And of the Asian Diocese, with the Civil and Ecclesiastical government
thereof, thus much in brief may suffice.

FINIS.
TO The Right Honorable, the House of PEERS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
Humble Petition of JAMES Archbishop of ARMAGH.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Lordships were pleased to employ your Petitioner in
preaching before you on the Fast Day, the 22. of December last: (which service,
according to his mean ability, he was careful to perform:) so it is, that one
John Nicholson, having got into his hands a collection of some rude and
incoherent Notes of that Sermon, took the boldness to publish the same (under
the Title of Vox Hiberniae) as a true Relation of that which was uttered before
your Lordships that day. Which being in many places void of common sense, and
in the whole every way unanswerable unto what was fit to have been delivered
before so Honorable and judicious an Audience,

His humble request is, That your Lordships would be pleased, to call in that
suppositions Pamphlet, etc.

Die Veneris, 11. Februarii, 1641.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That a Book concerning the L. Archbishop
of Armagh, being published and printed by John Nicholson, shall be called in
and suppressed.

JO. BROWN. Cleric. Parliam.
To the Wardens and Company of the Stationers of London.
AN Order of the Commons House of Parliament, FOR The suppressing of an other
Pamphlet, falsely fathered upon the said Archbishop of Armagh. Die Martis, 9.
Febr. 1640.
WHereas complaint has been made unto us by James Lord Archbishop of Armagh
and Primate of all Ireland, that a certain Pamphlet has been lately most
injuriously fathered upon him, and spread abroad under the false title of The
Bishop of Armagh's direction to the house of Parliament, concerning the
Liturgy and Episcopal Government: It is this day ordered in the Commons House
of Parliament, that the Master and Company of Stationers, and all others whom
it may concern, shall take such course for the suppressing of the said Book,
that they shall not suffer it to be put in print, or if it be already printed,
not permit the same to be divulged. And if any man shall presume to print or
publish the Book abovementioned; That he, or they, shall be then liable to the
Censure of the said House.

H. Elsynge Cler. Domus Comm.


