UNDAUNTED Londonderry: OR, The Victorious Protestants constant Success
against the proud French and Irish Forces.
To the Tune of, Lilli borlero. Licensed according to Order.


PRotestant Boys both valliant and stout,
fear not the strength and power of Rome,
Thousands of them are put to the rout,
brave Londonderry tells 'um their doom:
For their Cannons roar like Thunder,
being resolved the Town to maintain,
For Wiliima and Mary, still brave Londonderry,
will give the proud French and Tories their bane.
Time after time, with Powder and Balls,
Protestant it Souls they did 'um salute;
That before Londonderry stout Walls,
many are slain and taken to boot;
Nay, their noble Duke of Berwick,
many reports, is happily taken,
Where still they confine him, and will not r^sign him,
till they have given the Tories their bane.
Into the Town their Bombs they did throw,
being resolved to fire the same;
Hoping thereby to lay it all low,
could they but raise it into a flame;
But the Polititious Walker,
by an intreague did quail them again,
And blasted the glory of French, Teague and Tory,
by Policy Boys, he gave them their bane.
Thundering stones they laid on the Wall,
ready against the Enemy came,
With which they vowed the Tories to mawl,
when ever they dare approach but the same:
And another sweet invention,
the which in brief I reckon to name:
A sharp bloody slaughter, did soan follow after,
amongst the proud French, and gave 'um their bane.
Stubble and Straw in parcels they laid*
the which they straightways kindled with speed,
By this intreague the French was betrayed.
thinking the Town was fired indeed:
Then they placed their scaling Ladders,
and over the walls did scour amain*
Yet strait to their wonder they were cut in sunder,
thus Frenchmen and Tories met with their bane.
Suddenly then they opened the Gate,
sallying forth with Uigour and might;
And as the truth I here may relate,
Protestant Boys did valliantly fight,
Taking many chief Commanders,
while the sharp fray they thus did maintain,
With vigorous courses, they routed their Forces,
and many poor Teagues did meet with their bane.
While with their blood the Cause they have seayd,
heaven upon their actions did frown,
Protestants took the spoil of the Field,
Cannons full five they brought to the Town,
With a lusty large great Mortar,
thus they returned with honor and gain,
While Papists did scour from Protestants power,
as fearing they all should suffer their bane.
In a short time we hope to arrive,
with a vast Army to Ireland,
And the affairs so well we'll contrive.
that they shall never have power to stand
Against King William and Queen Mary,
who in the Throne does flourish and reign,
We'll down with the faction, that make the distraction,
and give the proud French and Tories their bane.
FINIS.
Printed for I. Deacon in Guilispur-street.


