Logopandecteision, OR AN INTRODVCTION TO THE UNIVERSAL LANGVAGE. Digested into
these Six several Books, Neaudethaumata, Chrestasebeia, Cleronomaporia,
Chryseomystes, Neleodicastes, and Philoponauxesis.


BY Sir THOMAS URQUHART of Cromartie, Knight.

Now lately contrived and published both for his own utilitie, and that of all
pregnant and ingenious Spirits.

C^dere quaerenti nonne haec justissima res est?
Qui non plura cupit, quam ratio ipsa jubet.
Englished thus,
To grant him his demands were it not just?
Who craves no more, then reason says he must.
LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the Blackspread-Eagle
at the West End of Paul's; and by Richard Tomlius at the Sun and Bible near
Pye-corner. 1653.

The Epistle Dedicatorie, To Nobody:
Most Honorable,
MY non supponent Lord, and Sovereign master of contradictions in adjected
terms, that unto you I have presumed to tender the dedicacie of this
introduction, will not seem strange to those, that know how your concurrence
did further me to the accomplishment of that new Language, unto the
frontispeice whereof it is premitted.

You did assist me in the production of many special fancies, whose
promulgation will perhaps, exceedingly conduce to the delight of the
Philosophical Reader: by your help, amidst the the penury of books, and want
of learned conversation, have by me been enixed several treatises; which, for
their apparent usefulness, and curiosity, I sometime intend to consecrate to
the Shrine of public view: if none hitherto has made choice of such a
patron: neither has any till this hour afforded an invention of that kind. In
things whereof the proposed subject is within our reach, imitation is
imbraceable: but where the matter is transcendent, we commonly bid patterns
adieu, that porch will not befit a cottage, which is suitable to a Cathedral,
nor can unusual dedications, misbeseem tractats on an extraordinary purpose;
seeing therefore skill in symmetrie bespeaks an artificer and gives the
contexture of a work that decorum, which becomes the Author: I am with force of
reason persuaded to this election, thereby to glance at the proportion betwixt
your favors, and my retribution; for such were the courtesies you conferred on
me, that I could not otherways choose but lay hold on this expedient, to
testify my remembrance of them.

When after the fatal blow, given at Worcester, on the third of September. 1651.
to the regal party, I was 5 times plundered, pillaged, pilfred, robbed, and
rifled, and nothing almost left me, fortune could dispoil me of, save my health
alone, which in the crowd of so many incident difficulties, as I was forced to
undergo, was most miraculously preserved: You then out of your mercy, amongst
the victorious soldiers, were pleased to commiserate my condition. When, in
horses, arms, apparel, and money, I had, in that place, taken from me above
five hundred pounds worth English: you, at that time, out of piety, amongst
the Presbyterians of our army, did regret my case. When it was told, that
amidst the fury of the raging soldiery, I had above ten thousand crowns worth
of papers embezeled, without recovery: you from your generosity of all the
great men prisoners, Avarus nec patientibus compatitur, ^ec miseris subvenit
vel m^seretur: sed offendit d^um, offendit proximum, offendit scipsum; nam deo
detinet debitum, p^oximo d^negat n^cessa^ia sibi subt^a^^^ (...): d^o ingrat^s
proximo impius, sibi crudelix.
were sorry at the loss. And lastly, when, after my being brought to London,
without either money or goods, I had my self, and several others, both
brothers, and servants (whereof not any, save my self alone had been in that
City before) to provide for, in every thing, that the States allowance (which
nevertheless continued no longer, then my parole was taken for their true
imprisonment) did not reach unto: And that, after many of my fellow prisoners,
of considerable fortunes at home, had received, from the Scottish factors, on
the Exchange, in matter of borrowing money, answers so full of churlishness,
and inhumanity, that I am ashamed the ear of any man of common honesty should
hear them: then was it (whilst the charity of those Bankers, and other rich
Scots men at London, by little and little decayed, and became still the less,
the greater the pitch was, unto which their wealth had formerly increast: And
that for six months together, from none of my kindred, alliance, nor any other
of my pretended friends in Scotland, I had received so much, as the mission, or
return of a letter) that you (such was your magnificence) were content to
supply my need, and furnish me with what I lacked.

These favors, I deem my self in duty the more obliged to commemorate, that
they were bestowed upon me, in sequel of some others of that nature, Sir James
F^aser
namely, when, a while ago, I had a suit in Law, depending against a Gentleman
neighbor of mine, for taking fifteen in the hundred, these sixteen years past
and above, ^ui hic ardet aestu avaritiae, nostca ardebit igue Gehennae.
and refusing payment of the principal sum, that the said usurie might still
continue, for the which, there was given unto him by my Father, security in
land (by a present possession) worth more then thrice the money, which my
Father had received from him; as likewise, for plundring from my tenants (in my
absence) above two thousand, and five hundred pounds sterlin worth of goods: O
p^^is mali^na avaritia, ^emper b^nis animis terestanda, quid illae^i^m quid
in^nacu^^um ^ milti^.
it was then that your grace, in the session of the land, and Committee of
Estate, there taking notice of these enormous wrongs, did do me justice. Much
about the same time, when some Ministers had maimed my rents, to strengthen
their own stipends: your reverence, sitting in the commission of the Kirk, were
pleased to take my part against them, and patrocinate my cause. By your
highness also, sitting then at the helm of the State of Scotland, when a
grievance for the pressure sustained by me, was in all humility put in before
the said Committee of Estates, was I maintained against the cruelty, and
indiscretion of those, did overrate me in the exaction of public dues, And
finally, when by the oppression of some ill affected country men, under
pretext of Committee acts, my vassals, and tenants had suffered extreme
prejudice, straight upon the presenting of a petition thereanent, whereof at
least a hundred, at several times were tabled: your wisdom remedied the
plaintiff, and did for my cause redress the injuries done unto him.

That with these benevolences; as the most eminent effects of your ingenuitie,
I should (as affairs then ruled) be gratified by your liberality, was from day
to day, my constant expectation; being always persuaded to the greater
probability of my acceptance of them, that in many sound, and wel-grounded
opinions of mine, long before that time, you frequently jumped with me; for
when I openly said, that Presbytery was like to turn to a Hydral Episcopacie,
and that the gallantry of the English nation would never comport with such a
government (which Speech was thought should have been asserted by all the
Nobles, and Gentlemen of Scotland) you out of your goodness, amongst them all
(being sensible of the heavy yoke of the Democratical tyranny of the Kirk)
were pleased to justify my sayings. Besides this, when the intending of one
thing, and pretending of another, was by me a thousand times foretold to prove
destructive unto Scotland, and that the cause of God could not produce
Diabolical effects: Your holiness, amongst the Zelots of the Nation, did give
way to believe the truth of both. And when moreover I avouched, that money
should never be held in such estimation, that either to honesty, or a good
name, any sum, however so great, ought to be preferred: Your discretion,
amidst many of the Ecclesiastical Army, did in very deed acknowledge the
verity of the saying, although verbally you denied it. And at last, when to be
charitable to distressed men, whose misery could not with reason be imputed to
their own fault, was by me represented to be an especial act of goodness, you,
out of your love, amongst the Scottish Merchants condescended to it.

Whereby most seriously perpending the manifold, or rather innumerable
testimonies of your goodness, holiness, grace, discretion, wisdom,
liberality, reverence, mercy, piety, generositie, magnificence, love, and
other unexpressible respects, I have perceived to flow from your highness in
behalf of me, whether I applied my self to the Nobility, Souldierie, Gentry,
Clergy, or Burger degree of the Consistorian party of the Scottish Nation: I
must needs promise (in acquital of these incom^rehensible good deeds, out of
your endless, and immense bounty, so undeservedly erogated) whilst I breath,
to break my parole unto you, to be to you dishonest, and prove disloyal to you
in my trust, to curse you in malicious thoughts, reproach you with scandalous
words, and wrong you with cruel, and unconscionable deeds: to do you injustice,
deceive, and cosen you: to persecute you with hatred, envy, and rancour of
mind: and according to the infallible rules of the Sacred Evangile, dictamen of
reason, and precepts of Philosophy, to approve my self your faithless,
implacable and wicked enemy; and consequently, to your contrary opposite (
every body) upright, true, and honest: and to your contradictorie foe (some
body) an affectionate, trusty, steadfast, and unalterable both Friend, and
Servant.

Thomas Vrquhaer^.

The Contents Of the First BOOK, entitled NEAUDETHAUMATA.
THe Author in this first Book of his Introduction discloseth many excellent
overtures, for the furtherance of Literature: Esp^cially in the facility of
contriving expressions for any conception, the mind of man is able to afford.
He plainly sets down the analogy, that ought to be betwixt things, and
words; and that, to make a perfect Language, things semblable in nature, should
be signified by words of a like pronunciation. He proves all hitherto known
tongues, to be full of imperfection, both by reason of the insufficiency of
their Alphabets, and for that there are many common things, which cannot,
without circumlocution, be expressed by them. He compares the learned
Languages with one another: gives freely his opinion of all vernacularie
tongues: and demonstrateth an universal defect in all, and each of both the
one, and other, because of the common necessity they are driven unto, of mutual
borrowing for conveniencie of elocu^ion.

The Author also, in this Book, utterly rejects the vulgarly received opinion
of the origin of Languag^s, and very neatly twits the opposers of those curious
arts, where^n there is no harm. He confuteth that disproportion in matter of
number twixt words, and things, wherewith the smattrers in knowledge, would
cloak their inability of giving unto every thing its proper term: and shows
how for the advancement of Learning, and Virtue, and clearing the mind of all
prejudicat tenets, the brains, and heart should be purged of malice, and wilful
ignorance, the two plagues of a Commonwealth: the bad acquitals, he has
received from some great men of his own Country, he but glanceth at, to
incordiat other his compatriots, with more respect in times coming, to men of
no less desert: and declares what injury, to that deity, unto which the
heavens are subservient, is done by those lazy Sciolists, who frequently seek
after supernatural causes, where the natural is obvious to the eyes of our
understanding.

The Author likewise, sets forth in this Book, the possibility of framing a
new idiome of far greater perfection, then any hitherto spoken, and that the
performance of such an undertaking will without doubt exceedingly conduce to
the benefit, and contentment of all ingenious Scholars. By its Logopandocie,
or comprehension of all utterable words, and sounds articulat, he evidenceth
the universality of the proposed Language, and by infallible reason proves
whilst there is no other world, but this, the impossibility of forming any
other such.

Lastly, The Author, after his delivery of a genuine and upright gloss, on
three passages of Solomon, Terence, and Paul, in confutation of some
Scholiasts, Idolizers of corrupt antiquity, who had mis-interpreted those
texts, concerning the nature of new inventions, most manifestly avoucheth, that
exquisit inventions will never be wanting, so long as good spirits are extant
on the earth: and, in concluding this his first Book with sixty and six
several advantages, this Language has above all other, exposes to the view of
the judicious Reader, many inestimable secrets, worthy the perusal of the best
wits of the time.

The first BOOK OF THE INTRODVCTION To the Universal Language, entitled
NEAUDETHAUMATA. OR Wonders of the new SPEECH, which, as a Preface thereto,
comprehends its most necessary Prenoscendas, together with some Miscellanie
Articles concerning the AUTHOR himself.
1 WOrds are the signs of things; it being to signify that they were
instituted at first: nor can they be, as such, directed to any other end,
whether they be articulate or inarticulate.

2, All things are either real or rational: and the real, either natural or
artificial.

3. There ought to be a proportion betwixt the sign and thing signified;
therefore should all things, whether real or rational, have their proper words
assigned unto them.

4. Man is called a Microcosme, because he may by his conceptions and words
contain within him the representatives of what in the whole world is
comprehended.

5 Seeing there is in nature such affinity 'twixt words and things, (as there
ought to be in whatsoever is ordained for one another) that Language is to be
accounted most conform to Nature, which with greatest variety expresses all
manner of things.

6. As all things of a single complete being, by Aristotle into ten Classes
were divided; so may the words whereby those things are to be signified, be set
apart in their several storehouses.

7. Arts, Sciences, Mechanic Trades, notionall faculties, and whatever is
excogitable by man, have their own Method; by virtue whereof, the Learned of
these latter times have orderly digested them: Yet has none hitherto
considered of a mark, whereby words of the same Faculty, Art, Trade, or Science
should be dignosced from those of another by the very sound of the word at the
first hearing.

8. A Tree will be known by its leaves, a stone by its grit, a Flower by the
smell, Meats by the taste, Music by the ear, Colors by the eye, the several
Natures of things, with their properties and essential qualities, by the
Intellect: and accordingly as the things are in themselves diversified, the
Judicious and Learned men after he has conceived them aright, sequestreth them
in the Several cells of their understanding each in their definite and
respective places.

9. But in matter of the words whereby those things are expressed, no Language
ever hitherto framed, has observed any order relating to the thing signified
by them: for if the words be ranked in their Alphabeticall series, the things
represented by them will fall to be in several predicaments; and if the things
themselves be categorically classed, the word whereby they are made known will
not be tied to any Alphabetical rule.

10. This is an imperfection incident to all the Languages that ever yet have
been known, by reason whereof, Foreign Tongues are said to be hard to learn;
and when obtained easily forgot.

11. The effigies of Jupiter in the likeness of a Bull, should be liker to
that of Io metamorphosed into a Cow, then to the statue of Bucephulus, which
was a horse: and the picture of Alcibiades ought to have more resemblance with
that of Ceriolanus, being both handsome men, then with the Image of Thersites,
who was of a deformed feature: just so should things semblable in Nature be
represented by words of a like composure: and as the true intelligible species
do present unto our minds the similitude of things as they are in the object;
even so ought the words expressive of our conceptions so to agree or vary in
their contexture, as the things themselves which are conceived by them do in
their natures.

12. Besides this imperfection in all Languages there is yet another, That no
Language upon the face of the earth has a perfect Alphabet; one lacking those
letters which another has, none having all, and all of them in cumulo lacking
some, But that which makes the defect so much the greater, is, that these same
few consonants and vowels commonly made use of, are never by two Nations
pronounced after the same fashion; the French A with the English, being the
Greek Hra; and the Italian B with the Spanish, the Hebrew Vau.

13. This is that which makes those of one dominion so unskilful in the idiome
of another; and after many years abode in a strange land, despair from
attaining at any time to the perfect accent of the language thereof, because as
the waters of that stream cannot be wholesome; whose source is corrupted; nor
the superstructure sure, whereof the groundwork is ruinous: so does the
various manner of pronouncing one and the same Alphabet in several Nations,
produce this great and lamentable obstruction in the Discipline of Languages.

14. The G of the Latin word legit, is after four several manners pronounced by
the English, French, Spanish, and Dutch: the Ch likewise is differently
pronounced by diverse Nations; some uttering it after the fashion of the Hebrew
Shin, as the French do in the word chasteau, chascun, chastier, chatel; or like
the Greek Kappa, as in the Italian words, chiedere, chiazzar, chinatura; or as
in Italy are sounded the words ciascheduno, ciarlatano; for so do the Spanish
and English pronounce it, as in the words achaque, leche, chamber, chance:
other Nations of a gutteral flexibility, pronounce it after the fashion of the
Greek chapter Nor need we to labor for examples in other letters; for there is
scarce any hitherto received, either consonant or vowel, which in some one and
other taking in all Nations, is not pronounced after three or four several
fashions.

15. As the Alphabets are imperfect, some having but 19 letters, others 22. and
some 2^. few exceeding that number: so do the words composed of those Letters
in the several Languages, come far short of the number of things, which to have
the reputation of a perfect tongue, ought to be expressed by them.

16. For supply of this deficiencie, each Language borrows from another; nor is
the perfectest amongst them, without being beholden to another, in all things
enunciable, bastant to afford instruction: many Astronomical and Medicinal
terms have the Greeks borrowed from the Arabians, for which they by exchange
have from the Grecians received payment of many words naturalized in their
Physical, Logical, and Metaphysical Treatises. As for the Latin, it owes all
its Scientifick dictions to the Greek and Arabic: yet did the Roman Conquest
give adoption to many Latin words, in both these languages, especially in
matters of military discipline, and prudential Law.

17. And as for all other Languages as yet spoke, though to some of them be
ascribed the title of original Tongues, I may safely avouch there is none of
them which of it self alone is able to afford the smattring of an elocution fit
for indoctrinating of us in the precepts and maxim^^ of moral and intellectual
virtues.

18. But which is more, and that which most of all evinceth the sterility of
all the Languages that since the Deluge have been spoke, though all of them
quintesenced in one, capable of the perfections of each, yet that one so
befitted and accommodated for compendiousness and variety of phrase, should not
be able, amidst so great wealth, to afford, without circumlocution, the proper
and convenient representation of a thing, yea of many thousands of things,
whereof each should be expressed with one single word alone.

19. Some Languages have copiousness of discourse, which are barren in
composition: such is the Latin. Others are compendious in expression, which
hardly have any flexion at all: of this kind are the Dutch, the English, and
Irish.

20. Greek has the agglutinative faculty of incorporating words; yet runs
not so glib in Poesy as does the Latin, though far more abundant. The Hebrew
likewise, with its auxiliary Dialects of Arabiek, Caldean, Syriack, Ethiopian,
and Samaritan, compoundeth prettily, and has some store of words; yet falls
short by many stages of the Greek.

21. The French, Spanish, and Italians, are but Dialects of the Latin, as the
English is of the Saxon Tongue; though with this difference, that the mixture
of Latin with the Gaulish, Moresco, and Gotish Tongues, make up the three
first Languages; but the mere qualification of the Saxon with the old British,
frames not the English to the full, for that, by its promiscuous and
ubiquitary borrowing, it consists almost of all Languages: which I speak not
in dispraise thereof, although I may with confidence avere, that were all the
four aforesaid Languages stripped of what is not originally their own, we should
not be able with them all, in any part of the world, to purchase so much as our
breakfast in a Market.

22. Now to return from these to the learned Languages; we must acknowledge it
to be very strange, why, after thousands of years continual practice in the
polishing of them by men of approved faculties, there is neither in them, nor
any other Tongue hitherto found out, one single word expressive of the vice
opposite either to Temperance or Chastity in the defect; though many rigid
Monks, even now adays, be guilty of the one, as Diogenes of old was of the
other.

23. But that which makes this disease the more incurable, is, that when an
exuberant spirit would to any high researched conceit adapt a peculiar word of
his own coining, he is branded with Incivility, if he apologize not for his
boldness, with a Quod ita dixerim parcant Ciceronianae manes, Ignoscat
Demosthenis genius, and other such phrases acknowledging his fault of making
use of words never uttered by others, or at least by such as were most renowned
for eloquence.

24. Though Learning sustain great prejudice by this restraint of liberty to
endenizon new Citizens in the Commonwealth of Languages, yet do I conceive the
reason thereof to proceed from this, That it is thought a less incongruity to
express a thing by circumlocution, then by appropriating a single word thereto,
to transgress the bounds of the Language; as in Architecture it is esteemed an
error of less consequence to make a circuitory passage from one room to
another, then by the extravagancie of an irregular sallie, to frame projectures
disproportionable to the sound of the house.

25. Thus is it, that as according to the largeness of the plat of a building,
and compactedness of its walls, the Workmaster contriveth his roofs, platforms,
outjettings, and other such like parts and portion of the whole: just so,
conform to the extent and reach which a Language in its flexions and
compositions has obtained at first, have the sprucest Linguists, hitherto been
pleased to make use of the words thereto belonging.

26. The Bonification and virtuification of Lully, Scotu's Hexeity, and
Albedineity of Suarez are words exploded by those that affect the purity of the
Latin diction; yet if such were demanded, what other no less concise
expression would comport with the neatness of that language, their answer would
be altum silentium: so easy a matter it is for many to find fault with what
they are not able to amend.

27. Nevertheless, why for representing to our understandings the essence of
accidents, the fluency of the form as it is in fieri; the faculty of the Agent,
and habit that facilitates it, with many thousands of other such expressions,
the terms are not so genuine, as of the members of a man's body, or utensils of
his house; the reason is, because the first inventers of Languages, who
contrived them for necessity, were not so profoundly versed in Philosophical
quiddities, as those that succeeded after them; whose literature increasing,
procured their excursion beyond the representatives of the common objects,
imagined by their forefathers.

28. I have known some to have built houses for necessity, having no other aim
before their eyes, but barely to dwell in them; who nevertheless in a very
short space were so enriched, that after they had taken pleasure to polish and
adorn, what formerly they had but rudely squared, their movables so multiplied
upon them, that they would have wished they had made them of a larger extent.

29. Even so though these Languages may be refined by some quaint derivatives
and witty compositions; like the striking forth of new lights and doors,
outjetting of Crenels, erecting of prickets, barbicans, and such like various
structures upon one and the same foundation; yet being limited to a certain
basis, beyond which the versed in them must not pass, they cannot roam at such
random as otherwise they might, had their Language been of a larger scope at
first.

30. Thus albeit Latin be far better polished now, then it was in the days of
Ennius, and Livius Andronicus, yet had the Latinists at first been such
Philosophers as afterward they were, it would have attained to a great deal of
more perfection then it is at for the present.

31. What I have delivered in freedom of the learned Languages, I would not
have wrested to a sinister sense, as if I meant any thing to their
disparagement; for truly I think the time well bestowed, which boys in their
tender years employ toward the learning of them, in a subordination to the
excellent things that in them are couched.

32. But ingenuously I must acknowledge my averseness of opinion from those who
are so superstitiously addicted to these Languages, that they account it
learning enough to speak them, although they knew nothing else; which is an
error worthy rebuke, seeing Philosophia sunt res, non verba; and that whatever
the signs be, the things by them signified ought still to be of greater worth.

33. For it boots not so much, by what kind of tokens any matter be brought
into our mind, as that the things made known unto us, by such representatives,
be of some considerable value: not much unlike the Innes-a-court-gentlemen at
London, who usually repairing to their commons at the blowing of a horn, are
better pleased with such a sign (so the fare be good) then if they were warned
to courser cates, by the sound of a Bell or Trumpet.

34. Another reason prompteth me thereto, which is this, That in this frozen
Climate of ours, there is hardly any that is not possessed with the opinion,
that not only the three forenamed Languages, but a great many other, whom they
call Originals (whereof they reckon ten or eleven in Europe, and some fifty
eight more, or thereabouts, in other Nations) were at the confusion of Babel,
immediately from God, by a miracle, infused into men; being induced to believe
this, not so much for that they had not perused the interpretation of the
Rabbis on that text, declaring the misunderstanding whereunto the builders
were involved by diversity of speech, to have proceeded from nothing else, but
their various and diserepant pronunciation of one and the same Language, as
that they deemed Languages to be of an invention so sublime, that naturally the
wit of man was not able to reach their composure.

35. Some believe this so pertinaciously that they esteem all men infidels that
are of another faith; whilst in the mean while, I may confidently assever, that
the assertors of such a tenet, do thereby extremely dishonor God, who doing
whatever is done, by nature, as the actions of an Ambassador (as an Ambassador)
are reputed to be those of the Sovereign that sent him, would not have the
power he has given to nature to be disclaimed by any, or any thing said by us
in derogation thereof.

36. Should we deny our obedience to the just decree of an inferior judge,
because he from whom his authority is derived, did not pronounce the sentence?
Subordinate Magistrates have their power, even in great matters; which to
decline, by saying, they have no authority, should make the averrer fall within
the compass of a breach of the Statute called scandalum magnatum.

37. There are of those with us, that wear gowns and beards longer then ever
did Aristotle and Aesculapius; who when they see an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon,
or a comet in the air, straight would delude the commons with an opinion that
those things are immediately from God; for the sins of the people; as if no
natural cause could be produced for such like apparitions.

38 I saw once a young man, who for his cunning conveyance in the Feats of
Ledger Demaine, was branded, by some of that Fry, for Sorcery, and another (for
being able, by virtue of the Masson word, to make a Masson, whom he had never
seen before, without speaking, or any other apparent sign, come, and salute
him) reputed, by many of the same Litter, to have had a familiar, their gross
ignorance moving them, to call that supernatural, or above the natural reach
of mere man, whereof they knew not the cause.

39 By which means, Mathematical Thaumaturgies, Opticall magic, secrets of
nature, and other Philosophical mysteries, being esteemed to be rank
Witchcraft, they ruin the best part of Learning, and make their own
unskillfullnes Supreme Judge, to pass an Irrevocable sentence upon the
Condemnation of knowledge.

40 The matter notwithstanding would be of less danger, were this the worst:
but to this ignorance of theirs, is concomitant so much wickedness, that when an
action of any extraordinary performance, is done, although by a man of a most
approvable conversation and to a very good end, such as the curing of the
diseased, or releeving men out of apparent peril, yet if the cause thereof be
unknown to them, they will not be so charitable, as to attribute the effect to
a good Angel, albeit their faith obliege them to believe, that the Spirits
belonging to any of the nine celestial orders, are, for the achievement of
such masteries, in nothing inferior to the infernal Demons: but instead of
Gabriell, Raphaell, Michaell, and such good Spirits, by whom (I think) it is
more prob^ble, an honest man would be assisted, in works of a strange, and
hidden operation, then by the bad ones, they ascribe the wonderfullnes of the
exploit, to the inspiration of Beelzebub, Abadon, Lucifer, or some other of the
F^ends of Hell; so malevolently they asperse the reputation of gallant men,
whose deeds surpass their Capacity.

41 Truly, those two qualities of Ignorance, and wickedness conjoined, are of
such pernicious consequence, that no Nation, or Commonwealth, wherein they get
footing, is able long to subsist, for rapine, coveteousnes, and extortion,
flowing from the one, as from the other, does all manner of Baseness,
Pusillanimity, and cowardice, ignorance affects the Brain, and wickedness the
Heart: Yet both the Brain, and Heart of a common weal, by the mischeiously
unskillful, and illiterately, malicious, are equally depraved.

42 For remedy of so general a Calamity, seeing universality has its
existence in individualls, would each amend but one, the total would be
quickly rid of this Lamentable infection.

43 Therefore, since ever I understood any thing, knowing that the welfare of
the Body of a government, consists in the intirenes of its noble parts, I
always endeavored to employ the best of my Brain, and Heart toward the
furtherance of the Honor of that Country, unto which I did owe my birth.

44 In prosecuting whereof, as the heart is primum vivent so was it my heart,
which, in my younger years, before my brains were ripened for eminent
undertakings, gave me the courage for adventuring in a foreign Climat, thrice
to enter the Lists against men of 3 several nations, to vindicate my native
Country from the Calumnies, wherewith they had aspersed it, wherein it pleased
God so to conduct my fortune, that after I had disarmed them, they in such sort
acknowledged their Error, and the obligation they did owe me, for sparing their
Lives, which justly by the Law of Arms I might have taken, that in Lieu of
three enemies, that formerly they were, I acquired three constant Friends, both
to my self, and my compatriots, whereof, by several gallant testimonies, they
gave evident proof, to the Improvement of my Countries credit, in many
occasions.

45 As my Heart, has been thus devoted to the love of my native soil, so have
my Brains, to the Honor thereof discharged so much duty, that betwixt what is
printed, and what ready for the press, I have set forth above a hundred
several Books, on Subjects never hitherto thought upon by any.

46. Let no man think, that I have spoke this in hope of future benefit, or by
way of regret, S. d. B. 2. art. 53.54:56.57.58.
I should have faild thereof in times past; virtue (in my estimation) whether
moral, or intellectual, carrying always along with it a recompense
sufficient: nor yet out of pride, or vain glory in extolling of my own
praises, which (as willingly as to live) I would have smothered, but that the
continual receiving of bad offices, for my good intentions, has wrought this
excursion out of my pen.

47. Could any man imagine, I should have been singled out amongst all those of
Scotland, to, suffer most prejudice, without a Cause; that the wickedest of all
the Land, should be permitted to possess the best part of my Inheritance,
under color of a law by mere iniquity: and other, little better then he, to
gape after the remainder, without any fault of mine.

48. who would think, that, some of my Tenants (whilst I was from home) being
killed, and near upon three thousand pound sterlin worth of Goods taken from
them, by a pack of villains, who could pretend for their robery no other
excuse, but that they had been plundered by others, no reparation or justice
should be granted, although oftentimes demanded: that I should be extorsed, in
matter of public dues, beyond any of my neighbors: that a garrison should be
placed within my house, and kept there ten months together, to my almost utter
undoing, upon no other pretense, but that the stance thereof is stately, and
the house it self of a notable good Fabric, and contrivance, and in the mean
while, a party both of horse and foot remain nevertheles quartered upon my
lands till the remotest Highlands should pay their sesse-mony: that neighbor
Garrisons, besides my own, should by parties enforce me, upon their Governors
bare tickets, to furnish them with what provisions they pleased, and yet
nothing thereof be allowed unto me, although I presented a Bill to that purpose
to the Scots Committee of Estates, as I did forth quartering of several
Troops of horse, for many months together, without any allowance.

49. These grievous pressures with many other, and as many more I have
sustained by the ministry of the Land, whereof I make account in the large
treatise of my Aporrexises to give notice more at length, have occasiond this
digression in a part, which likewise having proceeded from a serious
consideration of the two aforesaid scurvie quallities, that move the
Inhabitants of this I Will to run every foot to superna^ural causes, engages me
to say, that as it is a maxim in Philosophy, that entia non sunt multiplicanda
sine necessitate. So: that it is no less in congruity to avouch, that a thing
has miraculously been done by God, or that for achievement thereof the help
of an evil Spirit (because of his being reputed of more experience, then man)
has been required thereto, when, in the mean while perhaps, the performance of
it, by secondary means of an ordinary working is obvious to any that have the
dexterity to open his eyes to see the truth.

50. For which cause, they are much to blame, that think it impossible for any
man naturally to frame a language of greater perfection then Greek, Hebrew, or
Latin.

51. For who, instead of affording the true cause of a thing, unnecessarily
runs to miracles, tacitly acknowledges that God naturally cannot do it:
wherein he commits blasphemy, as that Soldier may be accounted guilty of
contumacie and disobedience, who rejecting the Orders wherewith an inferior
Officer is authorized to command him, absolutely refuses compearance, unless
the General himself come in person to require it of him.

52. As there is a possibility such a Language may be, so do I think it very
requisite such a Language were, both for affording conciseness, and abundance
of expression.

53. Such as extol those Languages most, are enforced sometimes to say, that
Laborant penuria verborum; and thereunto immediately subjoyn this reason, Quiae
plures sunt res quam verba.

54. That is soon said; and, ad pauca respicientes facile ^auntiant. But here I
ask them, how they come to know that there are more Things then Words, taking
Things (as in this sense they ought to be taken) for Things universal; because
there is no word spoken, which to the conceit of man is not able to represent
more individuals then one, be it Sun, Moon, Phoenix, or what you will, even
amongst Verbs, and Syncategorematical signs, which do only suppone for the
modalities of things: therefore is each word the sign of an universal thing;
Peter signifying either this Peter, or that Peter; and any whatever name,
surname, or title, being communicable to one and many.

55. Thus though both words and thoughts, as they are signs, be universal; yet
do I believe that those who did attribute less universality to words then
things, knew not definitely the full number of words taking words for any
articulate pronunciation.

56. Nay, I will go further: There is no Alphabet in the world, be the
Calculator never so well skilled in Arithmetic, by virtue whereof the exact
number of words may be known; because that number must comprehend all the
combinations that Letters can have with one another: and this cannot be done,
if any letter be wanting; and consequently, by no Alphabet as yet framed,
wherein (as I have already said in the twelfth Article) there is a deficiency
of many letters.

57. The Universal Alphabet therefore must be first conceived, before the
exactness of that computation can be attained unto.

58. Then is it, when having couched an Alphabet materiative of all the words
the mouth of man, with its whole implements, is able to pronounce, and bringing
all these words within the systeme of a Language, which, by reason of its
logopandochie, may deservedly be entitled, The Universal Tongue, that nothing
will better merit the labor of a Grammatical Arithmetician, then, after due
enumeration, hinc inde, to appariate the words of the Universal Language with
the things of the Universe.

59. The analogy therein 'twixt the sign and thing signified holding the more
exactly, that as, according to Aristotle, there can be no more worlds but one,
because all the matter whereof worlds can be composed, is in this: so can there
be no Universal Language, but this I am about to divulge unto the world,
because all the words enunciable are in it contained.

60. If any officious Critic will run to the omnipotency of God for framing
more worlds, (according to the common saying, Nothing is impossible to God,
that implies not a contradiction) so must he have recourse to the same
omnipotent power for furnishing of man with other speech-tools then his tongue,
throat, roof of the mouth, lips, and teeth, before the contexture of another
Universal Language can be warped.

61. That I should hit upon the invention of that, for the furtherance of
Philosophy, and other Disciplines and Arts, which never hitherto has been so
much as thought upon by any; and that in a matter of so great extent, as the
expressing of all the things in the world, both in themselves, actions, ways of
doing, situation, pendicles, relations, connexions, pathetick interpositions,
and all other appurtenances to a perfect elocution, without being beholding to
any Language in the world insomuch as one word, will hardly be believed by our
fidimplicitary Gown-men, who, satisfied with their predecessors contrivances,
and taking all things literally, without examination, blaterate, to the
na^seating even of vulgar ears, those exotic Proverbs, There is no new thing
under the Sun, Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius, and Beware of Philosophers,
authorizating this on Paul, the first on Solomon, and the other on Terence.

62. But, poor souls, they understand not that in the passage of Solomon is
meant, that there is no innovation in the essence of natural things; all
transmutations on the same matter, being into forms, which, as they differ from
some, so have an essential uniformity with others preexistent in the same kind.

63. And when it was said by Paul, Beware of Philosophers, he meant such
Sophisters as themselves, who under the vizzard of I know not what, corrupt the
channels of the truth, and pervert all Philosophy and Learning.

64. As for the sayings of Terence, whether Scipio couched them, or himself,
they ought to be inferred rather as testimonies of neat Latin, then for
asserting of infallible verities.

65. If there has been no new thing under the Sun, according to the adulterate
sense of those Pristinary Lobcocks, How comes the invention of Syllogisms to be
attributed to Aristotle, that of the Sphere to Archimedes, and Logarithms to
Neper? It was not Swart then, and Gertudenburg, that found out Gunpowder, and
the Art of Printing; for these two men lived after the decease of Solomon.

66. Had there been Canon in Solomon's days, Rehoboam (by all appearance) would
have made use of them for the recovery of his inheritance; nor had some mention
of Artillery been omited in the Books of the Macchabees.

67. Pancerola's Treatise de novis adimpertis (although Polydor Virgil were
totally forgot) would be, had there been no new thing since Solomon penned
Ecclesiastes, but as a discourse of Platonic reminiscencies, and calling to
mind some formerly lost fancies.

68. Truly I am so far from being of the opinion of those Archaeomanetick
Coxcombs, that I really think, there will always be new inventions, where
there are excellent spirits.

69. For as I ascribe unto my self the invention of the Trissotetrail
Trigonometry, for facility of calculation by representatives of letters and
syllables; the proving of the equipollencie and opposition both of plain and
modal enunciations by rules of Geometry, the unfolding of the chiefest parts of
Philosophy by a continuated Geographical allegory; and above a hundred other
several books on different subjects, the conceit of so much as one whereof
never entered into the brains of any before my self (although many of them have
been lost at Worcester-fight:) so am I confident, that others after me, may
fall upon some strain of another kind, never, before that, dreamed upon by
those of foregoing ages.

70. Now to the end the Reader may be more enamored of the Language, wherein I
am to publish a Grammar and Lexicon, I will here set down some few qualities
and advantages peculiar to it self, and which no Language else (although all
other concurred with it) is able to reach unto.

71. First, There is not a word utterable by the mouth of man, which in this
language has not a peculiar signification by it self; so that the allegation
of Bliteri by the Summulists, will be of small validity.

72. Secondly, Such as will harken to my instructions, if some strange word be
proposed to them, whereof there are many thousands of millions, deviseable by
the wit of man, which never hitherto by any breathing have been uttered, shall
be able, although he know not the ultimate signification thereof, to declare
what part of speech it is; or if a Noun, unto what predicament or class it is
to be reduced; whether it be the sign of a real or notional thing, or somewhat
concerning mechanic Trades in their Tools, or terms; or if real, whether
natural or artificial, complete, or incomplete; for words here do suppone for
the things which they signify; as when we see my Lord Generals picture, we
say, there is my Lord General.

73. Thirdly, This world of words has but two hundred and fifty prime radices,
upon which all the rest are branched: for better understanding whereof, with
all its dependant boughs, sprigs, and ramelets, I have before my Lexicon set
down the division thereof (making use of another allegory) into so many Cities,
which are subdivided into streets, they again into lanes, those into houses,
these into stories, whereof each room stands for a word; and all these so
methodically, that who observes my precepts therein, shall at the first
hearing of a word, know to what City it belongs, and consequently not to be
ignorant of some general signification thereof, till after a most exact prying
into all its letters, finding the street, lane, house, story, and room thereby
denotated, he punctually hit upon the very proper thing it represents in its
most specifical signification.

74. Fourthly, By virtue of adjectitious syllabicals annexible to Nouns and
Verbs, there will arise of several words, what compound, what derivative,
belonging in this Language to one Noune or to one Verb alone, a greater number
then does pertain to all the parts of speech, in the most copious Language in
the world besides.

75. Fifthly, So great energy to every meanest constitutive part of a word in
this Language is appropriated, that one word thereof, though but of seven
syllables at most shall comprehend that which no Language else in the world is
able to express in fewer then fourscore and fifteen several words; and that not
only a word here and there for masteries sake, but several millions of such;
which, to any initiated in the rudiments of my Grammar, shall be easy to frame.

76. Sixthly, In the cases of all the declinable parts of speech, it surpasses
all other Languages whatsoever: for whilst others have but five or six at most,
it has ten, besides the nominative.

77. Seventhly, There is none of the learned Languages, but has store of Nouns
defective of some case or other; but in this Language there is no Heteroclite
in any declinable word, nor redundancie or deficiencie of cases.

78. Eighthly, Every word capable of number, is better provided therewith in
this Language, then by any other: for instead of two or three numbers which
others have, this affords you four; to wit, the singular, dual, plural, and
redual.

79. Ninthly, It is not in this as other Languages, wherein some words lack one
number, and some another: for here each casitive or personal part of speech is
endued with all the numbers.

80. Tenthly, In this Tongue there are eleven genders; wherein likewise it
exceeds all other Languages.

81. Eleventhly, Verbs, Mongrels, Participles, and Hybrids, have all of them
ten Tenses, besides the present; which number, no Language else is able to
attain to.

82. Twelfthly, Though there be many conjugable words in other Languages
defective of Tenses, yet does this Tongue allow of no such anomaly, but
grants all to each.

83. Thirteenthly, In lieu of six Moods which other Languages have at most,
this one injoyeth seven in its conjugable words.

84. Fourteenthly, Verbs here, or other conjugable parts of speech, admit of no
want of Moodes, as do other Languages.

85. Fifteenthly, In this Language, the Verbs and Participles have four voices,
although it was never heard that ever any other Language had above three.

86. Sixteenthly, No other Tongue has above eight or nine parts of speech; but
this has twelve.

87. Seventeenthly, For variety of diction in each part of speech, it
surmounteth all the Languages in the world.

88. Eighteenthly, Each Noun thereof, or Verb, may begin or end with a Vowel or
Consonant, as to the peruser shall seem most expedient.

89. Nineteenthly, Every word of this Language declinable or indeclinable has
at least ten several synomyma's.

90. Twentiethly, each of these synomyma's, in some circumstance of the
signification, differs from the rest.

91. One and twentiethly, Every faculty, science, art, trade, or discipline,
requiring many words for expression of the knowledge thereof, has each its
respective root from whence all the words thereto belonging are derived.

92. Two and twentiethly, In this Language the opposite members of a division
have usually the same letters in the words which signify them; the initial and
final letter being all one, with a transmutation only in the middle ones.

93. Three and twentiethly, Every word in this Language signifies as well
backward as forward; and however you invert the letters, still shall you fall
upon significant words: whereby a wonderful facility is obtained in making of
Anagrams.

94. Four and twentiethly, There is no Language in the world, but for every
word thereof, it will afford you another of the same signification, of equal
syllables with it, and beginning or ending, or both, with vowels or consonants
as it does.

95. Five and twentiethly, by virtue hereof, there is no Hexamater, Elegiack,
Saphick, Asclepiad, Iambick, or any other kind of Latin or Greek verse, but I
will afford you another in this Language of the same sort, without a syllable
more or less in the one then the other, Spondae answering to Spondae, dactil to
dactil, caesure to caesure, and each foot to other, with all uniformity
imaginable.

96. Six and twentiethly, As it trotteth easily with metrical feet, so at the
end of the career of each line, has it the dexterity, after the manner of our
English and other vernaculary Tongues, to stop with the closure of a rhyme; in
the framing whereof, the well-versed in that Language shall have so little
labor, that for every word therein he shall be able to furnish at least five
hundred several monosyllables of the same termination with it.

97. Seven and twentiethly, in translating verses of any vernaculary Tongue,
such as Italian, French, Spanish, Slavonian, Dutch, Irish, English, or whatever
it be, it affords you of the same signification, syllable for syllable, and in
the closure of each line a rhyme, as in the original.

98. Eight and twentiethly, by this Language, and the Letters thereof, we may
do such admirable feats in numbers, that no cyphering can reach its
compendiousness: for whereas the ordinary way of numbering by thousands of
thousands of thousands of thousands, does but confuse the hearers
understanding; to remedy which, I devised, even by cyphering it self, a far
more exact manner of numeration, as in the Treatise of Arithmetic which I have
ready for the Press, is evidently apparent; This Language affords so concise
words for numbering, that the number for setting down whereof, would require in
vulgar Arithmetic, more figures in a row then there might be grains of sand
containable from the center of the earth, to the highest heavens, is in it
expressed by two letters.

99. Nine and twentiethly, what rational Logarithms do by writing, this
Language does by heart; and by adding of letters, shall multiply numbers, which
is a most exquisite secret.

100. Thirtiethly, the digits are expressed by vowels, and the consonants stand
for all the results of the Cephalism, from ten to eighty one, inclusively;
whereby many pretty Arithmetical tricks are performed.

101. One and thirtiethly, in the denomination of the fixed Stars, it affords
the most significant way imaginary: for by the single word alone which
represents the Star, you shall know the magnitude, together with the longitude
and latitude, both in degrees and minutes of the Star that is expressed by it.

102. Two and thirtiethly, by one word in this Language, we shall understand
what degree or what minute of the degree of a sign in the Zodiac, the Sun or
Moon, or any other planet is in.

103. Three and thirtiethly, as for the year of God, the month of that year,
week of the month, day of that week, partition of the day, hour of that
partition, quarter and half quarter of the hour, a word of one or two syllables
at most in this Language will express it all to the full.

104. Four and thirtiethly, in this Language, also, words expressive of herbs,
represent unto us with what degree of cold, moisture, heat, or dryness they are
qualifyed; together with some other property distinguishing them from other
herbs.

105. Five and thirtiethly, in matter of Colors, we shall learn by words in
this Language the proportion of light, shadow, or darkness commixed in them.

106. Six and thirtiethly, in the composition of syllables by vowels and
consonants, it affords the aptest words that can be imagined, for expressing
how many vowels and consonants any syllable is compounded of, and how placed in
priority and situation to one another. Which secret in this Language, is
exceeding necessary, for understanding the vigor of derivatives in their
variety of signification.

107. Seven and thirtiethly, for attaining to that dexterity which Mithridates
King of Pontus was said to have, in calling all his soldiers of an Army of
threescore thousand men, by their names and surnames, this Language will be so
convenient, that if a General, according to the Rules thereof, will give new
names to his soldiers, whether Horse, Foot, or Dragoons, as the French use to
do to their Infantry by their noms de guerre, he shall be able, at the first
hearing of the word that represents the name of a soldier, to know of what
Brigade, Regiment, Troop, Company, Squadron, or Division he is; and whether he
be of the Cavalry, or of the Foot; a single Soldier, or an Officer, or
belonging to the Artillery or Baggage: which device, in my opinion, is not
unuseful for those great Captains that would endear themselves in the favor of
the Soldiery.

108. Eight and thirtiethly, in the contexture of nouns, pronouns, and
preposital articles united together, it administreth many wonderful varieties
of Laconick expressions, as in the Grammar thereof shall more at large be made
known unto you.

109. Nine and thirtiethly, every word in this Language is significative of a
number; because, as words may be increased by addition of letters and
syllables; so of numbers is there a progress in infinitum.

110. Fourtiethly, in this Language every number, how great soever, may be
expressed by one single word.

111. One and fourtiethly, As every number essentially differs from another,
so shall the words expressive of several numbers, be from one another
distinguished.

112. Two and Fourtiethly, No Language but this has in its words the whole
number of letters, that is, ten vowels, and five and twenty consonants; by
which means there is no word escapes the latitude thereof.

113. Three and fourtiethly, As its interjections are more numerous, so are
they more emphatical in their respective expression of passions, than that part
of speech is in any other Language whatsoever.

114. Four and fourtiethly, The more syllables there be in any one word of this
Language, the manyer several significations it has: with which propriety no
other Language is endowed.

115. Five and fourtiethly, All the several genders in this Language, are as
well competent to verbs as nouns: by virtue whereof, at the first uttering of a
verb in the active voice, you shall know whether it be a god, a goddess, a man,
a woman, a beast, or any thing inanimate, (and so through the other five
genders) that does the action: which excellency is altogether peculiar unto
this Language.

116. Six and fourtiethly, In this Language there is an art, out of every word,
of what kind of speech soever it be, to frame a verb; whereby, for expressing
all manner of actions, a great facility is attained unto.

117. Seven and fourtiethly, To all manner of verbs, and many
syncategorematical words, is allowed in this Language a flexion by Cases,
unknown to other Tongues, thereby to represent unto our understandings more
compendious expressions then is possible to afford by any other means.

118. Eight and fourtiethly, Of all Languages, this is the most compendious in
complement, and consequently, fittest for Courtiers and Ladies.

119. Nine and fourtiethly, For writing of Missives, Letters of State, and all
other manner of Epistles, whether serious or otherways, it affords the
compactest style of any Language in the world, and therefore, of all other the
most requisite to be learned by Statesmen and Merchants.

120. Fiftiethly, No Language in matter of Prayer and Ejaculations to Almighty
God, is able, for conciseness of expression, to compare with it; and therefore,
of all other, the most fit for the use of Churchmen, and spirits inclined to
devotion.

121. One and fiftiethly, This Language has a modification of the tense,
whether present, preterite, or future, of so curious invention for couching
much matter in few words, that no other Language ever had the like.

122. Two and fiftiethly, There is not a proper name in any Country of the
world, for which this Language affords not a peculiar word, without being
beholding to any other.

123. Three and fiftiethly, In many thousands of words belonging to this
Language, there is not a Letter which has not a peculiar signification by it
self.

124. Four and fiftiethly, The polysyllables of this Language do all of them
signify by their monosyllables; which no word in any other Language does, ex
instituto, but the compound ones: for though the syllabical parts of exlex
separately signify as in the compound; yet those of homo do it not, nor yet
those of dote, or domus, as in the whole: and so it is in all other Languages
except the same: for there are in the Italian and Latin Tongues, words of ten,
eleven, or twelve syllables, whereof not one syllable by it self does signify
any thing at all in that Language, of what it does in the whole; as
adolescenturiatissimamente, honorificieabilitudinitatibus, etc.

125. Five and fiftiethly, all the Languages in the world will be beholding to
this, and this to none.

126. Six and fiftiethly, there is yet another wonder in this Language, which
although a little touched by the by in the fifty eighth article of this
Preface, I will mention yet once more; and it is this, That though this
language have advantage of all other, it is impossible any other in time coming
surpass it, because, as I have already said, it comprehends, first, all words
expressible; and then, in matter of the obliquity of the cases and tenses, the
contrivance of undeclinable parts; and right disposure of vowels and
consonants, for distinguishing of various significations within the latitude of
letters, cannot be afforded a way so expedient.

127. Seven and fiftiethly, the greatest wonder of all, is, that of all the
Languages in the world, it is easiest to learn; a boy of ten years old, being
able to attain to the knowledge thereof, in three months space; because there
are in it many facilitations for the memory, which no other Language has but
it self.

128. Eight and fiftiethly, sooner shall one reach the understanding of things
to be signified by the words of this Language, then by those of any other, for
that Logarithms in comparison of absolute numbers, so do the words thereof in
their initials respectively vary according to the nature of the things which
they signify.

129. Nine and fiftiethly, for pithiness of proverbs, oracles, and sentences,
no Language can parallel with it.

130. Sixtiethly, in Axioms, Maxims, and Aphorisms, it is excellent above all
other Languages.

131. One and sixtiethly, for definitions, divisions, and distinctions, no
Language is so apt.

132. Two and sixtiethly, for the affirmation, negation, and infinitation of
propositions, it has proprieties unknown to any other Language, most necessary
for knowledge.

133. Three and sixtiethly, in matters of Enthymems, Syllogisms, and all manner
of Illative ratiocination, it is the most compendious in the world.

134. Sixty fourthly, Negative expressions are more compendiously uttred in
this Language, then in any other in the world.

135. Sixty fifthly, The infinitant terms by this Tongue are in one single
word expressed, which succinctness is by no other Language afforded.

136. Lastly, There is not any phrase whatsoever, which, for being peculiar to
one Speech, and consequently in all other to be improperly taken (wherewith
each known Tongue in the world is most variously stored) has, when translated
from its original idiome, the denomination of Graecism, Latinism, Scotism,
Anglicism, and so forth; but in this universal Language is so well admitted,
that, in losing nothing of its genuine liveliness, it bears along with it,
without any diminution either of sense or expression, the same very emphasis in
the stream, which it had at the spring, the like whereof is in no other
Language to be found.

137. Besides these sixty and six advantages above all other Languages, I might
have couched thrice as many more, of no less consideration then the aforesaid,
but that these same will suffice to sharpen the longing of the generous Reader,
after the intrinsecal and most researched secrets of the new Grammar and
Lexicon which I^am to evulge.

The Preface To the second BOOK, entitled CHRESTASEBEIA.
THe scope of the Author in this his second Book is to plead for the removal of
some impediments, which stand in the way of emitting those his works of a
curious invention, wherewith he intends to gratify this Isle; in doing
whereof, he observes a very compendious, and most commendable method, for
prosecuting of the noble design, proposed in the general title of the
Introduction. Natural Phylosophie teaches us, That one form is to be expelled,
before another can be introduced upon the subjected matter; for which cause
Aristotle very wisely, constituted Privation for one of the th^ee principles of
Nature. No judicious Architect will begin to erect a fabric, till the ground
be first cleansed of the rubbish, which hinders the laying of the foundation.
Arts, disciplines, and sciences, for being qualities (as are the faculties
whence they emane) (though of another species) are predicamentally classible
under accidents, that have their essential dependence on that substance, which,
without derogating any thing from the soul of man, may properly be said, to be
the body, whose livelihood consisting in a maintenance by external means, The
Author very rationally thence infers, a necessity of being established in
the estate of his Predecessors, for the production of his brain-issues, in ma^y
elaboured secrets. Those the Author metaphorically terms movables, thereby
to claim the benefit of an act of Parliament, for his redintegration into his
progenitors Land, and yet that he should make so disproportionate a parallel,
he lays the weight upon the iniquity of the times, and rigor of Flagitators,
whose lamentable wrongs done unto him, he most egregiously amplifyeth by three
notable examples: and in sequel thereof describes Usurie to the life, together
with the bruti^hness of the churlish exacters of it. Why to the promised
Language, is premised this Introduction, and that the promulgation thereof is
retarded, the Author, besides what is said, inserteth this other reason, least
it is inconsiderate prostitution should make it be undervalued: to confirm this,
he shows by three or four pregnant examples, how enjoyment abates affection,
and by ten instances more, how in the est^mation of ill-poised Judgments, very
precious things have been postposed to quisqu liary trash, for witnessing the
transcendencie ^f the effects of mental faculties, beyond those of either body
or fortune, he points at Scotus, and Sacrobosco: but in collatiotioning
Learning with Warfare, he leaves the odds undecided. What large Donatives have
been bestowed on learned men for their encouragement to Literature, he
specifyeth by eight several examples: and by seven more, the indefatigable
pains taken by eminent Scholars of former ages in the prosecuting of their
studies; all which the Author is pleased to display before us, the better
thereby to extol the gifts of the intellectual part: and where he transiently
lets fall a word in praise of his own elucubraetions, he excuses it by the
necessity of avoiding a greater evil, subjoyning thereto for better
illustration, three specious presidents of a King, a Prophet, and a Saint, all
divinely insp^red: and finally closes all, with a certainty (upon the removal
of obstructions) of performing whatever he has promised, the contexture of all
which being maturely perpended, cannot choose, but be pleasing to the
industrious Reader.

The second BOOK OF THE INTRODVCTION ENTITLED CHRESTASEBEIA. OR Impious
dealing of CREDITORS. WHEREIN The severity of the Creditors of the Authors
Family, is desired to be removed, as a main impediment to the Production of
this Universal Language, and publication of other no less considerable
Treatises.
1 WHy it pleased me to set forth this Preamble a part, without annexing
thereto the rudiments of the Language, by the faith I owe to truth, it was
against my will, and the cause thereof did merely proceed from without: First,
for that all the Papers concerning that Subject were lost at the spoil after
Worcester fight, and next, there being in Scotland of those that would despoyl
me of my whole Lands, who care as little for Learning, as a Sow does for a
Pearl: Avarus prius saccum implet q^am animum.
should I have publicly exposed these treasures, like Aesops Cock, they would
have preferred a Barley Corn before them.

2. And although I expect no applause from them, whose Arcadian ears by the
warbling of no Nightingale; Interea pleno cum ^urget saculus, ore. Crescit amor
nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
are to be demulceated: yet by reason of the power they have in the land, I
thought fit to stop my Pen for a while, least otherwise I should fail of my
design, in the preservation of my Predecessors inheritance.

3. For albeit it might be thought unreasonable, that I should be denuded of
those possessions, my Ancestors have enjoyed these one and twenty hundred
years, and upwards, and that by them to whom I was never beholding insomuch as
a penny, Avari animus nullo satiatur lucro.
nor any of my predecessors, save my Father alone, whose facility, in making of
unprofitable bargains, they abused, for enriching of themselves; and at whose
hands they have gained so much, although they never get a penny from me they
can be no losers.

Suos hospites male remunerat avarus serpens est in sina ignis in gremio, mus
in pera.
4. Yet as if I were their Debtor (of which Title, the civilest Nations in the
world will acquit me) I demand of the State, and Authority established, this
favor amongst others, that they would allow me the benefit of the six and
thirtieth Statute of the fifth Parliament of King James the third, which never
yet was repealed, in so far as it provideth, that the Debtors moveable goods be
first valued, and discussed, before his lands be apprised, much less possessed.

5. And if conform to the aforesaid Act, this be granted, I do promise
shortly, to display before the world, ware of greater value, then ever from the
East Indias were brought in ships to Europe.

Qui studet nummis hic praefert infima summis: condita fastori proeponit and
ejus amori.
6. And though there be many (even of my Fathers Creditors) that will postpose
it to a Little money, yet are not Diamonds and gold of the less worth, because
the Americans make more account of Iron, and Beads.

7. I have seen of those, that choosed Sugar, before Ambergrece; because they
deemed it sweeter to the taste: and preferred Black Tours velvet, to pure
Segovia scarlet; for that it seemed softer to the touch: Yet is not such a
simple, and unskilful misprising of things to pass for a Rule amongst the
better sort, for inhansing, or imparing of their prices.

8 For truth being in indivisibili, as is the essence of what ever is, who is
most versed in the nature, and properties of a thing, is always best able to
dignosce of its value.

9. A Shoemaker cannot judge so uprightly of an elabourate Picture, as a
cunning Artist in the trade of Painting: nor an illiterate Soldier pry so
profoundly in a Metaphysical Argument, as a Learned Philosopher brought up with
quiddities.

10. A Ploughman, is better acquainted with tilling, then Bills of Exchange: and
a Merchant banker, with the rate of what in the Hundred, is to be taken from
Amsterdam to Venice, then what Fair he should go to, for buying of the
cheapest, and best cattle.

11. Seamen will prove as ridiculous, in making on foot their approaches to a
Fort, as Land warriers, in the conding of a ship; and it will become a Clown as
ill, to complement with a Lady, as a Courtier to carry Burdens. Each trade, or
vocation having its own genius, and no man being skilled in all alike.

12. I have heard an Italian of good report say, that, with the money got from
a Lapidarie, for a box of precious stones, he bought a signiorie of Land, which
the owner, ignorant in such, would not have disponed for a Hundred times as
many Jewels.

13. And have likewise known a Citizen in Paris, that would not have let out
one single Chamber of his, though but for a month, for six times more
Cochenile, then at the hands of others, well seen in the like Chaffer, afforded
the money, for which he was glad to sell a Ninteen years Lease of his whole
house together, consisting of ten Rooms as good, which is the proportion of
thirteen thousand six hundred and eighty, to one.

14. Out of which instances, is to be collected, that seeing men of all
professions trade for money, who usually are unexpert in the Commodities of one
another vocation, if it occur, that the Debtor and Creditors be of several
Faculties, the Debtor must otherwise then with the Chevisance of his
Employment, Labor for the Contentment of his Creditor of another calling; and
consequently money being the common measure of all merchandise, must needs sell
to some other, for the payment of him.

15. The case in some measure is my own, considering the condition, wherein,
for the present, I am made to stand with my Fathers Creditors, whose lack of
insight in the Ware, I would make sale of, together with their earnest pressing
me for money, enforce me, for the better obtaining of the last, to have
recourse to those, that are more skilful in the first to dispone it to.

16. Yet if I were not netled by such a Sect of bawling, and obstreperous
Seekers, Vide Art. 69.
in a time so unfertil of good shifts, and wherein I have already essayed the
uneffectualness of all other manner of means, Hic bona pars hominum d^cepta
cupidine salsa. Nil satis est inquit.
this vendacity should never have appeared in me of a Commodity, which to
appreciate at the rate of any coin, I would have accounted a kind of Simonie,
and a course which, had my Land been as clear of Merchants, as my mind is of
mercinariness I had not daigned to stoop to for a Kingdom.

Ergo sollici^ae tu causa pecunia vitae es.
17. But for want of other expedients, making bold to pitch on this, I heartily
supplicate the subsidiarie-courtesie of the State aforesaid, toward the
emancipation, and infranchising of my mind, from the drudgery, and servile
ploddings, wherewith it has been captivated, Tu vitiis hominum ^^udelta ^^bula
p^aebes semina curarum de capite o^ra l^^o.
how to perform duty to those Faeneratorie Masters.

18. Who always sticking close about me, like a cluster of stinging Wasps, and
thundering upon me charges, as unwelcom to any generous Spirit, as is the touch
of an Ibis Pen to a Crocodile, have so fretted, galled, and pricked me to the
very Soul, that all the Faculties thereof, have by them been this great while
most pitilesly, and atrociously inslaved, and incarcerated in the comfortless
dump, F^enus est on us etiam divitibus intollerab^le, says Plutarch. Magno malo
est hominibus avaritia idcirco quod homines magnis and multis incommodis
conflictantur propter immensam pecuniae cupiditatem.
of searching for wherewith to close their yawning mouths, and stop their
gaping.

19. For truly I may say, that above ten thousand several times, I have by
those Flagitators been interrupted for money, Vid. lib. 5. Ar. 43. Avarus omnia
devorans vellet nullum hominem esse, ut omnia solus possideret.
which never came to my use, directly or indirectly, one way, or other, at
home, or abroad, any one time whereof, I was busied about Speculations, of
greater consequence, then all that they were worth in the world; from which,
had not I been violently plucked away by their importunity, I would have
emitted to public view, above five hundred several Treatises on inventions,
never hitherto thought upon by any.

20. But as a certain Shepherd, on a time (according to the Epimythist) would
have persuaded the Fox not to destroy his flock, till he had got their fleeces,
Excusatio avaritiae est cumulare pro filiis.
the wool whereof was to be employed in Cloth for the royal Robes of the
Sovereign of the Land: unto whom the Fox replied, That his main interest being
to fatten himself, and his cubbs, he did not find himself so much concerned in
either Sovereign or Subject, that upon any such pretext (how specious soever)
he would leave his terrier unmagazined of all manner of provision, competent
for his vulpecularie family.

21. Even so may I avouch, that the nature of the most part of this strange
kind of Flagitators, Nullum est justitiae in cordibus illorum vestigium in
quibus avaritia sibi fecit habitaculum.
being without any consideration, or regard to the condition of a Gentleman, or
whether the improvement or impairing of his Fortunes, should further, or retard
the progress of the Countries Fame, totally to employ themselves in a
coin-accumulating way toward the multiplying of their trash, and heedful
accrescing of the Mammon dross, wherein their Lucre-hailing minds, and
consopiated Spirits lie intombed, and imburyed.

22. For again, as the old Hyena of Quinzie (as it is reported in some
Outlandish stories) after he had seized upon the sublimest witted Gymnosophist
of that Age, Omnium scel^rum gravissima est avari^ia cum omnia humana and
divina jura cultumque vel ipsius dei pessundare consuevit cum nihil sit tam
sanctum quod avaritia vicla^e non soleat.
on purpose to feed upon him, being a Hungered, did vilify and misregard the
tears and sorrow, justly shed, and conceived by the Inhabitants of that
populous and magnificent City, for the apparent loss of such unparallelled
wisdom, and exquisite Learning, as through the death of so prime a Philosopher,
was like for ever to redound to the whole Empire of China: and altogether
postposing them, to the satisfying of his base appetite, with one poor meal of
meat, and that only in a sorry breakfast he was to take out of his bowels,
killed him, tore him in pieces, and greedily snatched up that repast, the
better to dispose his stomach, within three hours thereafter, for another of
the like nature.

23. Just so, amongst many of my Fathers Creditors, has there bin a generation
of such tenacious Publicans, Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, auri sacra fames.
that cared so little, what the Country in general might be concerned in any
man's private interest (though much by some singular good friends of mine, has
been spoke to them in my own particular) that through their Cruelty, and
extreme hard usage, I have been often necessitated to supply out of my Brains,
Qui maluat locupletari crumenas quam Camoenas consulcre. Ab ipsis etiam statuis
exigerent (ut aium) farinas.
what was deficient in my Purse, and provide from a far, what should have been
afforded at home, one half terms. Interest, although but of a Petty, and
trivial Sum, being in their eyes of more esteem, then the Quintessence of all
the Liberal Arts, together with that of the Moral Virtues, epitomized in the
person of any, though imbellished to the Boot, with all other accomplishments
whatsoever, for discategorically, in despite of all order, by marshalling
quality after habere, they have still preferred the possession of a little
Lumber, and baggagely Pelf, to all the Choicest perfections of both body and
mind.

24. And indeed, to speak ingenuously, as the Sparrow, whom a late Archbishop
of Canterbury weeped to see as often forced to fall back, as it strove to fly
upwards, by reason of a little Peeble stone, fast at the end of a string, that
was tied to her foot: the contemplatively devout Prelate thereby considering,
that the sincerest minds, even of the most faithful, are oftentimes impedited
from soaring to their intended height, because of the clog of worldly
encumbrances, which depresseth them.

Nunquam expletur cupiditatis sitis nam cupiditati nihil est satis.
25. Even so may it be said of my self, that when I was most seriously imbusied
about the raising of my own, and Countries reputation to the supremest reach of
my endeavors, then did my Fathers Creditors, like so many milstones hanging at
my heels, pull down the vigor of my Fancy, and violently hold at under, what
other ways would have ascended, above the sublimest regions of Vulgar
conception.

26. Thus I being, as another Andromeda, Nil avaro molestius nullam est hominum
genus quod ^am auri habendi cupiditate intab. scat.
chained to the Rock of hard usage, and in the view of all my Compatriots,
exposed to the merciless Dragon, Usurie: I most humbly beseech the Sovereign
Authority of the Country, like another Perseus, mounted on the winged Pegasus
of Respect to the weal and honor thereof, to releeve me, by their power, from
the eminent danger of the jaws of so wild a monster.

27. Which makes the very meanest, and most frivolous sum of any (like the
Giant Ephialtes, Vid. B. 3. Art. 8. Inflammatur lucio avaritia and non
extinguitur quasi gradus quosdam cupiditatis habet et quo plures ascenderit eo
ad altiora festinat unde sit gravior^uina lapsuro.
who grew nine Inches every month) immensely to ^pread forth its exuberant
members, without any other sustenance, or nourishment, then the mere invisible
Flux of time, that starveth all things else, until it extend it self at last
to a mighty huge Colossus of Debt, able, like that of the Rhodes, to take
fastening upon two territories at once.

28. And in recompense of a so illustrious and magnificent action, unto the
State of this Land, as fittest patron for such a present, will I tender some of
the aforesaid movables whose value I do warrantably make account to be of no
less extent, then in the estimation of all the Universities of both Nations,
and other pregnant Spirits of approved Literature, shall centuplate the worth
of the whole money, that for debt can be asked by those Creditors, out of the
profoundest exorbitancy of their Covetousness.

29. By my appealing thus to a Judicatorie, conflated of the prime lights of
the Isle, and who (as all wise men else) do more magnify, and extol the
endowments of the mind, then those of either body, or fortune: it is very
perceptible, unto which of these three branches of good this offer of mine is
to be reduced.

30. No man will deny, that is not destitute of common sense, but that Scotus,
and Sacrobosco, brought more reputation to Scotland by their learned writings,
then if they had enriched it with Gallioons, loaded full of gold: and that it
had been better for that Nation, to have lost many millions of Angels, then
that through penury, or any other accident, the works of those Gallant men
had been buried in Oblivion.

31. For as in both body and mind, the instruments of the nobler faculties are
esteemed of the greater value: so in a politic incorporation, so much the more
should be respected, and dignified the advancers of the reputation thereof,
then the accrescers of its wealth, that of the three degrees of goodness, the
qualifications of the mind have the precedence.

Cum avaritia alicui duminatur subjectu^ malis omnibus demonstratur quia de
avaritia omnia mala oriuntur and peccatorum omnium spinae producuntur.
32. And although, there be Legions in Scotland of those Gadarenal Swine, that
will prefer the taste of a Sky ball to the fragrancy of the most odiferous
Jasmin: who also, like so many dunghill fowls, to a grain of wheat, will
postpose the most precious Pearl that is: and haling only after sensual things,
reduplicatively as sensual, give no repast at all to the better part, which
preposterously dancing attendance, after the inferior appetites, has its eyes
in a veternatorie somnolency shut up from the prospect of all mental
speculations.

33. Yet the essence of man consisting in reasonability, he may be said to have
little of man in him, that regards not another the more, for having his reason
imbellished with the addition of Literature.

34. Which has been held in such grandissim account by the prudentest of
Pristin ages, that making it come in competition with Soldiery it self, they
did not stick to aver, that Greece (which of all Nations was most renowned, and
most worthy to be most renowned, both for wit and valor) did owe more cordial
praise, and commendation to the Philosophers thereof, then to all its most
military and warlike Champions; preferring in this Case, knowledge in Sciences,
to fortitude in the fields; and the habits of the Intellectual faculties, to
those of the moral.

35. But unfainedly, seeing to the foundest judgments of any* and most
consentaneous to one another, in their Adherence to Apodictick conclusions, is
oftentimes incident a repugnancy of Opinion in matter of Dialectical
ratioc^nation: and that some of them, in a very similitudinary probability of
prevalency on both sides of the Argument, do ferret, out of Topic celluls,
mediums prompting them to have in greater estimation magnanimity of Courage,
then vivacity of Spirit.

36. I will in so far as concerns my self, for that I hope ere long to breath
in such auspicious days, as will give way to my good destiny, to present me
with those favorable opportunities may make my deservings appear equally
reco^mendable in both, rather choose to suspend the pronouncing of my verdict,
then by any sentiment of mine, positively to determine of the preeminence of
either.

37. However, to descend more particularly to the purpose, seeing it is every
where uncontroversibly acknowledged, that the goods of the mind are of more
worth, then those of fortune; and by consequence, the pregnantly conceived, and
maturely ennixed offspring of my own brain (which least I should seem to
philotize it, I in all humility submit to the unpartial censure of the choicest
Spirits) of far greater value, then any piece of money due to my Fathers
Creditors.

38. I do ardently desire, and supplicat the State not to suffer the majesty,
and sacred name of Sovereign authority, under color of a Law, any more to be
abused in favors of those men, who have made use thereof in several charges
against me, formerly in the name of both the King Charle's, and now in that of
the Keepers of the Liberties of England, O Avare sordidius nihil est nihil est
te spurcius uno qui potes insidias dona vocata.
to no other end but to rob me of my Predecessors Inheritance, without any
procurement of mine.

39. Withal, I heartily entreat them to vouchsafe the Patronizing of the
present, I am to make unto them, and in Testimony of their acceptance of it,
exoner me of the Burden of these Flagitators, by taking such a course, as to
their discretions shall seem most expedient, which, if they consider aright,
were it for the defrayment of greater sums, will be of small difficulty. Si^
avidis fallax indulget piscibus hamus Callida sic stultas decipit esca feras.


40. And here I promise, by the Faith I owe to God, that this courtesy, so
conferred, shall (if I live) as Seed sown in a fertile soil, yield a hundred
fold, to the promoving of the repuputation of the Land.

41. Which in an age, so full of Calumnies, and wherein the most zealous
thoughts do not escape mis-interpretation, is not to be rejected, nor any thing
in that kind, which may conduce to the undeceiving of Forrainers of any
prejudicate opinion of late conceived by them against the integrity of our
Countrymen.

42. Some will say, that, I demand much, and things unusual to be granted:
others again, that I promise far more, and am too prodigal in my own praises:
But my self will avouch, that as my demand is reasonable, so would I have ere
now performed what I promised, and not spoke so much as one syllable in my own
Favors, but that by one and the same occasion, I was necessitated to do the
one, and forbear the other.

43. It is ordinary amongst Seamen, to say the Tempest so increased; that, for
safety of my life, I was glad to throw my goods overboard: I have heard
Soldiers likewise affirm, and have seen, that they have heartily abandoned
their Purse to the prevailing Enemy, for obtaining the better quarter: yet to
examine either of these actions aright, they were but mixed ones tending to the
lesser evil; voluntary, secundum quid, but simpliciter, unwilling.

44 Just so is it, for shunning of the greater harm, to wit, the Inconveniency
might ensue upon the vilifying of my brainworks, I choosed both to restrain
their Emission, and commend what was to be promulgated: either of which, had it
not been for the aforesaid necessities, would have been as unwelcome to me, as
to the Merchant, was the casting out of his goods into the Sea; or to the
Soldier, the delivery up of his purse unto his Foe.

45. Enjoyment commonly abates Estimation, but longing does increase it; And as
there are of those, who, for one night of a Lady, have bestowed double the
means, would have sufficed for a Joyncture to the Mother of their lawful
children, although a better and more handsome woman to the boot: so are vulgar
Spirits (for the most part) highly mistaken in their sense of the true value of
things of any importance.

46. Judas valued at three hundred pence the Box of Ointment, which Mary poured
on the feet of Christ, whom himself sold for thirty.

47. I have seen of them, that accounted no more of Ambergrece, then of Fullers
Earth, though in some parts, a handful of the one, will be worth a Thousand
cart loads of the o- other.

48. I have likewise heard of a hundred crowns, given for a Fresh Salmon, where
the Scots Pint of wine did cost but three halfpence: and of a Salmon every
whit as good, got for six pence, where so much wine of no better kind would
have stood you in half a Crown, which is the proportion of twenty thousand to
one. For who at Toledo with the hundred crowns got for a Salmon, supposed
fresh, which at Aberdeen he bought for a six pence, did purchase four thousand
pints of Wine, which at his return to Aberdeen yielded him two thousand Crowns,
has clearly obtained twenty thousand six pences for one: Or who at Aberdeen
with the two Crowns got for four pints of Wine, which at Toledo he bought for a
six pence, did purchase twenty fresh Salmons, which at his return to Toledo,
yielded him two thousand Crowns, has in the same manner, for one six pence
obtained twenty thousand, which is a hundred to one, two hundred times told.

49. Of these examples there are many, which to sum up in one of a more
disproportioned mistake, then any of the rest, I will tell you, that there
happening a Gentleman of very good worth, to stay awhile at my house, who one
day, amongst many other, was pleased, in the deadst time of all the Winter,
with a Gun upon his shoulder, to search for a shot of some Wild-fowl: and after
he had waded through many waters, taken excessive pains in quest of his game,
and by means thereof, had killed some five or six Moor-Fowls, and Patridges
which he brought along with him to my house, he was by some other Gentlemen,
who chanced to alight at my gate (as he entered in) very much commended for his
love to sport; And (as the fashion of most of our Countrymen is, not to praise
one, without dispraising another) I was highly blamed for not giving my self in
that kind to the same exercise, having before my eyes so commendable a Pattern
to imitate; I answered, though the Gentleman deserved Praise, for the evident
proof he had given that day of his inclination to thrift and laboriousness,
that nevertheless I was not too blame, seeing whilst he was busied about that
Sport, I was employed in a diversion of another nature, such as optical
secrets, mysteries of natural Philosophy, reasons for the variety of Colors,
the finding out of the Longitude, the squaring of a circle and ways to
accomplish all Trigonometrical calculations by signs, without tangents, with
the same compendiousness of computation, which, in the estimation of learned
men, would be accounted worth six hundred thousand Partridges, and as many
Moor-Fowles.

50. But, notwithstanding this relation, either for that the Gentlemen
understood it not, or that they deemed the exercise of the Body to be of
greater concernment, then that of the mind, they continued firm in their
former opinion, whereof I labored not to convince them; because I intended
according to their Capacities to bear them Company.

51. In the mean while that worthy Gentleman who was nothing of their mind, for
being wet, and weary after travel, was not able to eat of what he had so much
toyled for whilst my brain recreations so sharpened my appetite, that I supped
to very good purpose. That night past, the next morning I gave 6 pence to a
footman of mine, to try his fortune with the Gun, during the time I should
disport my self, in the breaking of a young horse: and it so fell out, that by
I had given my self a good heat by riding, the Boy returned with a dozen of
wild fouls, half-Moor-foule, half Partridge, whereat being exceeding well
pleased, I alighted, gave him my horse to care for, and forthwith entered in to
see my Gentlemen, the most especial whereof was unable to rise out of his bed,
by reason of the Gout and Siatick, wherewith he was seized for his former days
toil.

52. Thus seeing matters of the greatest worth, may be undervalued by such as
are destitute of understanding: Vide Art. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 46, 47, 48, 49.
B. 6. Art. 51, 52, 53, 54, 55.
who would reap any benefit by what is good, till it be appreciated should be
charie of its prestitution; let this therefore suffice, why to this preface, or
Introduction, I have not as yet subjoyned the Grammar, and Lexicon.

53. But why it is I should so extol the worth thereof, Vide Art. 46. of the
first Book, and 54, 56 of this same.
without the jeopardy of vain Glory, the reason is clear, and evident, being
necessitated (as I have told in the fifth and twenty eight articles of the same
Book) to merchandise it for the redintegrating of an Ancient family, it needs
not be thought strange, that in some measure I descend to the Fashion of the
shopkeepers, who to scrue up the buyer to the higher price, will tell them no
better can be had for money, it is the choicest ware in England, and if any can
match it, he shall have it for naught.

54. So in matter of this Literatorie chaffer, I determined not to be too rash
in the prostitution thereof, least it should be villified: yet went on in my
Laudatives, to procure the greater Longing, that an ardent desire might stir up
an emacity, to the furtherance of my proposed end.

55. Thus the first step of this Scale, being to avoid the dispreciative
censure of Plebeculary Critics, Hi admiratures auri oderunt virtutis indolem
and omnes honestas arts.
who (as Children prefer an apple to an Inheritance, or, Esau like, postposing
their birthright to a dish of pottage) have no regard of intellectual
perfections, where they come in Competition with any sensual goodness; or if
they do consider of them, in so far as concerns new inventions, they
slightingly use to vent themselves thus, the matter is not great, another could
have done it, what serves it for edification, Philosophy is dangerous, the
Apostle himself avoucheth it, and other such Quisquiliary diblaterations, to
the opprobrie of good spirits, and cloak of their own ignorance, they cast in
the face of Learning, that there is more humanity in the voice of a bull, or
that of the wildest bear that ever was, then in the speech of those monsters

56. The second step thereof, is my elogiarie interthets, in extolling the
proposed matter (without any philotary presumption) whereof in the most
authentic writings there wants not store of presidents.

57. Moses, in a book commonly said to be of his own writing, entitled
himself, the meekest man upon the face of the earth, and Paul, in the 11 of the
2 to the Corinthians, which was an Epistle of his own, ascribed to himself the
style of one of the chiefest of the Apostles, magnifying likewise his own
Learning therein, and other qualifications, wherewith he was endowed.

58. Nor was David, for all his heinous transgressions, free from this manner
of exalting himself; for in several of his Psalms, he wished to be judged
according to his righteousness, all which, though proceeding from the pen of
man, had the Spirit of God for the Dictator.

59. Truths related to a good end, carry not along with them any Blemish of
ostentation, and the intention being that which specified the Action, such self
commendatives are not to be dispraised; seeing they bring us to the third step
of the Scale, which is seriously to long after Learning.

60. Men of the greatest renown among the Ancients have been so taken with the
Love thereof, that some divested themselves of large Patrimonies, and vast
possessions, the better to attend their Studies, Such was Anaxagoras: others
pulled out their own eyes, that they might be subject to the less distraction
from Philosophical Speculations, as did Democritus: others again, like
Carneades, with metaphysical raptures were so taken up, that when set down to
table to eat, they forgot to put their hands to their mouths.

61. Nor was this at starts, but so indefatigably studious were the most of
those prime men, in times of old, that Simonides writ his poesies, Chrysippus
his Logic, and Isocrates his Panathenaicon, when each of them was full
fourscore years of age: The reader may be pleased to have recourse to the 22
Axioms mentioned in a Book of mine entitled The vindication of the reputation
of Scotland.
it being likewise reported by Cicero, that Sophocles, in his hundredth year,
write the Tragedy of Oedipus.

62. From this earnest desire of Literature, we ascend another step, which is
to hold him in great estimation, that is well qualified therewith, and not
permit the offspring of his brain to perish, through the defect of worldly
goods wherewith to support it.

63. Of that most noble kind of Favorers of Learning, was Alexander the great
who allowed several thousands of men to attend upon Aristotle, in the writing
of his Natural history, for which, when done, he gave him in a donative, two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterlin. Largius Licinius to Pliny the
younger, would have given four hundred thousand Crowns for his Annals: and
Marcus Popilius Andronicus for a little treatise of that sort, got sixteen
thousand Ducates.

64. Isocrates for one oration which he pend, had given unto him six thousand
two hundred and forty pounds sterlin: and Antonius the Son of Severus, to
Oppianus the Poet, gave a crown for every verse of a great poesy, which he
had written of the Nature of Fishes.

65. Ptolomae, on Cle^mbrotus the Physician, bestowed a hundred talents: and at
how dear a rate Aristotle bought the Books of Speusippus; and Plato those of
Philolaus the Pythagorian, is clearly set down in Aulus Gellius, and Valerius
Maximus.

66. Notwithstanding what has been said, I would not have it to be thought,
that these Largesses were so much competent prices for the Learning approved
of, as manifest testimonies of the givers unfeigned affection to the learned
man.

67. For, as there is no known proportion betwixt a crooked line, and a
straight; and that the angle of contingence, is less then the least acute
angle that is: so cannot all the transitory goods in the world, be paralleled
with those of the mind, if either we believe Ovid, whilst he says, Nil non
mortale tenemus, pectoris exceptis, ingeniique bonis: or the Dutch Poet
Buschius, in this his Epigram, Judicious, virtus, saepientia, cedere fato
Non norunt tristi, nec didicere mori:
Nec cole (si cordis quod habes) sunt caetera mortis,
Divitiae, robur, gloria, sama, genus.
Or yet Julius Scaliger, who in his sixth book de re poetica, (entitled,
Hypercriticus) professes, That he had rather have been the Author of Pindar's
Pythionick, and Nemeonick lines, then King of Aragon, although he accounted
them far short in value, to the third Ode of Horace's fourth book, or ninth of
his third, which nevertheless he esteemed to be by many stages inferior to
Virgil's verses, at so high a rate he valued the minds endowments.

Vid. B. 3. Art. 12.
68. Seeing thus it is then, that, being put into one balance, the scale of
learning depresseth the other, I would not expose any such talent of mine for
external means, were it possible for any else to buy, with all the moneys in
the world, that which I would preserve therewith, to wit, that antiquity of
race, by a continuat descent from many Predecessors, in one and the same Land,
which would be altogether buried in oblivion, by dispossessing me of my ancient
inheritance.

Vide Art. 16. Perpetuo ^ignis crescit crescentibus ignis orco siv mari men's
aequ ^aratus avari.
69 Yet were free from the slavery of Flagitators, though most of the Island
should disapplaud my writings, I would nevertheless emit them, without hope of
any further recompense; for a deed of virtue, whose reward is in the action it
self, makes the very doing thereof to pass for a competent remuneration.

70. But the exigence of my estate, and fortune, requiring another course to be
taken, I will on this fourth step of the scale, as on its landing place,
expatiat my self upon the equity of my demand, and assurance of the performance
of what I promise, for the better doing whereof, I make account to speak
somewhat of our family, other some of the rigor of the Flagitator, a little of
what the Law in Justice may provide for either of us: and lastly, to mount the
highest degree of all, by closing with a persuasion to have my Ancestors
inheritance made free to me, and mine.

In Flagitatores. Ep. 1.
Scotorum e^templis nunc exulat omnis imago,
Sculpta nec in saxo sed nec in aere manet.
Causa patet nimirum, est unum venerabile numen,
Nec colimus, quanquam novimus esse deum.
Aurea nam postquam Scotis affulsit imago
Nomina sola colunt quae gravis arca tenet.
The Design Of the third BOOK, entitled CLERONOMAPORIA.
AS in the Book immediately foregoing, the Author very plainly has pointed at
the main block, which lies in the way, as a hindrance to the progress of his
brain-itineraries: so in this, the third of his Introduction, does he, with
great perspicacity, educe most peremptory reasons out of the clearest springs
of both modern, and ancient, divine, and humaene Law, why it should be removed.
In the mean while, the better to prepare the Reader toward a matter of so
prime concernment, he begins the purpose with a peculiar, and domestic
Narrative of the manner, how those impediments were cast in, to the end that
the more unjustly he was dealt with by the persons, who did inject them, the
greater justice may appear, in his relief from their oppressions, to have
mentioned such particulars, and unfolded them to the view of the public, did
very much damp the Genius of the Author, who, could he have otherways done,
would undoubtedly have manifested ae most cordial dislike of any motion,
tending to approve the offering unto Pan, the sacrifice of the household gods, or
disclosing to all the mysteries of penatal rites. But the thread of the
discourse hanging thereupon, without a gap in its contexture, it could not be
avoided; especially, that generous and worthy Knight, the Authors Father,
haeving been unparalleledly wronged by false, wicked, and covetous, men,
himself being of all men living, the justest, equallest, and most honest in his
dealings; his humor was rather than to break his word; to lose all he had, and
stand to his most undeliberate promises what ever they might cost, which too
strict adherence to the ansterest principles of veracity, proved oftentimes
dammageable to him, in his negotiations with many cunning sharks, who knew with
what profitable odds, they could scrue themselves in upon the windings of so
good a nature. He in all the near upon) sixty years that he lived, never
injured any man voluntarily, though by protecting, and seconding of some
unthank^full men, he did much prejudge himself: he never refused to be surety
for any, so cordial he was toward his acquaintance; yet (contrary to all
expectations) his kindness therein was attended by so much good luck, that he
never paid above two hundred pounds English, for all his vadimonial favors. By
the unfaithfulnes on the one side, of some of his menial servants in filching
from him much of his personal Estate, and falsehood of several Chamberlains, and
Bailiffs, to whom he had entrusted the mana^ing of his Rents, in the
unconscionable discharge of their Receipts, by giving up one account thrice, and
of such accounts many: And, on the other part, by the frequency of
disadvantagious bargains, which the slieness of the subtle Merchant did involve
him in, his Loss came unawares upon him, and irresistibly, like an armed m^n;
too great trust to the one, and facility in behalf of the other, occasioning so
grievous a misfortune: which neverthe^ess, did not proceed from want of
Knowledge, or Ability in Natural parts: for in the business of other men, he
would have given a very sound advice, and was surpassing dextrous in
Arbitrements, upon any reference submitted to him, but that he thought it did
derogate from the Nobility of his house, and reputation of his person, to l^ok
to petty things in matter of his own affairs. Whereupon, after forty years
custom, being habituated thereunto, he found himself at last (to his great
regret) insensibly plunged into inextricable difficulties, in the large field
whereof, the insatiable Creditor to make his harvest, by the ruin of that
Family, struck in with his sickle, and by masking himself with a vizard,
composed of the rags of the Scottish Law, in its severest sense, claims the same
right to the whole inheritance, that Robinhood did to Frankindals money, for
being master of the purse wherein it was. Those wretched, and unequitable
courses, indefatigably prosecuted by merciless men, to the utter undoing of the
Author, and exterminion of his name, have induced him, out of his respect to
antiquity, his piety to succession, and that intim regard of himself, which by
divine injunction ought to be the rule, and measure of his love toward his
neighbor, to set down in this parcel of his Introduction, the cruel usage,
wherewith he has been served these many years past, by that inexorable race,
the lamentable preparatives, which, by granting their desires, would ensue to
the extirpation of worthy pedigrees, and the unexemplifyable injustice thereby
redounding to him, who never was in any thing obliged to them. The premises he
enlarges with diverse quaint, and pertinent Similies, and after a neat
apparelling of Usury, in its holiday garments, he deduceth from the Laws, and
customs of all Nations, the tender care that ought to be had in the
preservation of ancient Families: the particulars whereof, in matter of
Ordonance, he evidenceth by the acts of Solon, the Decrees of the Decemvits,
and statutes of the Twelve Tables: And for its executional part, in the persons
of Q. Fabius, Tiberius the Emperor, and the Israelitish observers of the sacred
institution of Jubilees. By which enarration, nothing is more clearly inferred,
then that seeing both Jews, and Gentiles, Painims, and Christians, in their
both Monarchical, and Polyarchical Governments, have been so zealous in their
obsequiousness to so pious a mandate, that the present age being no less
concerned in the happy fruits thereof, then the good days of old, the splendid
Authority of this Isle should be pleased, not to eclipse their commendation, by
innovating any thing in the Authors case. Who decyphering the implacability of
Flagitators, by showing how they throw in obstacles, retarding their own
payment, thereby tacitly to hasten his destruction; and hinting at the
unnatural breach of some of his Fiduciaries, he particularizeth the candor of
his own endeavors, and nixuriencie to give all men contentment, the discourse
whereof, in all its periods, very well deserves the serious animadversion of
the ingenious Reader.

Ad Illustrissimos Dominos Comitiorum Serenissimi Status ANGLICANI. Carmen
(...).
SCotia quam vidit sublimi in sede superbam,
Praeque aliis unam saepe tulisse caput;
Ehen prisca domus generoso stemmate foelix
Urcharti diro foenore pressa jacet.
Commodat era viris usurae subdolus author,
(Aerased in turpem conduplicanda sinum)
Hinc erosus ager vastus, victique penates,
Et lex conspicuos turbat iniqua lares
At vos o patres, legum queis summa potestas.
Quique datis populis jura benigna tribus,
Ne sinite indigno ruat ut domus optima lapsu,
Terraque ut immeritum rapta relinquat herum:
Ille sacer Musis lotus parnasside lympha,
Vivat, and Aonii gloria prima chori:
Primus Hyperboreum musas qui duxit ad axem,
Cum stupuit dominum barbara terra suum.
Pone lyram Pataraee tuam, tu barbiton Orphen,
Sint licet and carmen saxa secuta tuum:
Ille rudem populum primus feritate remota,
Jusserat Aonios edidicisse modos.
Nunc querulae lugent sylvae, collesque nivosae,
Gens viduata dolet, monticolaeque gemunt.
Nec Pan Arcadiae sylvis tam saepe vocatur,
Quam nunc Urchartum terra relicta sonat.
Patres bellorum primi, pacisque columnae,
Ferte o, nam meritam far potestis opem,
Creditor heu totas sylvas est, flumina potat,
Et centena avido jugera ventre premit.
Ut Scylla in medio fertur latrare profundo,
Sorbet and aequoreas dira Charibdis aquas.
Utque rates avidis claudit Godwinus arenis,
Gazaque cum domino non reditura suo.
Sed neque pull, a fames, det tandem Jupiter ut sit
Carne vorax propria visceribusque satur.
The third BOOK OF THE INTRODVCTION ENTITLED CLERONOMAPORIA. OR The intricacy
of a distressed Successor, or apparent Heir. WHEREIN For the better evulging of
this Universal Tongue, and other works, the preservation of the Authors ancient
Inheritance, is by the laws of all Nations, Pleaded for.
1 MAy it therefore be considered, in the first place, that a competent estate,
(which, these many years past, has yielded a thousand pounds sterling of
rent, although hardly the fifth part of that, either in extent of bounds, or
revenue, which some 900 years ago from the days of my fore-father Zeron
upwards, till those of No^ostor, who was the first of my Progenitors, that
stayed to inhabit the Land of Cromartie) being (consecutively (through a direct
uninterrupted Series, for the most part, and Lineall descent of threescore and
twelve several Ancestors, from Father to Son, for the space of (near upon)
fourscore two Iubiles, at 25 years each served, and retoured heirs (almost
always) to their immediately foregoing Predecessors, in the same family,)
continued, devolved, and transmitted, with many especial royalties, privileges,
and immunities from one another, and in all integrity preserved, until the
time of the majority, and perfect age of my Father: who according to the
prescript form of the country received it then, from his Guardian, or Tutor (as
they called him) without any burden of debt (how little soever) or provision
of brother, sister, or any other of his kindred, or alliance, wherewith to
affect it; he having nothing else (being void of all manner of encumbrances) to
care for, out of so considerable means, blessed with so much freedom, but
himself, and Lady alone, my Mother, it pleased his Father-in-law, my Lord
Elphingston then high Treasurer of Scotland, at the time of the marriage, to
require of him so to manage the foresaid patrimony, with such ease and plenty,
through a various change of neighbors, and so carefully conveyed unto him,
that in compensation of the courtesy received from his predecessors, and to
retaliate so great a favor, he should be obliged and tied to leave unto her
eldest Son, to be begotten of her (who some 5 years afterward happened to be
I) the said estate, in the same freedom, and entirenesse, every way, that it
was left unto himself, which before many noble men, and others he solemnly
promised to do to the utmost of his power.

2. Nevertheless, by incogitancy one way, or what else I know not, Faenus
extremae impudentiae signum. Lucri promissio est quasi esca in muscipola.
and on the otherside, by the extortion, and rapine of some usurious
Cormorants, whose money then was constantly laid out, as a bait for improvident
men of great revennues, to be hooked by: the fortune of his affairs turned so
far otherwise, from the bias they had been put in (to the regret and heavy
dislike of all his friends, and his own likewise at last, when he knew not how
to help it) that all he bequeathed unto me, his eldest Son, in matter of
worldly means, was twelve or thirteen thousand pounds sterling of debt, five
brethren all men, and two sisters (almost mariageable) to provide for, and
less to defray all this burden with, by six hundred pounds sterling a year,
although the wars had not prejudiced me in a farthing, then what for the
maintaining of himself alone, in a peaceable age he inherited for nothing.

3. But that, Avarus animus nullo lucro sa^iatur, Auri namque fames parto fit
mayor ab auro.
which did make my case the more to be commiserated, was, that all these huge,
and exorbitant sums were charged on me by those, to whom I was never obliged
in a penny, nor whose money ever came to that fine, that it might be known to
what good end, it was borrowed; there being nothing more certain, then that the
education of his whole children, comprehending my self, and all together, with
what he expended on his daughters portions, and other ways disbursed for
suretyship, did not in all amount to above two years rent, and a half, of that
estate, which he totally enjoyed for six and thirty years together: and that
in such halcyonian days, without any compulsory occasion of bestowing his
means other ways, then might best please himself, that till two years before
his decease it was not known by the commons of the Land, what the words of
Musqueteer, and Pikeman did signify.

4. Notwithstanding all this, and that neither directly, Lucrum facit homines
dete^iores et nisi lucrum esset nemo f^re esset improbus. says Volateranus.
nor indirectly, I had a hand in the contracting of so much, as one twopence
of the aforesaid burden, Those Creditors (all Scots) dealt so rigorously with
me, that by their uncharitable severity (even in my fathers time) it was done
what lay in them, to shake me loose of my progenitors inheritance, and denude
me of what I was born unto, by investing themselves in the right of those
Lands, that through the continuat race of six dozen of Predecessors (as
aforesaid) were after the expiring of many ages, by their valor, virtue, and
industry, most heedfully transmitted to these late years, free from all
intanglements, claims, and intricate pretenses whatsoever.

5. Yet did I thereby attain to the greater portion of my fathers blessing, who
conscious of the prejudice I sustained by leaving me (contrary to the promise
made to his Father-in-law, and ancient custom of the Country) so much
inthralled, This was do (...) August in the year 1642 some 4 years after the
hatching of the Covenant.
had of me that respect, and remembrance, although in another dominion for the
time, that, besides his constant bewailing the hard condition, whereunto he had
redacted his house in my person, during all the time of that long, and lingering
disease, whereof at last he died, he so generously, and lovingly (as truly he
was one of the best men in the world) acquit himself two days before his
decease, that he had all my six brothers strongly bound, and obliged before
famous witnesses himself being one, and the prime of all, especially my nearest
brother entitled the Lord of Dun Lugas for whose occasion, to sharpen his
thank^ullnesse the bond was conceived, because of that portion in Land he
received from him worth above 3000 pounds English money, under pain of his
everlasting curse, and execration, to assist concur with, follow, and serve me,
(for those are the words) to the utmost of their power, indu^try, and means,
and to spare neither charge, nor travel, though it should cost them all they
had, to release me from the undeserved bondage of the domineering Creditor, and
extricate my Lands from the impestrements, wherein they were involved: yea to
bestow nothing of their own upon no other use, till that should be done; and
all this under their own hand writing, secured with the clause of registration,
to make the opprobrie the more notorious, in case of failing, as the paper it
self, which I have in retentis, together with another signed to the same sense,
by my mother, and also my brothers and Sisters, Dunbugar only excepted, will
more evidently testify.

6. Thus l^cking nothing I could have desired of him, but what by my
grandfather he was engaged to leave me in matter of temporal means. I must in
all humility make bold to beg the permission to proceed a little further in
this purpose, seeing it does not diametrally militate against the reverence, I
owe to the established authority, and municipall Laws of the Land.

7. In competition with which, though by the Laws, and and statuts of many the
most civilized parts of Europe, the punishment, or correction inflicted for
faults of undertaking excessive burdens upon ancient estates, be merely
personal, and not (like Gehazies leprosy) derived to posterity; Qui in magnis
opibus sunt avidiores and sitibundi in medio oceani gurgite.
there being more regard had by them to the memory of worthy, and renowned
Gentlemen (whose reputation they would not have laid in the dust, by the supine
remissness of any one of their successors) then to the raising up of the
fortunes of those, who have no other virtue to recommend them by, but the
stupid neglect, forgetfulness, and improvident carriage of those, that borrowed
their money.

8. Whereby like the indwellers of Guinea, Vid. B. 2. Art. 27. Avoritia est
porta nortis and radix omnium malorum.
they may be said to purchase their gold sleeping; for in whose hand soever any
little heap thereof is sequestered upon obligation; the smallest time of any
engenders interest thereon, which is no sooner bred, then apt to propagate
another progeny, of the same pregnancie with the first, to beget a third: and
so forth from term to term, by the incestuous copulation of the Parent with the
whole Children together, and with each a part, Argentum and aurum non extin^uit
agenti and auri cup ditalem n^que si plura possideas coercetur plura possidendi
cupiditas.
and every child conjunctly, and severaly with all the rest: one brood
springing forth of another, and another again out of that, producing still, in
that progressive way of procreation, a new increase of the like nature with the
former.

9. And all by virtue of a bond dormant, lying passibly in the greasy cobweb
of a musty chest, whose master (perhaps) being lulled all this while in a dull
lethargy of ease, awaketh not (Like the Angel Apollyon, in the eleventh of the
Apocalypse entitled Abadon) but to the destruction of some one or other of his
paper-fetterd slaves. Avarus, says St. Austin, est inferno similis, nam
quantumcumque devor iverit nu^qu^m dicet is. Sic quanquam omnes thesauri
consluxerint in avarum non satiabitur.

Heu crescit scelerata sitis praedaeque recentis incestus jam flagrat amor
nullusve petendi crescendique pudor.


proving such a bad one indeed to whom he has concredited his goods, that he
never abandoneth them, till his covetousness (making that the fertilest thing
of any, which of it self is most unfruitful) have, in the unconscionable
multiplying of such a graceless generation, reared up that unhallowed result
from a spark (as it were) in a corner of their houses, to the hight of a most
prodigious flame, to consume them, their wives, and children, with their whole
estates, and fortunes for ever.

10. Yet seeing the rigor of the Law of Scotland, seems rather (as the times
have been this while past) to favor, Cortemnenda est cupid ^as quae qu^d^m
velut^ ignis quanto p^us acci^it tanto plus requir^t.
and abett the unmercifull creditor, then the debtors innocent successor, I
have till this hour (although not without some inward reluctance) chosen rather
to undergo the sternness, and austerity thereof, then legislatively to
supplicate the eversion of an established custom.

11. Albeit (what ever Lawyers say) I be sure, that Law, as it is conform to
equity, and justice, requires as well (if not more) that there be antidots,
and preservative remedies for men's estates in Lands, as for the fortunes of
them, whose stock is only in money.

Vide. ^. 2. Art. 68. O avare jungantur solium Craesi Cyrique tiarae, Nunquam
dives cris nunquam sallabere quaestu.
12. Especially, in the behalf of those, whom to deprive of their old
possessions (as is glanced at a little in the sixty eight Article of the
second Book) would ingulph, and bury in forgetfulness, that antiquity of Line,
which all the riches on earth is not able to purchase, and consequently, making
nobility stoop to coin, and virtue to gain, bring the only support, and props
of honor, to serve as fuel to the unquenchable fire of avaritious hearts.

13. And I may very well say, seeing it cohaeres with the purpose in hand, that
I sustain a greater prejudice, in being debarred from my Lands, Lucrum
justitiae praefer^nt impit.
which were more then two and twenty hundred years ago, acquired by the
valor, and prudence of my Predecessors, then the Sons of the aforesaid
Creditors can do, by the want of the money, pretended to be due to them, for
my Fathers debt; the overthrow of a worthy Family, being more deplorable, then
the missing of what a Thief may filch out of a clout: and have reaped as
little benefit of the sums so lent, as the brats, they are as yet to beget,
have done of the Revenues which should be mine.

14. What forcible Statutes have been published in former ages, for obviating
the decay of honorable houses, is not unknown to those, that are any thing
versed in the history of prudential Law.

15. In this, the ablest, and most judicious men on earth, have employed the
best of their wits: and Solon, that famous Legislator amongst the Athenians,
and wisest man then living, made acts so favorable for the preservation of
ancient Families, and so strictly to be observed, that the controveners of
them, so long as the splendour of that Republic lasted, were by the Arcopagits
most exemplarily, and condignely punished, as the relics of the Attick Laws,
till this day, will sufficiently bear record.

16. Nor was this so conscientious an ordonance, so totally proper to the
Commonweal of the Greeks, but that the remanent of the world, in those happy
times of old did taste of the wholesome influence, and goodness of it.

17. The Decemvirs (amongst the Romans) instituted, and ordained, that those
who were apt by their mis-government, and reckless conduct to endanger the
undoing, and subversion of their predecessors house, to the apparent detriment,
and damage for ever of such, as by nature were designed to succeed after them
in that family, should be disabled from disponing Lands, alienating any
whatsoever goods, and contracting debts, in such sort, that whosoever should
meddle or deal with them, in either of those kinds, should do it at their own
hazard, and peril, without hope of restitution of any loss, or hinderance they
might sustain thereby, as manifestly may be seen, by the Law Julianus, in the
paragraph de cura Furiosorum, and in the Law, is cui bonus in the paragraph, de
verbis obligatoriis.

18. Which being conform to that other Law of the twelve tables, whereby such
like inconsiderate persons were appointed to have surveyers, and controulers
set over them, and wholly prohibited, and interdicted from all manner of
managing their own affairs, as the words of the Text it self more succinctly
declares, Quando bona tua paterna, avitaque negligentia tua disperdis
Liberosque tuos ad egestatem perducis, ob eam rem tibi, ea re, commercioque
interdico.

19. It is apparent how heinous, horrid and sacrilegious an offense it seemed
to be in those happy days, to have a hand in pulling down the monuments of
their forefathers virtue, and demantling the honor of their house, by
dilapidating their estate.

20. And least these premised acts, should be thought to have been but good
Laws ill obeyed, and worse executed: such rigorous punishment was inflicted
upon the delinqents in them, that no person guilty, of what age, or condition
soever, was spared.

21. As may be instructed by Quintus Fabius, son to Quintus Fabius the great,
surnamed Allobrogicus, who, by an edict of Quintus Pompeius Praetor, was curbed
and inhibited from doing by his misguiding, and unadvised carriage any harm or
prejudice to the house of his progenitors.

22. And by that prodigal Senator of threescore years of age (otherways wise
enough) over whom the Emperor Tiberius did constitute, and impose a tutor, or
governor, that, to the impoverishing of his issue, he might not have power to
lavish away the estate he never acquired.

23. The causes which moved them to inact, and publish those Statutes being no
less urgent now, then they were then, should (as I conceive it) astrict, and
oblige us to be every whit as zealously fervent, as they in the observing of
them.

24. Chiefly being warranted thereto by the sacred Scripture it self, in the
old Testament, whereof, the people of Israel is said to have been enjoined to
marry in their own Tribes, Jubilees appointed, and all debts whatsoever, after
the revolution, and expired date of so many years, ordained to be discharged,
annulled, freely acquit all bonds and bills rescinded and cancelled and all
this only for the preservation of ancient houses.

25. Of which the country of Scotland also, till within these fourscore ten
years, was so exactly careful, that Signior David, one of Queen Martes prime
Courtiers, could not for all the money he was master of, obtain in that whole
dominion, the purchase of one hundred pounds sterlin of rent in Land, whereby
to acquire the benefit of a Scottish title, the more to ingratiat himself (being
an Italian) in the favor of the Nation; so unwilling in those good days, was
every one to break upon any parcel of their predecessors inheritance.

26. Seeing thus it is then, that all Nations, and almost all Religions, both
Jews and Gentiles, have had the benefit of so commendable, and pious a custom,
shall Scotland alone be deprived, and destitute of it, and that only since it
is said by themselves, to have received the purity of the Gospel, and about
the year of the Jubilee, no man will think it, that has any good opinion of
the Nation?

27. But although it were so (as God forbid it ever come to that pass) and that
like to the most rigid Levellers who would inchaos the structure of ancient
greatness, into the very rubbish of a Neophytick parity, it were inacted there
be no more regard had thereafter of pristin honor, then of old garments: and
that none be thereby dignifyed, but in so far, as the number, weight, and
measure of modern coin, shall serve to inhanse him.

28. Yet with some probability, do many harbor in their breasts the opinion,
that with a never so little auxiliary suffrage of public Order, there should
be found amongst them, and the successors of those, that in diverse good offices
(not to speak of my self) have been obliged to the proprietaries of our house,
severals who would of their own accord, (in what they could) without any great
incitement thereto, supply the deficiency of the Law in that point* and further
of themselves, the redintegration of my Predecessors family in my person.

29. Notwithstanding all this, nullum est officium came sanctum atque solenne
quod non varitia comminue^e atque violare soleat.
the embracing of the foresaid subsidiarie expedient, being too far below my
inclination I do really Imagine, that (without the conscriptitious adjutancie
of the State) I shall enterprise but impossibities, and never enjoy the
proposed end; which nevertheless my bashfullness and natural aversness from
craving what might put me to a blush if denied would never have permitted me to
prosecute by such means, if by the in^quitie of the times, disloyalty of some I
did put trust into, and rough harshness of the unplacable creditors, I had not
been frustated of my other designs.

30. For albeit, to the most frugall, Avaritia crudeles efficit eos qui ei
serviunt and animus avari sepulchrum est.
it might seem a task very difficult, to make the payment of my Fathers debt,
consist with the preservation of my forefathers estate: when by the malignant
influences of concredited sums, the Land rents do usually shrink in, to the
accrescing of the burden; there being nothing more certain, then that the
apprising of of Lands, serving of inhibitions, arresting of Farms in the hands
of Tenants, purchasing of letters for delivering up of the Manor house, and
other such like most rigorous proceedings, whereby one is made illegal, would
have disabled any (though never so well affected) from putting his means to the
best avail, and taking that safe course for himself, and creditors together,
which otherways (with less disadvantage to either) might be performed by one,
that were free of these lets and disturbances.

Av vitia ema^s i^just^tiae som^s est, and avarus communis omnium host is cujus
arculae sunt sepulchra in quibus saepo (...) vitae paup^^um.
31. Whereupon ensue such dismal inconveniences, that commonly, when a
gentleman's estate begins to be clogged with such like impestrements, little or
no use at first is made of the rents thereof; either for that the Tenants (for
fear of creditors attachings and arrestments) pay not their due, least they be
forced to repay it, and so, through the uncertainty of masters, spending all on
themselves, become some times insufficient debtors: or for that merchants
(being afraid to fall into the reverence of creditors, because of inhibitions
and arrestments) dare not bargain for victual, or any such like annual
commodity: both, or either being like to drive on the decadence of a house to
its utter desolation at last.

32. So that instead of a double benefit, that ought to accrue to both the
Debtor, and Creditor, by the timely payment of both Lands, and money rent, a
twofold prejudice (for the most part) through the strictness of the creditors,
is incurred, to wit the one, by delaying their own pay, and the other, by
hastening the ruin of the house of their Debtor: as if men should be tied to
defray great sums of money, and yet not get leave to make use of their own
means, wherewith to do it, there being hardly any shift remaining for a man so
used, but to have recourse to his wits.

33. Nor is it any thing less lamentable, that the Law of Scotland, in matter
of Horning, should be a main furtherance of this inconvenience by debarring any
one lying under the lash thereof, from getting payment at the hands of others of
never so just debts due to them; whereby a greater load being laid on him that
is already overburthened. Machiavel's policy of breaking the bruised reed, and
thrusting him over head and ears in the water, that was in it to the chin, is
very punctually observed.

34. Which rugged, cross, Similis est pecunia usurarii morsui aspidis,
percussus enim ab aspide quasi delectatus vadit in somnum, et per suavitatem
soporis moritur.
and thwarting proceedures so incensed, damped, and exasperated my father, that
a charge from a creditor, being as the hissing of a Basilisk, the disorderly
troubles of the Land being then far advanced (though otherways he disliked
them) were a kind of refreshment to him, and intermitting relaxation from a
more stinging disquietnesse.

35, For that our intestin troubles, and distempers, by silencing the Laws for
a while, gave some repose to those, that longed for a breathing time, and by
hudling up the terms of W^itsuntide; and Martimass, (which in Scotland are the
destinated times for payment of debts) promiscuosly, with the other seasons of
the year, were as an oxymal julip, wherewith to indormiat them in a bitter
sweet security.

36. Yet for all this, and notwithstanding the grievousness of such
solicitudinary, and luctiferous discouragements, able to appall the most
undaunted spirits, and kill a very Paphlagonian partridge, that is said to have
two hearts, I did nevertheless, without attristing my self a jot, undergo the
defrayment of the debt, although not as a debtor, with as much alacrity, and
cheerfulness, Usurae liberos servos faciunt.
as if it had been of my own undertaking: and took such speedy course therein,
that immediately after my Fathers decease, for my better expedition in the
discharge of those burdens, having repaired homewards, I did sequestrate the
whole rent (my Mothers jointure excepted) to that use only, and, as I had done
many times before, betook my self to my hazards abroad, that by virtue of the
industry, and diligence of those, whom by the advice, and deliberation of my
nearest friends, I was induced to entrust with my affairs, the debt might be
the sooner defrayed, and the ancient house releeved out of the thraldom, it
was so unluckily fallen into.

37. But it fell out so far otherwise, that after some few years residence
abroad, without any considerable expense from home, when I thought, because of
my having mortified and set apart all the rent to no other end, then the
cutting off, and defalking of my Fathers debt, that accordingly a great part
thereof had been discharged: I was so far disappointed of my expectation
therein, that whilst conform to the confidence reposed in him, I hoped to have
been exonered, and relieved of many Creditors, the debt was only past over, and
tranferred from one in favors of another, or rather of many in the favors of
one, who, though he formerly had gained much at my Fathers hands* was
notwithstanding at the time of his decease none of his creditors, nor at any
time mine; my Egyptian bondage by such means remaining still the same, under
task masters different only in name, and the rents nevertheless taken up to
the full, to my no ^mall detriment, and prejudice of the house standing in my
person.

38. The aim of some of those I concredited my weightest adoes unto, being, as
is most conspicuously apparent, that I should never reap the fruition, nor
enjoyment of any portion, parcel, or pendicle of the estate of my
predecessors, unless by my fortune, and endeavors in Foreign countries, I
should be able to acquire as much as might suffice to buy it (as we say) out of
the ground.

39. And verily (though not in relation to these ignoble, and unworthy by-ends)
it was my purpose, and resolution to have done so, which assuredly, had not the
turbulent divisions of the time been such as to have crossed, and thwarted the
achievements or more faisible projects, I would have accomplished two or three
several ways ere now.

40. And yet for all the stops, and inconveniences, that flowed from the late
unhappy stirrs, and garboyls in both Nations, I had by all probability) got a
great many thousand pounds thereof, had not a wretched, poor, and trivial sum
scarce worth the naming, been more prevalent with the aforesaid party.

41. By reason of whose injurious, and unequitable dealing, in appropriating to
themselves, and converting by all appearance) to their own use my rents, and
neither purging the Land, nor exonerating me of any considerable part of the
burden, wherewith either it, or I stood affected: I was moved to face about,
and return homewards, to take that solid, and deliberate course with the crazed
estate left unto me, as might make the subsistence of my house, compatible with
the satisfaction of my Fathers Creditors.

To which effect, with might and main, to the uttermost of my ability, I
strove, with pecunial charms, Questum facile negligit generosus animus, inquit
Hieronymus.
and holy water out of Pluto's Cellar, to exercise and lay the Spirit lately
raised, and raging abroad, without the besprinkling of a Chrysopast hyssop, not
to be conjured: my successfulness therein amounting, non obstans all
interveening impediments, to the final discussing of some of these creditors,
and, in a plausible way, according to the exigence of the persons, and
circumstances of the nature, condition and quality of their security, to
dispatch the residue of them epassyterotically, that is, one after another.

43. And to this end, applied all my aforesaid rents, save so much, as for
public dues, and augmentation of Ministe^s stipends were exacted of me: in the
latter whereof, because of the hereditarie loss, which I thereby am like to
sustain, I will make bold to insist a little, with that reverence nevertheless,
which becomes me to the Church, and to be established Ecclesiastical order of
the Land. Nulla ditare ratione potestas avari vos faciunt inopes quas cumulatis
opes.


24. Here nevertheless, Let the good Reader be pleased to take along with him
for his better conceiving of the unmercifulness and indiscretion of my Fathers
creditors, how when to some of them I had offered present possession of Land,
til they should be found paid; and unto others, who formerly had been victual
Merchants, had made tender of my rents of that kind, at very easy rates, to be
delivered by my deputies, Hu jusmodi lucra hominem comparare decet propter quae
nunquam in postcrum doliturus sit.
without their running of any hazard at the hands of a distressed Tenandrie:
the answer of the former was, That they would have no land, but money; and of
the other, That though they had often before that traffiqued in such like
commodities* yet that then for being taken up with other more public
businesses they could not accept of my proffer, but wishing I might have the
fortune to deal with those would give the greatest prices, expected I should
not fail to let them have the money for defalcation of some of their accounts.

45. By which their subdolous and crafty tergiversation, from what in a time of
peace, De damno alterius n^^o lucrum s^^ctet.
they would have so eagerly embraced, they have made it too evidently apparent,
that in prosecuting of their own ease, they have aimed at my utter destruction,
both their resolutions concentring in this, That they thought it more
expedient, Qu lucra lenta fugit damna re^^nte subit Non habet eventus sordida
praeda bonos. Nam quae male parta domi accumulantur nihil salutis habent.
by a little forbearance, to suffer their unhallowed sums to increase, for the
better obtaining afterward of my whole Estate to themselves, then by any ways
meddling with my rents, in a tumultuous time, to bring me the sooner in a
capacity of enjoying my own, through the diminution of my Fathers debts, by
their receivings. This pit they dug for me, which that they should fall into
themselves were both just and equitable.

In Flagitatores. Ep. 1.
Tros quondam Aeneas Harpyas, virginis ora,
Atque ungues volucrum vidit habere truces.
Namque fame rabidus dum littore prandia sumit,
Omnia foedarunt vel rapuere viro.
Creditor his similis, perturbans omnia, pacem
Nullam vicini qui sinit esse sui.
Harpiae proprios certant defendere fines,
Ille tamen pejor namque aliena rapit.
Alterum.
Non satis apparet cur nomina creditor omnis
Accipit a credo: res ratione vacat,
Debuerat potius vocitari incredulus, et sic
Sortiri merito nomina digna suo,
Esse avidus nullum nam credit in aethere numen,
Nec quenquam fidum Creditor esse virum.
The Scope Of the fourth BOOK, entitled CHRYSEOMYSTES.
THe Author having in the two preceding Books, very orderly proceeded from the
manifestat^on of the huge log of Flagitators, lying in his way, to the
displaying of pregnant reasons, why the said impediment should be removed, for
the weal of the whole Isle, whose Literature by his endeavors he is to
improve; In this fourth Book of his Introduction, he makes mention of another
block, which, though not ^f so immense a bulk, ought nevertheless, for its
repugnancie with the proposed end, be as well laid aside, as the former, and
that is the unjust decrees, wherewith the Presbyterian Commision has robbed
him of a great deal of his rents. He for compendiousness sake, begins with the
figure of Apophasis, to say he intends not to expostulate for the injury
sustained by that Kirkomanetick tyranny, which despoyled him of his right of
Patronage to his Churches, and from thence descends to a plain Narration, how
contrary to an established Union by Act of Parliament, and in opposition to
seven relevant reasons, to any one whereof they would not daigne to make
answer, the Commission of the Kirk; without giving any hearing to the Authors
advocats, decerned one of his good Priests, to have an augmentation out of his
patrons, rents, though equivalent to as much more, as was possessed by his
Predecessor in that Church; and the Churches of the other Parish (in spite of
both Law and Reason) to be disunited, and to each of the Ministers thereof,
more stipend mortifyed, thou to them both formerly was thought to be
sufficient. This is one of the chips of the block of Presbyterial Government,
which because the violent assertors thereof would by a pretended jure divino
authority pertinaciously obtrude upon our consciences, and co-essentiat it in
the object of our Faith, with the most orthodox Ecclesiastical doctrine, the
Author very civilly, without falling upon the common School-controversies,
twists out a discourse concerning Fables, Sorcerers, and distracted people,
wherein, they will be found as erroneous in their opinions, as in their rule,
oppressive. The Author desires to have the prolixity of the disgression for
this cause excused, that who would encounter with such an adversary, must step
a little aside to cope with him aright. He walks in no known tract, his actions
are arbitrary, and passion directs his motions: and where he finds evasions
suitable to his hypocrisy, Proteus never transformed himself into so many
shapes, as he will do for his own ends. What the Author speaks of the devotion
of his Ancestors, before the Nativitie of our Savior, and when afterward the
only Romish Faith was embraced by them: Of the antiquity of his Tenandrie, and
their skilfulness in the Ceremonies of p^istine Sacrifice: Of vindicating old
customs from the aspersions of Neoterick Sciolists, and maintaining the
ingeniositie of Fables: Of the consistence of Poetical Fictions with true
Divinity, and sympathy twixt old and new Rome in their Rites and Mysteries of
Religion: and Lastly, of Hypocondriack, and Fanatical brains, and the great
perpetrations of horrible unjustice in Scotland, by the too frequent mistakes
of their diseases, is to no other purpose^; but in view of the Courteous
Reader, to carreer his Spirits along the bounds, the rigid Presbyter would not
have to be trod upon: and to make that Judicatory perceive, to whom he makes
his appeal, how unfit it were, that any consistorian veil should da^ken the
light of his Elucubrations. After all, he closes with the covetousness, and
inflexibility of the selfish Kirkist, which as it is connexed with foregoing
passages, to the discretion of the gentle peruser cannot come unseasonably.

The fourth Book OF THE INTRODVCTION ENTITLED CHRYSEOMYSTES, OR The covetous
Preacher. WHEREIN The rigor of the Scottish Kirk, beyond that of the Churches
in former ages, is shown to have very much obstructed the Authors design, in
the emission of this new Idiome, and other Tractates of that nature.
1. HEre I omit the Kirks denuding me of my Heritable right of Patronage to the
Churches of the Shire, whereof my Predecessors have above these two decades of
Ages been both Hereditary Sheriffs and sole proprietaries: as likewise to make
mention of the five Chalders rent of additionall stipend, any year worth 500 l.
Scotch, which the Minister of Cromartie has now, more then his foregoing
Incumbent in that Charge did enjoy.

2. I will only speak a word or two of my two other Churches, which when
separated in former times, and those of late too, had but 300 l. Scotch of
allowance betwixt them both, which nevertheless was a great matter then in
proportion to the little stock whence it was to be educed; and therefore
together with other more relevant causes, were by a commission to that effect
by the Parliament then sitting in the year 1617. united into one, and ordained
after the decease of either of the two, that then preached in them, to have the
cure of them, served singly by the Survivor, and so consecutively from one
another, by one alone.

Presby^^r in mundo n^n est qa^ dicit a^u^^io.
3. But when the stipauctionarie tide, immediately after the Duke of Hamilto^ns
unluckie engagement, begun to overflow the Land, and that I thought with
sufficient Bulwarks of good argument to have stayed the inundation thereof,
from the two foresaid half Churches I was violently driven, Clericus annof^s
lic^timb^r^s: furiosus, non possit prunam dum drachmam si^^cipii ^nam.
like a feather before a whirlewind, notwithstanding all my defenses, to the
sanctuary of an enforced patience.

4. For though I did put in these subsequent reasons, against the disuniting,
and adjectitious provision of the aforesaid two Churches.

First, that both parishes together are but three miles long, and one of the
churches thereof (called the Kirk of Cullicudden) seated in the middle (or near
by) so that the dwelling house of the remotest parishioner of either of the
parishes, will not be above a mile and a half distant from that church, and yet
within 40 miles of that place, and that in a plain country, there are of those
whose dwelling house in the parish, is sixteen miles distant from the parish
Kirk.

5. Secondly, that there are not thirty six ploughs laboring in both, and when
acknowledged to be united, they shall be found the least parish in the Country,
both for rent, people, and bounds.

6. Thirdly that these two have been but one parish (by all appearance) from
the beginning; for Cullicudden is built after the fashion of a Church, but that
other (now called Kirkmichel) is in its edifice like but to a Chapel.

7. And forsooth, it was nothing else but a Chapel, which one of my
predecessors, in the time, that the Romish Religion was universally professed
in Scotland, caused to be built for his own ease of devotion.

8. For having a pretty summer dwelling adjacent thereto, within the precinct of
the parish of Cromartie, and three miles distant from the church thereof, he
chused rather, then weekly to go so far to hear mass, and other such liturgies,
as, on the Sundays, and many festival days, are amongst the Catholic Romans
till this hour in use, to be at the charge of that petty Fabric, and the
maintenance of a Chaplain, whereby, with the less labor to exercise his
devotion at his own doors.

9. and in testimony thereof, my father, not thinking it should have been at
any time destinated for a parish Church, but a place only for preaching, with
the more ease to the auditorie caused make it as much longer as it was before,
which evidently shows, it being the shortest church as yet in all the
country, that it could not at first have been but a Chapel.

10. Nor is it to be thought strange, why my Ancestors of late have been
pleased to expend so much on structures, to a religious end; seeing as my
father, who was the first protestant that ever was of our house bestowed the
charge of the additional length of the half of the whole of that chapel, which
now they call a Kirk, and as some of my progenitors, bestowed all those lands
in the parochin of Rose Marknie which now are in the Possession of Robert
Leslie of Finrasie upon the Bishop Dean and Chapter of Ross, and that others of
them were at the cost of building the churches of Cromartie and Cullicudden,
and many other monuments, betokening their zeal to the Romish faith then
professed: so amongst their forefathers, were there severals of our family,
who before the days of Christ, in the same foresaid parishes, founded many
Temples, delubres, and fanes, for sacrificing in the groves, and high places to
Jupiter, Juno, Mars, Pallas, Mercury, Venus and Diana, the relics whereof
are as yet in my Land obvious to the eye of any curious antiquarie, and so much
extant till this day as by the circularie oval, Triangulary, or square figure,
together with the various manner in situation of the stones, will to an
intelligible Mythologist, and well versed in rites of old, make it easily
discernible, to which of the Heathenish deities the respective dedication was
made.

11. That in my bounds should be seen remainders of so great antiquity, is
much: yet is it more to have them in a Country so remote from the territories
of the Theonomothets, and Legislators of the divinity of the Ancient Poets; but
most strange of all it is, that in my Lands should be found of those, who
(though they can neither read nor write) will nevertheless be able to exchange
discourse with any, concerning the Nature of the Heathenish deities, and afford
pertinent reasons for the variety of Sacrifices, and other circumstantial
points usual to be performed in the days of old.

12. I asked them how they came by this knowledge, they told me, that their
fathers taught them it, who had it from their progenitors, unto whom (say they)
it was derived from their first forefathers, that accompanied my predecessors
Alypos, Beltistos, Nomostor, Astioremon and Lutork in their aboriginarie
acquest of the Land of their Ancestors residence, and in this their relation,
they were so punctually exact, that some of them by Nomenclature, in a Lineall
pedigree from Father to Son, of above threescore several persons, instructed
their dependence upon our family, in one and the same Land, three hundred years
before the days of our Savior.

13. That this is very probable, and that none has a more ancient Tenandrie
then my self, I do the rather believe it, that both history, and the most
authentic tradition we have, avoucheth the first Laborers, and manurers of
that Land, to have come along with my ancestors Beltistos, Nomoster and Lutork,
and for their good service done, especially to the last of those three,
received Leases thereupon in the quality of yeomans, who were so well pleased
with what they got* that after they had most contentedly spent the best of
their age, when decrepit years did summon them to pay their last due to nature,
they bequeathed unto their children the hereditarie obedience they did owe
their master, to whom they left their blessing, and best wishes.

14. Which proved so effectual in advancing obsequiousness on the one side, and
protection on the other, that in his posterity they were most fortunate, from
generation to generation, and so deeply engaged to each, in the long continuate
succession of our house, that the children of their children, in a subsecutive
progress of Dad to Brat, and Sire to Suckling, have, til this hour, through so
vast a flux of time, remained tenanciarie enjoyers for pay of those their
respective rooms, without any interruption of assedation, or breach of Lease,
which, at the expiring of any 5 years end, might (unwronged the late possesser)
have been bestowed on any other.

15. I have Farmers, who, albeit neither they, their Fathers, nor forefathers
ever paid to me, or any of my predecessors, above fifteen pounds sterlin a
year, dwell nevertheless in the self same house, which has been inhabited by
their Ancestors, from parent to child, above nine hundred years together,
though none of them ever yet had a lease for above five years.

16. But of such; as have removed a furlong, or two from the place of their
progenitors abode, there are that can reckon, in their own familiar pedigree, a
row of antecessors who have dwelt in that country above a thousand years beyond
that time.

17. Although this constancy of residence be commendable, yet does it carry
along with it this disadvantage, that the progeny of these firm abiders, is
always of a small extent, for the most part, as may appear by seven or eight
several surnames, in two parishes of my Land, whereof scarce one was ever heard
of in any other place of the world.

18. The reason hereof proceeds from that, when at first (after the manner of
the plantation of the Israelites in the Palestine each Tribe by it self) my
predecessor had assigned to every family a part, its own allotted parcel of
ground, they very suddenly took such deep root therein, that to the^r
successors they left an irremovable ascriptitiarinesse to the soil in which
they had been ingraffed.

19. Each Hamlet by that means, decenarie, or Wapentake (to use the Saxon word)
having its peculiar Clan (as we call it) or name of a Kindred, none whereof will
from that portion of Land, bouge with his will to any other, upon never so
great advantages offered unto him, the interflitting from one parish to
another, though conterminal, being of such a mutual displeasingness, that all,
and each of them esteem of it, as of an extrusive proscription to the
Barbados, or depulsorie exile to Malagask.

20. It is amongst such of both sexes, that are found some Philarchaean Zelots,
whose pristin, and breborian customs, ^avouring of superstition, manifest great
antiquity, many of them endeavor the prosecuting of good ends with an upright
intention by exolet, and Palephasian means utterly exploded: which seccessive
course of sanctimonial duty has successively been followed by many with such
inveterate proneness, that some of our Neoterick sacricolaries, have been much
scandalized at the hereditariness thereof.

21. We, for being Christians, ought to avow that those ways (although such a^
were trod upon with great observancie by the ancient Gentiles) should
nevertheless, for deviating from the straight paths of the present profession
of the Country, be nothing at all relied upon; because they were excogitated by
the only wit of man: so for the same reason and faith we owe to him, who is the
truth as well as the way, should all of us endeavor to be upright in our
judgment, and not to determine rashly of a fault, but to consider thereof
according to the nature of its delinquencie, without aspersing it with the
guilt of another crime.

22. To punish a Fornicator for murder, or a Thief for Fornication, is an act
of injustice; because the first begets rather then kills, and the other
rather takes then gives; and to chastise one for an offense, which he has not
committed, is a mere oppressing of the innocent: for that whatever secret sin
he have, that may deserve it from above, it is without any cause* known to him
that inflicts the Correction

23. So is it, that we may esteem that censure unreasonable, and injurious,
which imputes to Sorcerie what merely proceeds from the frivolous practice of
poetical divinity; and and that scholar, a bad proficient, that is mistaken in
the exercise of that whereof in the Schools he was taught the speculation.

24. I have heard of a silly old Wife, who for doing some pretty feats
(wherein she had been instructed by her mother) according to a prescript manner
set down in some of the Verses of Homer, whom neither of them had the skill to
peruse, but had learned the contents from their Progenitrices upwards, through
many ages, was branded with the imputation of having the concomitancie of a
D^mon, and accused of witchcraft, by him, who, being a pro^essor of the Greek,
whipped a boy, for not getting these verses by heart, it being the Task, that was
enjoined him for a days Lesson, as if the Devil had been more assistant to the
operation, then the Theorie, and that it had been lawful for them to study,
what was felony for others to enact.

25. Amongst this meaner sort of people, there are some, who tenaciously
cleaving to their frets of old, do very often repair at set times to
Fountains, Oak-trees, little round Hillocks, and great stone heaps, where, with
pre-conceived words, and motions befitting the service, they do things truly
not approvable, because unwarranted by the best religionaries of the time, yet
that there is charm, fascination, enchantment, infernal assistance, or any
thing else more, then mere custom in them, may safely be denied; for that in
the choicest of the ancient of the both Greek, and Latin Poets, are couched, in
set terms words, expressive of all the points of that Poetical Liturgy.

26. Who doubts hereof, let him read Homer, Virg^l, Theocrit, Hesiod, Pindar,
Aristophanes, Ovid, Claudian, Horace, Martial, and others, which if he do not,
his laziness to peruse these books, should not be of such prevalencie over our
credulity, as to make us believe, that others do devilishly, because he
knows not what it is they do; otherwise (as is said in the 30th Article of
this first book) the Lesbian rule of the various degrees of ignorance, would be
the sole directory, to the overthrow of knowledge.

27. According to the unstreightness of which canon square, or pattern, in what
country soever it shall happen, men of eminent condition for place, and
fortune (whose example usually is the only Line and Level, whereby the
multitude, and body of the people is ordered, both in their Lives and opinions)
to be so regulated, as implicitly to follow such leaders, and, without any
further examination, to ply as they bow, jog as they wag, redandruate as they
ampirvat, and every way bestirre themselves after their motions, more
constantly in that their inconstancy then the rising of the billows of the
Sea, at the boisterous and impetuous thuds of a raging Boreas: There is nothing
more infallible then that a country, Kingdom, or Commonweal sick of the
ablepsie of such an epidemical sectatorship, (of which disease, incivility,
malice, usurie, ignorance and hypocrisy are the ordinary symptoms) must needs
by the frequencie of its convulsions against reason, equity, and conscience
(though under pretext of a Law) perish, and be ruined at last, either by the
violence and fury of a foreign enemy, or by intestin broils, and commotions
within it self, or by both together: so dangerous a thing it is, wilfully to
hudwink the mind, and blind-man-buf't, in the propatularie view of a meridian
sun, as if we were quoquoversedly mufled, in the sable mantle of Cimmerian
darkness.

28. It is a bad acquital we give the ancients of great Literature, for their
pains taking to civilize our manners, and instruct our minds in all the
choicest, and most researched mysteries of Learning, and true Philosophy, by
the lovely, sweet, and curious allurements of poetical devises, to twit them
with the name of Devils, fiends, and infernal spirits.

29. Whether it be so or no, I appeal to all the judicious Mythologists of this
age, whereof some being most eminent in their knowledge of Theology and of
choice literature in other commendable faculties, have in their learned
Writings made most evidently appear, what sacred rays of true divinity, lie
hid in those excellent fables of old.

30. Such as say, that fables are lies, and therefore, not unlike to have
proceeded from the deceiver, and father of lies understand not well what
belongs to truth, and derogat much, from the most authentic writings of any,
wherein allegories, parables, and apologues are almost every where obvious to
the readers perusal.

31. Complexed truth is in affirmation, and negation, which in matter of signs
enun^ed of one another, has its plenarie signification in the things by them
signified, as when we say, man is reasonable, we mean not that the word man, is
the word reasonable, but that the thing, for which the word man suppones, has
reason in it.

32. Even so is it in a fable, where the epimythie, or morality thereof is
supposed to be sign^fied by the words, and not the litteral sense, which by
them is expressed, but in actu signato (as it were) and not exercito.

33. As the Fables in Aesop of the Wolf, and the Lamb, the Lion and Mouse, the
Frog, and the Ox, the Grashoper, and the Pismire, the Bull, and the Goat, the
Dove, and the Magpie, the Eagle, and the Raven, the Cuckoo, and the Hawk, the
Be, and the Bear, the Dog, and the Sheep, the Stork and the Fox, are verified
in their Epimythetical sense: by some great men's oppressing of the innocent: by
the thankful retribution of a received favor: by the ruin that Pride brings
upon the arrogant man: by the advantage of careful industry, beyond wanton
idleness: by kicking against those their betters, whom misfortune suppresseth:
by the hazard that many good men run, to be deceived: by undertaking things
foolishly beyond their power: by keeping themselves wisely within bounds: by
the patience rather to endure somewhat, then in being revenged to suffer more:
by the huge prejudice, which false witnessing brings upon many: and by the
great delight we oftentimes conceive in clinching, and retorting jeers, jests,
and pranks; all which to avow not to be as truly expressed, by that
affabulatory manner of speech, as by a plain historical enarration of the
purpose decyphered by it, is to ascribe less vigor to the rays of the Sun at
noon, in an estival Solstice, then when in Capricorn he is merely horizontal.

34. As in copious Languages, there are several words made use of, for setting
forth one and the same thing to our understandings, whereof nevertheless each
apart is a sufficient sign, for its representation, though not with such
imbellishment: so should we dissever truths from elocutions framed in this kind
of way, we would open a door to the destruction of eloquence, by banishing from
our discourse all figurative utterance, in the delicious variety of Tropes and
Schemes.

35. There are more ways to the wood, then one, (as the common saying is) and
from the circumference to the center, may be drawn infinite lines, whereof
nevertheless, not any can fall perpendicularly on the Basis, save one: yet is
the obliquitie of any of those radial lines, the less, the nearer it approach
the perpendicular, and so much the greater, the less that the angle be, which
with the Basis it comprehends.

36. Just so, there being one sole God omnipotent upon whom the conservation of
the whole world depends, which is the ground work, and Basis, whence is
erected that perpendicular of perfection, and true knowledge attained unto by
the only saints in heaven, and celestial hierarchies, there proceeds from the
circumference of the duty of man, an innumerable diversity of religious Sects,
and faiths, tending all, and each of them very cordially to the aforesaid Basis
of incomprehensible goodness, whereof there is not one, that, by reason of
humane frailty commixed with it, declineth not a little from that orthog^nal
straightness, which in the Theocathetos is required.

37. However, there is nothing more sure, then that as the more amply by
Learning, and integrity of heart, the acute angle (to call it so) of a
profession be dilated, it will prove the more orthodoxical, so the greater
deflexion, that by wickedness, and ignorance it be brought to from the
proposed uprightness, it will be the less warrantable.

38. By which account, although all be directed to one end, yet because of the
imperfections which anavulsibly adhere to the soul, whilst it remains invested
with mortality, there being none of them without some blemish, the difference
only is in more, and less; better, and worse.

39. Nevertheless, albeit in every state almost there be a discrepance in the
manner of regulating the consciences of the people, yet without any danger of
heresy, may the mysteries of one and the same devotion be displayed unto us,
after several fashions, as the variety of the signs takes not away the unity
of the thing, that is represented by them.

40. The Trumpet incourageth Troops of horse, the same is done by Kettle-drums:
the foot is animated by the Tambour, and with our Highlanders, the Bag-pipes
effectuates every whit as much. The Mahumetans repair no faster to their
Moschees, at the voice of La ilha, illa alha, which calls them thereto, then
we do to our Churches, at the knell of the Bell, though of an inarticulat
sound.

41. If the thing be the same, which is signified, as likewise the conception
we have of that thing, although the signs be various, which to that our
conception do represent it: Whereat is it (I pray you) that we startle? Is not
the sacred Word interpreted as well anagogically, as literally; and
allegorically, as well as after any of the other ways, yet are all the said
expositions accounted authentic, and the same authority attributed to each.

42. It is evident to such, as will look out with their own eyes, that the
first instituters of Fables, which admit of a Physical, as well as Moral sense,
did in their plurality of gods, aim at the knowledge and worship of one only
divinity, in whose perfection they conceived all other deities to concenter, as
substantial qualities flowing from his virtue, power, and goodness.

43. Do not our selves affirm, That all that truly can be said of God, is God
himself; because of his simplicissime abstractednesse, pure act, and substance,
void of all matter and composition: and yet what is more commonly said amongst
our Theologs, then that many are the attributes of God, which kind of speech
they maintain to be necessary, for our better understanding; hence the word,
Anthropopathie, a descending to the capacity of man.

44. God is just, he is loving powerful he is, and wise: yet all, and each of
those qualities in the Abstract belonging to him, are God himself. Astraea,
Cupid, Mars, and Apollo, by the prist^n Poets have been made, by a Metonymical
trope, to stand concretively for the divulsives of the justice, love, power,
and wisdom of God: not much unlike to the second notions, to which we grant an
objective existence in the mind.

45. That the Heathen did believe in the unity of the Godhead, is also apparent
by this, that all their deities of both sexes, were in consanguinity, and
affinity with Jupiter; which is as much to say, as that all power, virtue,
goodness, and efficacy, proceeds from God.

46. Neptune was esteemed the power of God, in the Seas: Minerva, the power of
God, in Learning: Pluto, the power of God, in subterranean concavities:
Baecchus, in Wine: Ceres, in Corn: Nemesis, in revenge: and so through all,
whatever may concern Gods efficacious working, in relation either to the
quality, whence it flows, the subject, that receives it, or place, wherein
it operateth; by emanation, or any other kind of production.

47. To make use therefore, either in our discourse or writings of the words
Bellona, Hebe, Aeolus, Mercury, Aphrodi^e, Hercules, Pan, Saturn, Hymen, and
so forth through the whole List of Poetical terms, for warfare, youth, wind,
eloquence, lust, virtue, the universe, time, virginity; and almost all that is
of any importance, either for subsisting by its self, or qualifying of us* does
so little derogate from the purity of our Religion, that (in my opinion) our
manners are improved by it, our Language enriched, and, by virtue of Rethorical
tropes suggesting to our minds two several things at once, the spirits of such
as are studious of Learning, filled with a most wonderful delight.

48. And why should not Greek and Latin words of so sublime expression, obtain
acceptance in this our English tongue, when many ultramarine terms of very low
consideration, and vernacularie in our neighbor Nations, receive admittance in
it.

49. Ruitmaster, Ruit, Plunder, and Proveant are Dutch; yet have we made them
English; the French words of Parole, Cavalleer, Van, Rear, are now by us spoke
usually: We have likewise made perfect English of the Spanish words, Junto,
Begotero, Balcone, Montera: as also of those Italian ones, Piazza, Montebanco,
Curvetti, Ciarlatano, with many more both of these, and other Languages, which
luxurious wits of foreign education, for the greater emphasis, have obtruded
upon their maternal idiome.

50. Nay I will go further, by those excellent fancies is so curiously
imbellished the doctrine of both the Law, and Gospel, that in a Book entitled
Mystagogus Poeticus, written by Mr. Alexander Rosse, you may find how prettily,
God is represented by Apollo, by Atlas, by Jupiter, by Neptune, by Prometheus;
his Spirit by Boreas, and his Word by Ariadne: How Christ is the true
Aesculapius, and how vively he is evidenced by Amphion, by Apollo, by
Aristaeus, by Aurora, by Bacchus, by Bellerophon, by Cadmus, by Ganymed, by the
Genii, by Hercules, by Mercury, by Minerva, by Neptune, by Orpheus, by
Perseus, by Prometheus and by Theseus: How Christians are expressed by
Hercules, by Jason, by Sphinx, and by Ulysses; And how lastly, the Church is
signified and set forth by Atlas, by Ceres, by Diana, and by Iason's Ship.

51. And all this by the elucubrations of that worthy Gentleman Master
Alexander Rosse, whose praise in that late Book set forth by me, in vindication
of the honor of Scotland, I thought expedient not to omit.

52. That the Catholic Romans have constantly, and as yet do, after the
manner of the learned Paynims of old, most heartily relish variety of
consecrations, plurality of invocations, and adoring one and the same thing,
under a great diversity of titles, is apparent by the several names of
Churches, huge Legend of Saints, and different dedications to one dietie as of
one edifice to Christ the redeemer, and of another to Christ the mediator, of
one to our Lady of help, and of another to our Lady of mercy: even as the
warlike Romans devoted their temples to Ju^iter Feretrius; and Jupiter Stator:
to Diana Lucina, and Diana Flu^na.

54. In this likewise they agree, that amongst the Heathnish Philosophers,
there were many sects, such as Stoics, Academicks, Peripateticks,
Pythagoreans, and Cynicks, and amongst those we call Papists, there are diverse
orders of Monks, Friars, Thomists, and Scotists: subdivivided again into
Ecclesiastical incorporations, such as Cordeliers, Recollects, Succola^ts,
Capuchins, Fucillans, Iacobins, Dominicans, Augustins, Jesuits, Teatins,
Oratorians, Benedictins, Cartusians, Carmelists, and many other of that Nature,
discrepant more in name, then opinion; in habit then profession.

55. That there is great unformity in both doctrine, and discipline betwixt the
Churches of the Ancient, and Modern Romans, will never be denied by any, that
having applied his mind to the Philosophical Poesy of the one, and scholastic
divinity of the other, is well versed in the rites of both.

56. And truly, there is so great knowledge wrapped under the vail of that
affabulatorie divinity of old, that not to believe in the truth of many points
thereof, will argue as much senslesnesse, and stupiditrie in him, that is so
incredulous, as it can of miscreance, and infidelity in the person of any,
that would question the infallible events of the most authentic revelations of
the other.

57. It is said by them, that Saturn was the son of Coelus, and Thetis, that he
devoured all his children, save Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, and Pluto, that he
disgorged them again; and after he devirilised Coelum, was expelled his
kingdom by Jupiter.

58. And say not we the same, though in other words, whilst we avouch, that
time is measured by the motion of the heavens, and ebbing and flowing of the
Sea: that the Elementarie, and mixed bodies are corruptible, whilst the
Elements themselves in their purest Natures are not so: that the corruption of
one thing is the generation of another: that there can be no more worlds but
one: and that it lies not in the power of time to limit the duration of the
celestial influences, in all which it seems that the Ancients did philosophate
pretty handsomely.

59. Had they remained there* it had been well, but when they begun to
adulterate that knowledge with superstition, and out of conscience, to immolate
the bloody sacrifices of young Infants, upon the altars of Saturn; then was it
that their profession became detestable to all the civil men in the world, and
what was commendable therein, even abhorred; because of its intermixture with
so much wickedness.

60. Yet is it the part of wise men to sever the good from the bad, and without
any relation to times, to adhere to what of it self is rightest, and to account
that religion damnable (what ever it be) that destroys mutual duties, and
authorizeth cruelty.

61. The Poets say, that Vulcan was the son of Jupiter, and Juno; that he was
lame, that he was thrust out of heaven, that he was fostred by Thetis, and the
sea Nymphs, that he had Venus, and Aglaia to his wives, that the semence,
wherewith he thought to have imbued Minerva, had its diffluence on the earth;
and that he was the smith, who made the armor of the Gods.

62. And do not we, though in other terms, affirm the same, whilst we say,
that fiery meteors are begot in the air, by the motion, heat, and influence of
heaven: that the flame of our fire ascends not in a straight line, but
crookedly: that lightning, and thunderbolts fall out of the air upon the earth:
that natural heat is entertained by radical moisture, and the ignean mixtures
in the second region by Marine exhalations: that beauty, light, and splendour
are concomitant with the heat of fire: that heaven, for being pure from the
commistion of elementarie qualities, remains still a Virgin, in spite of
that natural heat, which diffused on terrestrial things, makes them
fruitful in generation: and that natural heat is the armor, and defense of
our life, by which we are preserved from our destruction, our life, and motion
ceasing, when it is gone, now what can be said against this, but that their way
of expression is somewhat more figurative, and eloquent.

63. The ancient Heathens did assever that Bacchus was the Son of Jupiter, and
Sem^le: saved out of her ashes, when Jupiter in his coit had burnt her with
thunder, that he was cherished in his Fathers thigh, nourished by the Hyades;
bred in Egypt; and afterward conquered the Indians; that he had both a Virgin
and a bulls face; was sometimes Male sometimes Female; now with a beard, anon
without one: that he was worshipped on the same altar with Minerva, and
accompanied by the Muses: that whilst he was a Child Mercury carried him to
Macris, the daughter of Aristaeus, to have his lips anointed with honey: that
he slew the serpent Amphisbena* that virgins were his priests, himself painted
naked, and the Mag-pie consecrated to him: that he was turned into a Lion, was
called Liber, and Dyonisius, and the first that made bargains: that he was
three years with Proserpina, and that he was torn by the Titans, buried, and
revived again.

64. Though this relation seem a little fabulous, yet do we maintain the truth
thereof, whilst we affirm, that the Vine tree by the influence of a warm air
produces grapes: that ashes are excellent dung for Vines: that the best wine
is where the soil is hot, subject to thunder, and where the trees are parched
with the rays of the Sun: that Egypt is a fit climate for that Liquor; that
moisture makes it prosper very much: and that the Indians were very
temulencious Symposiasts: that there is a hudge difference, and almost
incredible betwixt the effects of wine moderatly, and immoderately taken: that
wine drunk with mediocrity conduces much to wisdom, and Learning, and
refineth our wits with eloquence, which brings us to a felicity of expressing
our selves most sweetly, in the best things that are: that wine kills sorrow,
utterly banisheth it from all joviall congrecations, in pulling from it the
sting at both ends of melancholy, wherewith both the beginning, and closure of
all commensall meetings are for the most part stung, without this Lyaean
liquor: that sometimes wine makes men effeminate, prompts them to reveal
secrets, and oftentimes occasioneth much prating: that many times it inrageth
those that drink it: that it makes men to talk freely, and stirs up the
mind to high attempts: that commonly it is in taverns that men are aptest to
bargain-making, when they are well whitled with Septembral juice: that it will
be three years before the Vine tree can come to its full perfection and that
its twigs cut off, and set in the earth will afterward bring forth good and
sufficient grapes.

65. Do not both these ways tend to the signifying of the self same conception
of one and the same thing? truly they do: Yet is it with this discrepance,
that our conceit thereof is naked and bare, and theirs apparelled with an
expression of more pomp and stateliness.

66. To run after this manner albeit in never so percursorie a way, through the
remainder of what is extant of this kind of inveloped Philosophy, would
require a Treatise of a greater bulk, then these few miscellanie schedules are
able to enclose.

67. Yet is it a thousand pities, that the knowledge of all Arts, and Sciences,
both Practical and Theoretick, having been very ingeniously shrouded, by the
learned men of Old, under the most gorgeous cover of Poetical fancies, there
should not of that precious Mantle now be seen, so much as the ten thousandth
part; too severe innovators by an ubiquitarie conflagration, having devored the
rest.

68. Truly I lament it, and could wish from my heart, that the diverse
exquisite books written on that subject, by Orphee, Musaeus, Linus, Phurnutus,
Palaephat the Stoic, Dorothee, Evanthes, Heraclit of Pontus, Silen of Chio,
Anticlides, Evartes, Zenon, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and several thousands
compiled by other Authors, which have been lost these many hundred years ago;
whereof I believe some were amongst those of curious arts, mentioned in the
nineteenth of the Acts, were at this time obvious to our perusal.

69. I say not this to undervalue other books, for the Spirit of God has
taught us, that the two Testaments of the Law, and Gospel do far excel them:
but only to give you to understand, that Diamonds are not the worse, they be
inchassed in Gold; nor a Patacoon to be rejected, because a Portugal ducat is
better.

70. Yet may the Oro de Tibar, and Plata de Peru, which are the best gold, and
silver that are any where; that, being of 24 Carats (or Quilates, as they call
them there) and this full twelve-pennie fine, abate much of their proper value,
by being allayed with baser metal; there being nothing admits of mixture, which
is not capable of being adulterated.

71. And likewise the unskilfulnesse of the receiver, may contribute much to
the undervaluing of very good coin, as I have seen by some the Cross dolar of a
Hanse Town (because of its circular shape) preferred to a Spanish Ryal of
Eight, of a Polygonal Form; the insufficiency, by the touchstone of the eye,
consisting in the figure.

72. Even so have these melliffluently relishing devises, sustained great
detriment in the estimation of many, partly by reason of the blind superstiion
of some pusillanimous Zelots, addicted to that kind of devotion: and on the
other part, because of the uncharitable mistakes therein of some supercilious
coxcombs, who avoiding to be instructed aright, are every jot as peremptory in
their doom, as they are certain in their unskilfulness.

73. Both which, the one, for depraving a thing by the intermixture of some
badness with it, and the other, for condemning that as ill, whereof he knows
not the goodness, are like the Syrtes, and Symplegades: or Rocks, and
Quicksands of error, to be shunned by those, that would sail into the haven of
truth.

74. As for my self, I never yet had such prejudicate averseness from old
Tenets, nor implicit adherence to new positions, whither at home, or abroad,
but that I always thought it most beseeming one of a liberal education, to keep
the middle course that tends to truthwards, without regard to either pristin,
or modern opinion; Ephestian, or Exotic.

75. Which resolution of mine, to hold on in an even path to what is rightest,
without straying to either side, begot such opposition in others, to whose
conduct I was loath to deliver up my judgment, that because of fascination,
incubation, succubation, peragration with fairies, and other such communication
with foul spirits, I had openly purged many of both sexes, whom they esteemed
guilty, I was forthwith reputed an obstinate assertor of erroneous doctrine,
and that with the greater vehemence of bitterness, that I who was but raw,
young, and lately come from my travels, would not without examination give
trust to aged men of long experience, albeit in matters contrary to both common
sense, and reason.

76. Yet as a child (though but of ten years old) is not obliged to believe it
is dark, when the Sun shines, although a man of threescore should swear it to
him: so such weak arguments a testimonio having never been of great prevalency
with me, I caused send for one of either sex, that were supposed Rivals in
Diabolical venerie, the male, with the succub; and the female with the incub
And after I had spoken kindly to them in generals, I entreated them with all
gentleness possible, to tell me f^eely, whether it was so, or-no, as it was
reported of them, (the Reader must understand, that these two knew not other,
and that it was not at one time, nor in one place, that I thus examined them)
their answer was (for they were not suspicious of any harm from me) that it was
true enough, yet wished because of their so ingenuous confession, that I would
be pleased never to bear testimony against them; I promised to do so, but
withal considering how, in all other incident purposes, they were always
every whit as pertinent, as any what ever man or woman else of their condition,
I straight conceived there might be a crack in their imagination.

77. The young man was two and twenty years old, very bashful, yet prone to
lasciviousness, and a handsome youth: she was some five and twenty, nothing so
pleasant as he, and had it not been for a little modesty that restrained her,
a very sink of lust: All this I perceived at the first view, and therefore the
better to try an experiment thereon, I commanded, at the time they were in my
Fathers house, an insomniatorie and exoniretick potion, for stirring up of a
libidinous fancy, to be given unto each of them: I also directed one of my
Footboys to attend the woman, with all possible respect, and outward show of
affection; the like I required of one of my mothers Chambermaids, to be done in
behalf of the young man: which injunctions of mine were by these two servants
with such dexterity prosecuted, that the day after each their nights repose, of
those two hypochondriacks, which happened to be within a month of one another,
when I had called for them, and after I had fairly insinuated my self into
their minds by a smooth discourse, asked whether, that night as formerly, they
had in their bodies felt any carnal application of the fowl spirit, or if they
did, in what likeness they received him: To this both of them made answer, That
of all the nights which ever they had enjoyed, it was that night respectively,
wherein unto them both the spirit was most entirely communicative in feats of
dalliance, and that in the representation of the Boy, and Chambermaid, whom I
had appointed to wait on them, as they went to bed.

78. This ingenuous declaration of theirs confirmed me in my former opinion,
which with more degrees of certainty increased, when I heard that within a
short while after, the imagination of two, had turned to a fornication of four:
for which, though I caused to punish them all, the Fantasiasts were thereby
totally cured, who (becoming afterward Yoke-mates in wedlock to the two
servants of our house) were in all times coming sound enough in fancy, and
never any more disquieted with such like apprehensions.

79. In these the cure proved easy, but in many that kind of disease takes
such deep root, that no remedy can prevail. I saw at Madrid a bald-pated
fe^low, who believed he was Julius Caesar, and therefore went constantly on the
streets with a Laurel Crown on his head: and another at Toledo* who would not
adventure to go abroad, unless it were in a Coach, Chariot, or Sedane, for
fear the heavens should fall down upon him.

80. I likewise saw one in Saragosa, who imagining himself to be the lawful
King of Aragon, went no where without a Scepter in his hand; and another in the
Kingdom of Granada, who believed he was the valiant C^d, that conquered the
Mores.

81. At Messina in Sicilie, I also saw a man, that conceived himself to be the
great Alexander of Macedone, and that in a ten years space he should be master
of all the territories, which he subdued: but the best is, that the better to
resemble him, he always held his neck awry, which naturally was straight and
upright enough; and another at Venice, who imagined he was Sovereign of the
whole Adriatic Sea, and sole owner of all the ships, that came from the
Levante.

82. Of men that fancied themselves to be women, beasts, trees, stones,
pitchers, glass, angels, and of women whose strained imaginations have fallen
upon the like extravagancies, even in the midst of fire, fortune, and the
extremest pains, there is such variety of examples, amongst which I have seen
some at Rome, Naples, Florence, Genua, Paris, and other eminent Cities, that to
muitlply any more words therein, were to load your ears with old wives tales,
and the trivial tattle of idly employed, and shallow braind humerists.

83 Thus am I forced to deliver my opinion, in opposition to some of our
Kirkists, who would burden my conscience with more tenets then are fit for it,
and lighten my estate of more money then is due to them. for proof of the latter
whereof, as I have already, in refutation of their covetous disjoyning of what
was legally united, and splitting one parish into two, deduced three pregnant
reasons, why the two forementioned Churches should remain as one Church,
belonging to one parish, I will in sequel of the sixth Article of the same book
say,.

84. Fourthly, that in the up-lifting of all Taxes, and impositions in former
times, these two pretended Churches have been still rated as one parsonage, as
the rolls of the stint can sufficiently bear record.

85. Fifthly, there are in both these pretended parishes, not above three
hundred communicants, so that the great charge of souls needs not much
obstruct the union, seeing there is to be found in a shire not far from thence,
eight thousand parishioners resorting to one parish Kirk.

86. Sixthly, that the whole parishioners of both nemine contradicente, did,
and do as yet, most unanimously accord to the union.

87. Seventhly, that to have the union ratified by the General assembly of the
Land, as it was past in the days of King James the sixth, I offered, if another
place might be pitched upon more expedient, for the ease of these two half
parishes, to cause build a church therein upon my own charges.

88. Yet for answer to these aforesaid reasons (in my opinion relevant enough)
a decree by the Commission of the kirk, was pronounced against me, in favors
of the 2 men serving at the cure of that Kirk and chapel, providing yearly to
each of them 4 chalders victual, and 400 marks Scotch in money, besides their
Glebe (as they call it) and vicarage: although before that time (by reason of
the smalnesse of the tiths of the Parish) their expectation did never reach to
above five chalders rent for both, without any money at all, and that they
would have been exceedingly well pleased, to have accepted of less, had they
been free of a brotherly suggestion to my prejudice, which for fear of
deprivation, they were forced to lay hold on.

89. With this ecclesiastical pressure, whereby my rents are diminished,
another from the same fountain, though of a higher nature, was inflicted on me
by a kirk-man, whose covetousness reaching the procurement of an unjust
decree, through non defense in my absence, at an inferior court, against four
of my especial tenants, for some farms pretended to be due to his mother, as
the wife of an ecclesiastical dignary, he prosecuted the action with such
indignation, violence, avarice, and extortion, so prevaricatly and contrarily
to both divine and humane Laws, that J purposely conceal his name, least the
divulging thereof should prove scandalous to his fellow Laborers in the
spiritual Vineyard, for tollerating a man of such oppressive courses, to
domineer in the Pulpit, by virtue of a supposed call from God for the preaching
of his word.

90. Many things may be spoken of the unstreight carriage of this man, who, as
I am Informed, is about as yet to vex my Tenants in Farnesse as formerly he
has done those of my Towns of Davistone and Pettistone, which if he do, let
him assure himself, that I will lay open the wickedness of his disposition to
the view of the whole Isle, as perspicuously as his face is weekly apparent to
his Parish at Romarkney.

91. But for the time I will forbear, in hope of his repentance, which no
sooner can appear then I shall be apt to forgive, my humor leading me never to
insist in twitting any that is not of an obdur'd spirit, nor had these three
Ministers against whom I writ, in that book of mine entitled Exscibalauron
sustained the lash of my pen, had they then been sensi^le of the wrong done me,
or acknowledged their faults, as afterward they did; for, although I had
dissimulation, I can upon a cordial remorse for any injury committed, pardon
my cruellest, and most inveterate enemy.

92. Why men that should make profession of Learning, do go about to vex and
disquiet me, is most wonderful; seeing it is not unknown to all, that are
acquainted with me, that there is none breathing does more respect and
reverence it then I, and that by all appearance I am like (by Gods assistance)
to give greater proofs thereof to posterity, then any whosoever that has been,
is, or will be ready to display open banner against me.

93. Bavius and Mavius were both envious of the worth of Virgil, and covetuous
of his means but although the ruin of Virgil, had acquired them an Empire, yet
had not so vast a purchase been able to contrevalue the infamy, which by that
one Hexameter, Qui Bavium non odit amet tua carmina Maevi did redound to them
both.

94, I will apply nothing, it being the readers part some times to infer
consequences, where the modesty of the writer will not permit it, but setting
forward in the proposed Method, do make account to glance a little at the
other branch of the dichotomie, mentioned in the forty second Article of the
third book; as very obstructive to the defrayment of private debts, to wit
public dues.

Epig. Primum.
Ardochae duri fodiebant arva Coloni,
Lassabatque graves terrae profunda boves.
Finrasus invasit: tunc longae rastra quieti
Tradidit, and non est quo fodiatur ager.
Scire libet quaenam sit trist is causa rapinae,
Quid poterant terrae, quid meruisse solum;
Iphigenia domi nimirum nubilis illi.
Dotanda est, proprio non tamen illa solo.
Debita fallaci socero nam Burgius heroes
Detulit, injusta qui rapit arva manu.
Sponsam ambit juvenis: pater agros ambit, and illi
Inde Ligone carent: illa Ligone suo.
Protinus armatas trahit in sua vota cohortes,
Authors culpae, substituitque suae.
Arva novo tibi sunt Cromarti danda colono;
Sic fodietur amans: sic fodietur ager.
Epig. Secundum.
Etheiam quondam Patrio Cromartius heroes
Jure habuit, raptam nunc tamen alter habet:
Ru^^que fallaces aluerunt devia vulpes
Semper and hos laqueo ducere moris erat;
S^d post quam has seeds cepisti Finrase, paejer
Incipis his cunctis vulpibus esse lupus.
Epig. Tertium.
Ut succum toto morbus de corpore ducit
Evacuata trahens ossa liquore suo
Torrida dum tot is concrescant viscera fibris,
Et subito in rugas cedat adusta cutis
Divitias populi totas sic Creditor haurit
Seque unum nummis Hydrope pejor alit
Argenti venas rimatur and undique quaerit
Abdita siqua auri gut ta vel una fluit,
Vos estis medici Patres si dicere fas est
Vos soli huic morbo far potestis opem.
Epig. Quartum.
Socratici fertur patientia longa mariti,
Xantippe lingua clara fuisse tua,
Ille tuo pulsus clamore obduruit etsi,
Lingua lacessito est aere sonora magis.
Huc ades, o venerande senex, tentamina linque,
Talia virtuti non satis aequa ^uae
Voce sua turbet solum te creditor unus,
(Sufficiuntque tamen non duo tresue mihi)
Xantippen querulam vere laudabis et ipse
Judice te post hac (creed) beatus eris.
Epig Quintum.
The Scripture says, that three things always crave,
The raging sea, the barren womb, and grave;
I dare not add to Scripture, but I say,
That Creditors do crave far worse then they.
When I have rendered, by mortality,
To the grave her due, she craves no more of me;
No strong desire can make me satisfy't,
Nor yawning womb command my appetite:
Besides ther'es pleasure here, in debt there is none,
And when once laid in grave, all grief is gone.
No sea constrains you, to entrust your frayl
Plank to the waves, or forces to hoise sail;
Or yet suppose it could, against your will,
There Is hopes of Calm, or of a Harbor still:
There Is storm on storm, when Creditors do crave,
And every Interest a rolling wave;
O let me debtor be to the other three,
Free me from Fa^cher, Fraser, Fendrasie.
Epig. Sextum.
That he might in oppression be free,
Fendrasi^ took the Kirk upon his side,
Who were of avarice as full as he,
And for the goods of all men gaped as wide,
Those that beheld him Saint-like veyl'd did wonder,
And marvelled that he was changed so much,
When Satan's claws were suddenly seen under,
And all were startled at his hellish clutch:
'Twas like his Father, who is the root of evil,
Who taking Angel shapes, is still a Devil.
Epig. Septimum.
Since your selves are unto the Devil as due,
You Usurers, as Debtors cash to you,
To trust you so the Devil does us wrong,
For you will not trust your debtor half so long;
But it is confessed indeed their may be lets,
And creditors by chance may lose their debts;
But though the Devil gets no use at all.
Yet is he sure to obtain the Principal.
Epig. Octavum.
Like as the Tyrant plundered mighty Jove
Out of his golden vesture, and him told,
A woollen one might now far fitter prove;
Because the season waxed somewhat cold:
And from the God of Physic, Phoebus Son,
The golden beard in bitter scorn he took,
And said it was not fit he should have on,
Since his own Sire a beard could never brook.
Even so my Creditors with charity,
And fellow-feeling piety possessed,
In our Estates would make a paritie;
For conscience, say they, not Lands is best.
Pox take your gryping conscience, let me Enjoy m' Estate, and keep your
Charity.
O creditorum dira, and immitis cohors
Furiisque cunctis saevior.
Quorum sonorus clamor exanimat meum.
Uritque pectus taedio.
Hoc sei^c nunquam numinis vestros sine:
Impune frauds pergere,
Cum vos hiatu caepiet immenso niger,
Si^uque claudet Tartarus.
Tum scire (si fas ista mortali) libet
Quas Aeacus paenas paret?
Megaera properat, properat Alecto ferox,
Incincta tortis anguibus.
Caliginosam saeva Tisiphone facem,
Intrantibus vobis quatit.
Nec non catenas certat extensas triceps
Averni custos rumpere.
Et linquit ales Titij exosum jecur,
Ad vos opimos advolans.
Saxumque dirum Sisyphi vobis datur,
Sitisque vobis Tantali.
Istisque cunctis pejus interca manet,
Majusque tormentis erit.
Absum et haeres omnia, et exosos lares
Divendet insignis nepos.
Ibitque tremula, et paene procumbens fame
Proles parentis perfidi.
Virique conjux tenera in abjecti sinu
Alga jucebit vilior.
Et cuncta vobis ista Mercurius feret,
Ibitque certus nuncius.
The intent of the fifth Book, entitled, NELEODICASTES.
WHat is to be last in the execution, being commonly first in the intention,
the Author, conform to that order, begun this Isagogical Treatise, as is
apparent by the first Book thereof, entitled, The Wonders of the new Language:
but in the continuation of the matter, through all the Books following, he quits
that Analytical method, and betakes him to the Compositive, wherein priority in
cause, has its citeriority in description. Thus therefore, as in the third
Book were deduced Reasons, why the impediment mentioned in the second, should
be removed; so to the fifth, has the Author reserved the expression of his
regret, for want of remedy against such injuries, as under which in the fourth,
he had discovered a pressure. In a word, the third block which does lie in the
way of the Authors excellent undertakings, is the lack of redress, after
Petition put in, for the wrongs he had sustained. Yet does he not insist so
long thereupon, as on the former; because the Court before which he did address
himself, was somewhat more homogeneal; and that to decline the Kirks authority
in civilibus, he conceived it to be no Heteroclitism. Both Iudicatories were
constituted the Epitomes and Abridgements of greater ones; the Parliament, and
Assembly: that, passing under the name of a Committee; and this, of a
Commission. But truly, such was the influence the Ecclesiastical party in this,
had over the Secular in that, in imitation of the larger Bodies, which they
represented, who had the same ascendent, and subordinacy, in rule, and
dependencie* that he was thereby plunged into the more lamentable sufferings,
the higher the exclamations against the Consistorian Clergy on all sides
soared to this Picrologie, that no good aspect was to be expected from a
conjunction of so malevolent Luminaries. After the enumeration of many grievous
losses from Soldiers, and others, which the Author, contrary to the Laws of
the Nation, and Equity it self, was enforced to undergo without reparation, he
falls in the next place to discuss the Flagitator, whose poison, by reason of
its universality of diffluence on all his best endeavors, requires a careful
administration of Antidotes to be set down in each of all the six Books of this
Introduction. To this purpose, in several particulars, he instanceth their
implacability, their unnaturality, and unconscionableness; he discloseth three
plausible overtures most untowardly rejected by them; and in amplification of
their cunning and rigor, has a learned disceptation concerning Prodigality
and Covetousness: he brings against them arguments both from Conscience and
Law, in its supremest Legislation; and with sentences of a vigorous and strong
impression, most accurately illustrates them. The tender care should be had of
ancient Houses, he again inculcates: and lastly, to persuade the Public to
exoner him of the forementioned burdens, he ratiocinates a minori ad majus, of
Monopolies, in ampler benefits granted to men of no desert, wherein he needs
not doubt to have furnished matter abundant, for the satisfaction of the
impartial Reader.

The Fifth Book Of the INTRODUCTION, entitled, Neleodicastes, Or, The pitiless
Judge.
Wherein the austerity of the Law of Scotland, together with the partiality of
those that professed it a while ago, is made appear to be a great hinderance to
the present promulgation of the Universal Speech, and future evulgement of
other excellent Inventions. 1 THe public Pressures, which in Scotland I was
enforced to undergo, (in matter of Tax and Loan, monthly maintenance,
additional Sess-money, transient Quarters, constant and assistant quartering
Horse, Foot, and Dragoon-Levies, besides near 3000 l. sterling worth of goods,
as it stands upon Record, under the hands of those Gentlemen authorized for
Commissioners, to take upon Oath and Probation, the just account of their
losses, most basely and unworthily (whilst I was absent from the Country)
robbed and plundered from my Tenants: against whom, no pretext of quarrel could
be had, but the love of their means, they being never sufferers, but for their
innocence, and too conscionable neighborhood) did extend to so vast a
proportion, that my Lands thereby were more sadly dealt with then those of any
Subject within the Dominion; and my self, from time to time, brought under the
sufferance of such exorbitant Impositions, as would have been almost
insupportable to any of the Country, though of a free estate.

2. But that which made my condition the more bewailable, was, that in spite
of that distributive justice according to which the then Estates of the Nation
enjoined each one ratably to lend his shoulder to the common burden* I was, by
over-prizing of my Lands, emitting too great a proportion of Horse and Foot,
and extraordinary quartering, at all occasions, singled out a part to sustain
the calamity alone, without that wretched comfort (called Solatium misoris) of
any other to share with me therein.

3. Which had it been inflicted on me* as a punishment for an offense, albeit
pretended, were somewhat tolerable: but all the doers could say, was, that what
they did then, they had warrant for; under the mask and vizard whereof, the
sordid and corrupt Commissaries, with the ravenous Neoptoleman Presidiaries,
did grind the faces of my poor men, and suck the very blood out of my estate.

4. This disorder of Order-monging multitudes (without prejudice be it spoke of
a well-disciplined Soldiery) together with the specious pretenses that some
have grasped at, to do iniquity by a Law, has truly run in such an
overflowing speat and inundation of violence against me, that what by the
cruelty and high hand of neighboring Flagitators and others, Nihil est
profecto molestius quam Vicinus avarus, says Joh. Decollo.
and continual current of unavoidable Taxes, my poor tenants were so
incompassionately plucked mangled, torn in pieces, and shuffled, that they and
I both, for all our endeavors, (the public burden alone, besides other
pressures, having in some years (over and above the whole rent of the Land) put
me to a hundred pounds English money on the score) have not been able to give,
in matter of the Principal, a full repast to the rest of those craving a
hungered Creditors, who, by reason of the foresaid obstacles, barring, my
determination remain as yet unsatisfied.

5. Of whom nevertheless not any almost (notwithstanding all these
difficulties, Stolidus est qui propter spen^ majoris rem praesint^m and certam
licet parvam non amplectitier.
which yet procreate this one and the greatest stop of all, that no Merchant is
to be had for Land, without huge loss to the disponer; men of flourishing
estates having sold their Lands of late at easy rates, to shun the pressures
of so frequent impositions, and Assesments) will abate a mite of the due, the
Law in its rigor does allow, nor out of a fellow-feeling of my sufferings,
relent never so little of the extremity.

6. For whether Land has been undone, Turpia lucra foenotis, and velox usura
inopes trucidat.

Sed male parta male delibuntur.


and impoverished by unseasonable years; or beggered, and exhausted by the
rapine of unruly Soldiers, they will always have their money to yield a
super-abundant and fruitful Crop, and the Rent thereof (in despite of the
fortune of the Nation) to hold our most plenteously to the full.

7. However, though to any judicious and well-poysed brain it would seem
strange, Hac prima est sc^lerunt matter quae semper habendo plus sitiens patulis
rimatur faucibus aurum.
that by such men what is naturally barren, shall be still made fruitful, even
when by the hardness of the times, what is naturally fruitful, is still made
barren.

8. I could nevertheless, in so far as concerns my own particular, be well
pleased not to decline the fertilizing of that sterility, (if the State think
such kind of men worthy of being so nearly taken notice of) provided the
judicatory, of the Land debar me not from the benefit of that justice which
(without too palpable a partiality) cannot be denied to a very stranger, though
but passing by, never to return again.

9. For the most of all that I demand, Sir James Fraser of Darkhouse, of whom
no good can be truly spoken but that he is dead.
springs from these two branches: first, that to have rest^tution of all that
wrongously has been taken from me and my Tenants, I be permitted to take my
course against the means of the Robber; who by having disabled them, through
so great a spoil, from paying their Farms ever since, and these seven years to
come, so well, as formerly they did, will prejudge me in thrice as great a
sum, as all they were pillaged of did amount to* and next, Avarum nisi cum
moritur nihil recte facit (says Publius Mimus) avaro quid mali optes nisi ut
diu vivat. Non sibi non aliis prodest dum vivit avarus and prodest aliis and
sibi dum moritur
that King James his Act, concerning the most important clause in decreets of
apprising may be conceived as it ought to be, in favors of them that offer
movables of more worth then the debt that is required.

10. Now lest I should seem to protract time; and involve the Reader into a
Labyrinth of discourse upon this so exuberant a purpose the amplification
whereof (should I give way thereto) would with little difficulty draw from my
Pen more Volumes (time not failing me) then ever Origin wrote, as is manifest
by those aporrectical interthetes I have already couched; (whereof nevertheless
I have not the twentieth part, nor any considerable portion of other more
worthy Manuscripts of mine, which I having left behind me at Cromartie, were in
the time of my imprisonment at London by the Sequestrator Dundasse's rifling of
my Library, most wretchedly imbezled, and unluckily scattered amongst those
that preferred clean paper to any writing that is) I will (after having
mentioned somewhat of the matter, climacotially proposed in the seventieth
Article of the second book, make bold to conduct the Reader to the reposingroom
of a closure, there to remain, if it please him, till it be high time to
require his progress toward the ten excogitable Cities mentioned in the 73
Article of the first book.

11. Seeing the matter already spoke of concerns me and my Fathers Creditors,
both of us aiming at one and the same thing to wit, the enjoyment of the Estate
of my Progenitors, I shall desire the Reader, by what I am to say, to take
notice, which of us has best right thereto, first in conscience, then
according to Law.

Vid. Art. 28.
12. Conscionably therefore to talk thereof, in some of the most civil parts of
the world, it is thought unjust, that the infection of debt, like a hereditary
disease, should be derived to Posterity, but only transmitted to those, that
from the indebted receive a benefit equivalent to the debt; conscience
requiring that each one be a faithful Administrator to his Posterity of the
means, which from his Predecessors he has received: nothing being made liable
to his own debt, but his own conquest; his Personal deservings, and nothing
else being that, which ought to expiate his personal faults.

13. Hence it follows by the same equity as aforesaid, seeing neither any of
my forefathers, nor yet my self, were obliged in so much as one farthing to
any of those Creditors; that consequently neither their estate, nor mine,
should be affected with the burden, which concerned us not, but only the
means of him that was the Party-contractor; whereby the whole shire of
Cromartie, and Baronry of fishery in Scotland; ought clearly to be mine, for
having belonged to my Progenitors five hundred and twenty years before the
Incarnation; it being enough, that I lose two hundred pounds sterling a year of
old rent, which my father put away, together with all his own conquest, and
movables belonging either to him or any other of my Ancestors.

14. But the Lucripetary Poscinummios, Hydropico similis nunquam saliatur
avarus infaelix, requie nocte dioque caret.
lending a deaf adders ear to these kind of motions, because the rigor of the
Scottish Law against the heirs of ancient families, allows not the admittance
of such a desire, to soften the hardness of their hearts, it was told them,

15. First, that seeing I had nothing answerable to the annual Rents of those
Creditors, but the yearly Rent of the Land, Non solum liberalitatis est, sed
etiam commoditatis plorumque aliquid de suo suit relaxare.
and that estates in Land should be as well weighed in the balance of Justice,
as stocks in money, it could not be but reasonable, that as much were defalked
from Creditors interests, as by public dues have been exhausted out of my
Land-rents.

16. Secondly, that for the payment of what sums of debt the Creditor could
with reason claim right to, he might be pleased to take peny-worths, Vtilia non
omnia quae pro fulura videntur. Effugere cupiditatem regnum est vincere.
not according to his own cutting and carving, but as judicious men employed
therein* should discern of their value; there being nothing more common amongst
burgers (whom the Law certainly cannot with reason favor more then landed men)
then that if a Merchant fall into any decadence in his means (although by his
own procurement) his Creditors must take of his movables, as, by the prime
Magistrates of the town, they shall be appreciated, and at no underrate.

17. Thirdly, for further trial of their discretion, it was propounded, (seeing
it was their resolution to have my Lands to go to the payment of another's
debt) that they would therefore vouchsafe to give some voluntary courtesy, In
lu^rando modus secta^dus.
for lightning of the burden; which favor, considering the smalness of the
sums at the first borrowing, and yet the smaller use they were put to, Sed
illis crescentem sequitur cura pecuniae.
(there being none living; but the Creditors themselves, that had any benefit
thereby, and yet how vastly and exsuperantly they have accresced since) may
very well be granted.

18. These most reasonable Overtures prevailing as little as the former, with
those cunning Creditors, who, when my father needed no money, Avari rectas
cogitationes non admittunt, and lucri gratia corpus and animum diabolo
prostituunt.
knowing his disposition to borrow, and ability to pay, did for their own ends
lend unto him whatever he pleased; that thus by laying out a worm (as it were)
to catch a Salmon, taking occasion of his profuseness, they might make their
own covetousness the main groundwork of their enrichment.

19. For which prodigality, I have already dispensed with all that ever he
acquired, and a hundred thousand pounds Scottish more, besides seven or eight
years rents of my Lands, which I gave them totally, save so much thereof, as
for Public dues I could not get avoided to abalienate from their acceptance.

20. Yet as if this their covetousness were such an illustrious and heroic
virtue, In illis neque pecuniae modusest, neque cispiditatum, quas nulla
praeda, unquam improbe parta minuit, sed auget potius, atque inslammat.
as could not be recompensed, all that ever they got from my father, or yet
from my self, taking no more bulk in the immense gulf thereof, then would a
grain of Milletseed in the throat of an ass.

20. They refused to take Land in part of payment of the superplus of the debt,
not but that in their own thoughts they esteem the Land much more worth then
the money to be discharged for it, themselves having given greater sums of
money for worse Land, Vltroneae vilescunt merces and pretia facilitate
decrescunt. Retia ubique tendunt ad nummos.
and less of it: but that by this their seeming refusal, to be free of their
cruelty otherways, I might be necessitated, out of desperation, to cast it into
their laps, half for naught.

21. Which that I might the sooner be enforced to do, they demanded, besides
their principal sums (which oftentimes were but failies of bargains) their
interests, reer-interests, expenses in seeking after them, and the interest of
those expenses, without having any regard to the difficulties of the times,
which eat up the rents in public disbursements; Lucrum in arca, damnum in
conscientia.
and had laid such politic courses for insnaring me in the trap of an
unthrifty bargain, that by their forestalling the bank, there was no money to
be had in borrowing for my behove, but only from themselves.

22. Had this been the worst, it should never by me have been mentioned; but to
conceal it, I were to blame. After that I was ascertained of what inward joy
was conceived amongst them, when they had fondly assured themselves of the
truth of my being killed at Worcester-battel, and for the gladness of the
tidings had madified their nolls to some purpose with the liquor of the grape.

23. And how when afterward they understood the contrary to be verified by
Letters under my own hand; and that by being (no thanks to them) in as good
health as any of themselves, they were like to be disappointed of their
abominable and unchristian hopes, they then threw in the way of my credit all
the impediments that they could, to debar me from money, that the withholding
of necessary helps might (if possible) snatch away what the sword had spared.

24. As also, what underhand-dealing there was for arresting of my person at
London, by men with whom neither my father nor I had ever any dealing
(notwithstanding of my being a prisoner upon Parole to the Council of State)
and likewise what plotting was in Scotland by that fry of men against me,
Voluntas fingendi and mentiendi est little qui lucrum desiderant.
after I was allowed by the State the favor of five months time to go thither
and return again, is well known by those that were employed by them in those
unconscionable negotiations.

25. What congeeing cringing* doffing of hats, making of legs, and petitioning
there was of the Judges of Scotland, the Commissioners for the Sequestrations
at Leith, and others, by many of those men, that they ( good souls) who have
always been found true and trusty ( to their own profit) should not, for my
lawless and unwarrantable joining with Charles (for so some called him) in the
invasion of England, be debarred from their legal rights to the enjoyment of my
fathers lands apprised by them for their ( most precious and inestimable)
money, is not unknown to any that for business did frequent the Courts of
Justice in that Country.

26. Furthermore, to show the craftiness and subdolous pranks of some of those
Creditors, of whose discharges I was content some two years ago to accept, for
sums of money I had given them toward the defrayment of certain debts due upon
Bonds, which they (perceiving my forwardness to relieve them, and having a
further project in their own minds) pretended they were so mislayd, that they
could not come at them, so soon as the urgencie and pressing haste of my
then-incident occasions might require, did, very subtly (or rather,
knavishly) at my last going down to Edinburgh from London, demand payment from
me by virtue of those Bonds, which then they had to show readily enough,
thinking the Discharges they had given me had been utterly lost at Worcester:
and although some of them, by means of the clauses of Registration which they
contained, might have been put upon Record, Divitias per falsitates ac^^^rere,
oppro^^^^^^ est.
that nevertheless that should help me nothing, because the Scottish Registers
were removed to the Tower of London, and therefore (in their conceit) never to
be exposed hereafter to the inspection of any of the Scottish Nation. So cunning
this generation of Usurers is of late become in Scotland.

27. But when they saw that those their Acquittances (which by the discretion
of one Captain Goodwin, in Colonel Pride's Regiment, had been recovered out of
the spoil at Worcester) were produced before them, they then looking as if
their noses had been a bleeding, could not any longer for shame retard my
cancelling of the aforesaid Bonds.

28. Who does not account such a trick a deep piece of iniquity, does not
positively know what belongs to sin: but who thinks any more of it, and of
all the formerly-mentioned abominations, then of a Flea-bite to the stinging of
a Scorpion, in regard of Robert Lesly of Finrasie's far more wicked
contrivances against me, has no skill in Comparatives.

29. For albeit of all the friends he ever had, the most deserving was my
father, by whose intercession alone he obtained, for the space of one and
twenty years together, fourscore pounds sterling. a year: Maxima cupiditas
rationem pervertit, ac mentem a suo slatu removit.
yet for exchange (as it seemed then) of so great a favor, he having lent him
eight hundred pounds English money, when my father neither needed nor required
it; and having by mischance on the one side, and subtilty on the other, got his
Bond thereupon, he was the first that led apprisings against his Lands; and not
content with that, to the end he might obtain the marrow of his estate to
himself, procured the most of all his other Creditors, to take the same violent
course against him.

30. And though when in the time of my Lord Montross's overrunning of the
North of Scotland, he knew not what course to take for the securing of his
Gold, Silver, Evidences, and other things of value, from the hands of the
Irish, it pleased my mother, out of courtesy, Cupicbam tuam ingratitudinem
silentio dissimulare, scel meam modestiam tua vicit improbitas.
to take into her own custody the Trunks wherein those things were, and place
them within my house of Cromartie: of all which although she made such a good
account unto him, that now he has them at his own disposure, yet (like that
Snake mentioned in the Fable, which, instead of thanks for the warmth of a good
fire bestowed on his almost-starv'd-for-cold joints, without which he had
assuredly died, did leap up in the face of his Host, to destroy him, with his
whole family) he has ever since applied the utmost of his wit to the undoing
both of her and me, and the utter subversion of all the remnant of our House.

31. That such bad acquitals should have by him been rendered to my father and
mother for those so considerable favors of theirs conferred on him who was born
a Gentleman (for he is the third in descent from Norman Leslie, that for
killing his Master Card. Tu omnium in gratissime pro summis officiis, qua^um
poles malesicorum reponis.
Retoun, was justly forfeited of his estate) is truly very strange.

32. Strange likewise it is, that by the continuance of his miscarriages
toward me, I should be necessitated in my own defense against him (who, Tu pro
officiis ea reponis ingratissimum monstrum, quae host is non faceret hosti.
as if there were a Cannibal-like Leprosy over his heart, impeditive of the
susceptibility of thanks, has never any way been sensible, in the least
measure, of the several good offices done unto him) to afford yet another
evidence of the height of his ingratitude; which is this.

33. When some four years ago, with all the Horse and Foot he was able to
command, he came in a hostile manner to take possession of a Farm of mine,
called Ardoch; unto which (as Sir Robert Farquhair can testify) he had no more
just title, Improbi cum maxim beneficia acceperint, tunc maxim ad malesicia
animantur.
then to the town of Jericho mentioned in the Scriptures; and that at the offer
of such an indignity to our House, some of the hotspirited Gentlemen of our
name would even then have taken him, with his three sons, bound them hand and
foot and thrown them within the Flood-mark, into a place called The yares of
Vdol, there to expect the coming of the Sea in a full Tide, to carry him along
to be seized in a soil of a greater depth, and abler to restrain the
insatiableness of his immense desires, then any of my Lands within the Shire of
Cromartie.

34. Then, when in hopes he would behave himself more legally in times coming,
prove a better neighbor, and more conscionable man, I had restrained their
fury, curbed their sudden attempt, and allowing him, together with those were
with him, a Pass and Safe Conduct to their own houses, I did not permit so much
as a hair of any of their heads to be touched; his retribution of thanks to me
for my then so publikely-manifested affection to him in the preservation of his
life (under God) appeared in nothing else, (he like another Mithridates,
feeding his gall on no other nutriment but on the poison of that rancour he had
most maliciously conceived against me and my family) but in the present setting
of himself to work for laying the platform of a most mischievous plot, to my
total and unavoidable destruction.

35. In pursuance whereof, having adjoined to himself Colonel Archibald
Strachan (then designed Lieutenant Colonel) good John Forbas of Innernass,
Lieutenant Huchison, and others who may be named hereafter, that under pretext
of saving my tenants from being quartered upon (with which punishment they were
threatened, even out of the Pulpit of Cromartie, by an intimation made to that
effect from the Ministers own mouth, who nevertheless (as I believe) knew
nothing of the Plot) unless I should go to Innernass my self, to conduce with
the Officers for some ease of an extraordinary Sess was then to be imposed on
me; Avarus etiam diis molitur fallactas.
hoping by such means, when I should be in that Town, that by virtue of a
Caption stolen out against me by James Sutherland Tutor of Duffas, I should be
deprived of my liberty, and kept in durance there, Eo productus est furor, uti
sit res periculofissima magna beneficia in aliquem confer: nam quia turpe
putat non reddere, non vult esse cui reddat.
till Finrasie should be fully satisfied in all his demands.

36. This wicked device proved so universally odious to all the ingenuous
spirits that heard of it, that his own wife having it in a perfect abomination,
because of the bad sequeles she was certain could not choose but ensue upon such
pernicious machinations, did not enjoy her self long after, but died very
discontented at the wilfulness of her husband: for truly she was a very
discreet and judicious woman, and so was his mother, who, though she loved him
as well as any mother could do her son, was still, in all differences betwixt
him and me, more for me then him, because she studied always to have reason on
her side.

37. The above-written Robert finding that this his subtle contrivance had
failed of its aimed-at effect, and that there appeared as much baseness in the
one, as rashness in the other attempt, did forecast another way how to bring
about his covetous designs; which that he might the better do, after that he
had most glibly insinuated himself into the favor of the aforementioned Archibald
Strachan, Ingratitudo est ventus urens, siccans fontes pietatis, and fluenta
gratiae.
and that he had a pretty while before that, moved a young Gentleman in Morray
(who afterward married one of his daughters, and who (had he been free from
the infection of his father-in-law's untoward suggestions) would have assuredly
dealt very courteously with me, he being the heir of one of my fathers
Creditors) to make over his rights to him, to be consolidated with his other
pretended claims, for the which he was to give him a good round sum of money,
and his daughter to the boot.

38. Now to the end he might bestow his daughter with the least charge he could
to himself, Ingratum dixeris, and omnia dixeris.
he procured an Order for Colonel Strachan to quarter a whole Troop of Horse
upon my Tenandry, till I should transact for a sum to be paid to his son-inlaw;
which verily was the greatest part of his portion; he choosing rather my Land
should lie waste, then that his daughter were not well labored. O tempora! O
mores!


39. The injustice of this action, against which Strachan, even at first, had
some inward reluctancie, stamped within a little thereafter into the Colonels
mind those deep impressions of regret for the perpetration thereof, from
whence sprung forth so many various prickles of soul-disturbing thoughts for
it, and some other of his more notorious actings upon the advice of a so
oppressive counselor, as that his conscience being exceedingly stung with
remorse, he was not able (a while before he died) to refrain from these abrupt
exclamations, Woe to thee Finrasie, accursed be thy consultations, shame fall on
them, and so forth: after this manner fretting and vexing himself several times
in private, at the very single memory of that one man, as some of those that
heard him in his Soliloquies a little before his decease, can bear record.

40. And truly thus much I can testify my self, that to my own hearing he did
acknowledge his hearty sorrow for the indefatigable pains he took for near upon
twelve months together, at the request of the said Finrasie, in procuring a
Garrison to be settled within my house at Cromartie, whereof the Governor (being
a Leslie) was (though otherways a passing civil young Gentleman) imbued in a
very short space with such corrupt documents from his cosen Roberts, that
before the disbanding of that Garrison (for which courtesy I owe the thanks to
Lieutenant General David Leslie, who I persuade my self did never approve of
Finrasie's proceedings against me) begun to keep such a high hand in my absence
over all that had in me any interest, that in the most unreasonable of his
demands (as his written Order as yet can bear witness) his loftiness was such,
that he kept a strain like that of Solomon the magnificent, to the petty
Princes of Christendom.

41. Not without a design (as is supposed) to indear himself the more
intrinsecally in the favors of the young Gentlewomen Finrasie's daughters
whose father (like another Charles of Burgundy) keeps them (by all appearance)
the longer unhusbanded, that they may serve him for so many stalking-horses,
whereby to entangle some neighboring Woodcocks (through an expectation of
wiving them) in a confederacy with him, and opposition to my Family, against
which he has so injustly denounced War.

42. The Garrison being removed from Cromartie, and honest Robert thereby
disappointed of any further assistance from Governor Leslie in the driving on
of his projects, he betakes himself to another course; and laying hold on the
occasion of a meeting amongst the Gentlemen of the name of Mackenzie, put in
this humble suit unto them, that they would be pleased to move the Earl of
Seaforth (their chief and his superior) to allow him the favor of protection,
and to further him to the possession of those my Lands he had apprized for
moneys due by my Father to him; which discourse as he amplified after the best
manner he could for his own advantage, so had he an especial care to make no
mention of his ungrateful miscarriage within a year before that, unto my Lords
own self; whose lawful commands (though both his Father and he had formerly
unto that Honorable Family sworn unfeigned obedience) he not only slighted,
in not undergoing those duties which (as a Vassal) it became him to discharge,
and which the primest Gentlemen thereabouts (out of the mere tie of
Neighborhood) did unanimously perform; but contrary to the homage he did owe
unto my Lord, and personal good Offices he had received from him, adjoined
himself with might and main, in both counsel and action, to those, that had
vowed the ruin of both him and his name, had plundered his and their Lands,
dipped their hands in the blood of his servants, and burnt some of the best
houses of his kinsmen.

42. All which things being very well known to the worthy Juncto of the
aforesaid Gentlemen, his Petition was justly rejected; not so much for that in
both Consanguinity and Alliance I had unto his Lordship a very near relation,
or that the Predecessors of us both, had for these many hundreds of years kept
a most entire and amicable correspondence, as that his demands were totally of
themselves unreasonable, and that (although they had been better grounded) my
Lord was not conceived to be in honor bound to protect him, who had infringed
his faith, and forfeited his loyalty to him, whose Vassal he was.

44. Whereas these rubs in the way of a plain-meaning man would have quickly
made him to desist from such violent undertakings, Lucri spes omnia dissicilia
facit jucunda.
he on the contrary was by such repulses the more eagar on his game: what would
have proved discouragements to others, did animate him; and the greatest spur
to his action, was the iniquity of the cause: he left no Wind unsailed by, nor
Oar unplyed he could make use of: he importuned the Kirk, solicited the State,
courted the Soldierie, feasted the Lawyers, cajoled, smoothed, and flattered
Gentlemen, Merchants, and men of all degrees, to gain friends both in Heaven
and Hell for my destruction, and that with such vigilance and circumspection,
cunning and reservedness, without sparing either cost or travel, that had the
time I was forced to bestow in my own defense on avoiding his grins, Vid. lib.
2. Art. 19.
shunning his traps, and with no small charge and trouble preserving my self
from his various and manifold snares, been spent after the manner I intended, I
would (by Gods assistance) in that space of leisure have emitted those things,
which (to the Isle of Britain) would have been of greater emolument, then all
the estate he is worth in the world, twenty times told.

45. But he mis-regarding these things, which did no more relish with him, then
a French Galliard in the ears of a Spanish Mule, and setting at naught my
enjoyment of any spare hours upon what occasion soever, did even at my last
being in Cromartie (where I was not to stay above two months, by reason of my
being engaged to the State upon Parole to return to London at a prefixed day)
plod and forecast how without offending Authority (I being a Prisoner of War)
he might so secure my person in Scotland, as not to be released till he were
contented in all his demands.

46. In the prosecuting of this Plot by his two elder sons and brother George
many of the English Officers both of Horse and Foot, together with the
Deputy Governor of that English Garrison in my house, being most earnestly
spoke to, he found them of such another temper then the Presbyterian Commanders
he had formerly employed against me, that neither the beauty of his daughters
nor glistering of his gold, being able to tempt them to a condescendment to his
unjust desires, in spite of his way-laying of me, and conducing with English
Messengers at Elguin in Morray to apprehend me, I securely traveled through all
the best Towns of Scotland, and thereby making a safe retreat to London, wished
him for the future to employ his Motto of Gripe-fast, with the Griffin pounces
of his Arms, upon some other prey then me, who knows him already so well, that
he being of Normans extraction, there can no Proverb be more fitly applied to
him, then that of Qualis Corvus, tale ovum.

(...) 47. Several Gentlemen of good account, and others of his familiar
acquaintance having many times very seriously expostulated with him, why he did
so implacably demean himself toward me, and with such irreconciliability of
rancor, that nothing could seem to please him that was consistent with my weal;
his answers most readily were these: I have (see ye?) many Daughters (see ye?)
to provide Portions for (see ye?) and that (see ye now?) cannot be done (see
ye?) without money; the Interest (see ye?) of what I lent (see ye?) had it been
termely paid (see ye?) would have afforded me (see ye now?) several stocks for
new Interests: I have (see ye?) apprized Lands (see ye?) for these sums (see
ye?) borrowed from me (see ye now?) and (see ye?) the Legal being expired (see
ye now?) is it not just (see ye?) and equitable (see ye?) that I have
possession (see ye?) of those my Lands (see ye?) according to my undoubted
Right (see ye now?)

48. With these over-words of see ye, and see ye now, as if they had been no
less material then the Psalmists Selah and Higgaion Selah, did he usually
nauseate the ears of his Hearers, when his tongue was in the career of uttering
anything concerning me, who always thought that he had very good reason to
make use of suchlike expressions, do you see? and do you see now? because there
being but little candor in his meaning, whatever he did or spoke was under
some color.

49. For under color of Religion, he did sow the seeds of division betwixt me
and the Kirk, and devised such abominable lies of me, as the like were never
hatched in Hell: under color of being against Tyranny, he sent his sons along
with Col. Strachan to the overthrow of Montross, whom he called James Graham
the, etc. as now he does his Master by the name of Charles Stuart: under color
of being for Monarchy, he hyed away his Eldest Son to Dunbar, where being taken
Prisoner, he was kept fast for a twelve month at New Castle; and under what
color soever he can show himself with the least detriment in public, does he
always with the greatest security drive on his private benefit.

50. So that such as talk and discourse with him, who goes always Masked and
Vizarded with colors and pretenses to what he intends not, ought not only to
see, to see well, and better see; to see well now, and see well then, but with
all the perspicacy of sight, and prying inspection that may be, to look upon
his concealed Objects, pore into them, and cast an eye on what from open view
he purposely withholdeth, to the end that in discovering by such optics the
fallacies of the sight of our mind, we be not deluded, by finding under the
Cloak of Righteousness, nothing else but the Babylonish Garment and accursed
thing.

51. Let the Reader (I beseech him) excuse my having so long detained him upon
the wretched subject of this man, who like a Fox in his Den, living in my
Progenitors Lands of Ethie, hides or shows his Paws as he sees the Prey in a
conveniencie to let go or lay hold upon: and in compensation (seeing
contrariorum eadem est ratio) I will set before him another of my Fathers
Creditors, who in the commendative deserves as much to be insisted upon, as
the other in the vituperatory part.

Quaestus magnus conscientiae puritas. Bona est substantia, cui non est
peccatum in conscientiae.
52. As of the ten Lepers whom Christ healed, one believed in him; and of the
two crucified Thieves, one was saved: so were it a pity, if amongst so many
Creditors there could not be found one honest man: but far more pity it were,
that (he being a man of such approved integrity) I should be silent in his
praises* and not extol his worth.

Nemo injustum habet lucrum sine justo damno, tamen non sic sapit lucrum quam
dolet damnum.
53. Virtue was the foundation of his wealth, and he never loved to gain any
thing by the loss of another: of the many Debtors that have been beholden to
him, he never offered to put the Bonds of any in the Register: yet has God in
his goodness toward him blessed him with prosperity, whilst others that had
blamed him for his lenity, and had themselves extended the rigor of the
Scottish Law to the extremest cruelty imaginary, till they had obtained to the
outmost farthing all that out of the depth of their covetousness they could
have required from my Father, and afterward had in their jollity vaunted of the
immense profit that thereby accrued unto them, are now (although it be not long
since the time of their oftentive rigor) in a despicable condition, and fit
objects of Divine wrath, to be punished with that poverty, which most
unmercifully for their own inrichment they would have inflicted upon their
betters.

54. But may William Robertson of Kindeasse, Honestum est lucrum, quo nemo
laeditur; just acquiritur, and nulli praejudicatur.
or rather kindness, (for so they call this worthy man) for his going contrary
to that stream of wickedness which carries headlong his fellow-Creditors to
the black sea of unchristian-like dealing, enjoy a long life in this world,
attended with health, wealth, a hopeful Posterity, and all the happiness
conducible to eternal salvation: and may his children after him, as Heirs both
of his virtues and means, derive his Lands and riches to their sons, to
continue successively in that Line from generation to generation, so long as
there is a hill in Scotland or that the sea does ebb and flow.

45. This hearty wish of mine, as chief of my kindred, I bequeath to all that do
and are to carry the name of Vrquhart, and adjure them, by the respect they owe
to the Stock whence they are descended, for my Fathers love and mine to this
man, to do all manner of good offices to each one that bears the name of
Robertson, both for the Personal deservings of the Gentleman I have now
mentioned, as for that (as it is a common saying that the Skeens ought to be
Robertsons) there is nothing more certain then that the Robertsons should be
Vrquharts; for besides that their own Coat Armor does in some measure manifest
it, the first of that name was a son of Robert, the second brother of Endymion
Vrquhart; which Robert, a little after the decease of Charlemain, in emulation
of his Uncle Carolo, was so renowned for his Chivalrie and valiant
achievements in Italy and other foreign Countries, that his Offspring has
ever after been designed by his name, as the Forbasses were by that of (...),
the second brother of Vocompos.

56. O that I might continue longer upon this subject! But the scope of this
Treatise not permitting it, I must of necessity have a fling at the Creditors
of another temper.

57. For whose preying like wolves upon the innocent flock, Avaritia (inquit
Chrysostom.) est canis rabidus, and insatiabilis ebrietas.
whom by Captions, Arrestments, Inhibitions, Apprisings, and other base weapons
of the rigor of the Scottish Law, they endeavor to devour, without Reason or
Conscience, I may safely avouch (conform to that ancient saying, Arma tenenti,
omnia dat qui justa negat) that, expedit, ut, jus tenenti, qui justa negat,
aliquid saltem de suo amittat.

58. Thus is it clear, in regard of their stubbornness, and refractary
carriage, Tantum est malum non se continere intra proprios penates majoribus
inhiando, ut propria saepe percant.
against all conscience, equity, and reason, as said is, that they get neither
wrong nor injustice done them, although they be made to forgo their principal,
as well as their annual; it being more conducible to the public good, that the
innocent enjoy the means of their forefathers, then that the monuments of
virtue become the inheritance of the vicious.

Pejor existimatur civis soeneratur, quam sur, says Cato de re rustica.
59. I know now they will exclaim, that they are scandalized, in being called
vicious for doing what the Law allows them: but truly I must answer them that
Fornication is accounted to be a sin, even by those from whom a permission
flows to commit it, as at Rome and Avignon; and that likewise for the
hardness of the peoples hearts, Vsurarius super omnes mercatores, est
maledictus, says Chrysostom. in his 38 Hom. upon Matthew.
Moses did tolerate Adultery; and what else can be said of Foenory* more then
Venery, but that, as too much illicite kindness occasioneth the one, the mere
lack of charity admits the other to be connived at, for the less prejudice of
the poor, in behalf of whom, the Law suffers rather that they should pay a
little Usury, then to be altogether undone for want of trust?

Avaritia omnis improbitatis, est metropolis. Nullum est vitium tetrius
avaritia: nam inopiae pauca desunt avaritiae multa.
60. Yet not to call it a sin, were to belly both Divine and Humane Law; under
pretext of either whereof, that they should go about to undermine ancient and
worthy Families, does make their sin to be so much the more prodigious.

61. Those that are any thing versed in the Morals, will acknowledge
Prodigality not to be a vice half so dangerous as Covetousness, because it
swerveth less from Justice, which is the common measure of all Virtues: for as
it is nobilius dare quam accipere; Avarilia animam and corpus esseminat nec
ullus ^am firmum praefidium habet, quod avaritiae infringere, and debili^are
non poterit.
so may it be truly said, that he does rather tribuere cuique suum that gives
too much of his own, then who exceeds in taking from his neighbor.

62. Now the properest effects of Justice, being to reward and punish,
according to the receivers demerit, there is no doubt but that both Prodigality
and Covetousness should fall under the compass of the penal Statutes; and this
more then that, because, as the Apostle says, it is the root of all evil.

63. It is a tenet, that faults being personal, the punishment of them ought
not to be transferred to after-ages, as is said in the twelfth Article of this
Book unless they did militate treasonably against a Prince or Commonweal; in
which case, for the public good, ut amor filiorum terrorem parentibus incutiat
incurrendi crimen laesae Majestatis, necesse est, ideoque justum, aliquantillum
deflectere ab ea justitia, quae privatis accommodari solet negotiis; even as we
find, contrary to the ordinary course of nature, for the weal of the Universe
ad evitandum vacuum, air to descend, and water to amount.

64. Of this nature of punishment, I have been participant with all my
predecessors of the Paternal Line, since the Reign of Eugenius Octavus, in the
days of my fore-father Zeron, who had the greatest part of his estate taken
from him, for no other trespass then his too great hospitality to a Prince of
his own kindred, as in the (...), or Genealogy of our House lately published,
is more fully deduced.

65. But this other kind of transgression, In nullum avarus bonus inse
pessimus.
being in a matter only twixt subject and subject, it follows that the
successor of neither the prodigal, nor covetous man, should eo nomine be
punished; much less should any, Omnia des cupido, sua non perit inde cupido.
for his predecessors covetousness be rewarded; nothing more shocking against
common sense it self, then to make the recompense for virtue be the reward of
vice, whereby the very pillars of equity would be quite subverted and
overthrown.

66. How can it then be called Justice, that the successor of the Prodigal, for
no other reason but his predecessors prodigality, Aestimat esse parum sibi
quicquid habet cor avarum, ac quoque semper hiat major pars, ut sibi fiat.
shall have his whole inheritance discerned to be the inheritance of the son of
a covetous man, and that merely for his covetousness? the only recommendable
quality for which he obtains it being a constant purpose and resolution to hook
his neighbors means unto him, by eights and tens in the hundred, and other
such baits, whereby improvident and inconsiderate men of great Revenues are
oftentimes entangled.

67. Were it not less prejudicial to the Public, and more equitable in it
self, that a covetous man should forgo both of his principal and interest,
Avaro tam deest quod habet quam quod non habet, quia aut non habita
conconcupiscit ut habeat, aut habita metuit ne amittal; and dum in adversis
sperat prospera, in prosperis formi dat adversa.
then that he who is neither prodigal, nor covetous, should be denuded of the
estate of his forefathers, which never was acquired by him that contracted the
debt?

68. Although the Lords of the Session, or any other inferior Judicature, were
never invested with power to judge otherways then according to the Customs of
the Country positively written, and Municipal Laws of the Land of Scotland; yet
the high Court of the Parliament of the Commonwealth, by virtue of their
Legislative authority, may, for the weal of the Public, transcend the bounds
of any written Law much more that unto which they were never tied, and of a
stranger-Country now under their command.

69. And as it is a common saying, Interest Reipublicae nequis re sua male
utatur; so does it very much concern the reputation of a Commonwealth, that
ancient considerable families be preserved from ruin, if possible.

70. If Creditors say, they get injustice done to them by it, I answer with
Tacitus, Nulla est res quae ad maleficium magis impellat quam avaritia, nec
justitiae sit infestior.
(Dato, sed non concesso) quod habet iniqui contra singulos ulilitate publica
rependitur: or with Plutarch, A justitia in parvis negotiis deflectendum est,
si ea uti volemus in magnis.

71. For if it be lawful to cut off an arm, for the preservation of the body,
how much more lawful is it to defalk somewhat from the exorbitant sums of
merciless Creditors, for the preservation of an ancient family, in favor of
him, that never was the debtor? seeing the Commonweal, for his appearance of
good service thereto, may be highly concerned in his fortune.

72. These few points I have premitted, to make those Creditors pliable to
Reason, in undergoing any such course as it shall please the State to command
or persuade them to; who, as I make account, will take them from off my hand,
and settle me with freedom in the inheritance of my predecessors, and that for
the reasons formerly mentioned.

73. Although the State pay them not to the full, or perhaps pay them (for so
much as concerns me) with a pardon; yet ought they to be thankful to the State
for what is left them, and not grumble at the Public severity, that others no
less faulty then they, have sustained a milder lash; seeing (as in the
Edecimation of Criminal Soldiers, the nine associates have no reason to
complain of partiality, because the tenth escapes unpunished) it becomes these
aforesaid Creditors to remain contented with that mercy to others, which
proceeds from those who are just to them, although they suffer by it: nam
plurimis damnum infligitur, quibus nulla fit injuria. And such of them as are
most clamorous in seeking, considering what benefit by usurious bargains they
had from my father, though they neither from the State nor me get any thing at
all, can be no losers.

74. However it go, I should not be deprived of my fore-fafathers Lands,
because of many reasons which I have already deduced. Nor is this unwillingness
in me to part from my Land a vice, as is their tenaciousness in keeping of
money: for, si parva licet componere magnis, as the King of Spain spent in the
defense of Flanders more Ryals of eight then would cover the face of the whole
Country (as is commonly reported) so to preserve my inheritance (whatever it
cost) it defends the honor and reputation of the House which I represent.

75. And ingenuously, as when I collationed in the fiftieth Article of this
same Book, Prodigality with Covetousness ( viz. that Prodigality, whereby one
lavishly expendeth his rents, and unnecessarily involveth himself into a
Labyrinth of debt; and not that other, Suum cuique pulchrum.
which by alienating his Predecessors ancient inheritance, destroys the whole
stock in so far as lies in him) I did prefer Prodigality to Covetousness as the
lesser vice: so should I now compare with the covetousness of an Usurer, the
profuseness of him that makes no conscience to dispone unto strangers the Land
of his Ancestors, I would find his fault a great deal more unpardonable then
that of the Usurer.

76. For who turns his Land into money, devirilizeth and emasculates what is
naturally procreative and by consequence, Est amor and rerum cunctis tutela
suarum.
bending his course to what is more imperfect, deserves greater blame then who
to the Eunuch and Spadonian money, allows a constant pregnancy, Avarus est
insatiabilis cui nec tolus mundus obolus est.
by imagining every penny to be both Father and Mother, still begetting, and
still bearing, and the child still growing per juxta Positionem; whom if the
Debtor find not beside the Parent at the semestral period, Avaritia latentium
indegatriae lucrorum, manifestae praedae avidissima vorago, neque habendo
fructa faelix, quamvis cupiditate querendi miserrima
he must educe another of the pre-supposed Bulk, or lie by it, as one that has
not faith enough; because although both be unnatural, yet for that the latter
aymeth at what is of choicer worth, it merits less imputation; the intention of
making what is barren fruitful, (albeit impossible to do) being more
commendable then of exchanging what is by nature fertile, for that which
produces and brings forth nothing but rust and dross.

77. However, although by what is already said my declining to pay those men,
needed not be imputed to me, for want of equity toward them in my proceedings,
they having received much from me, Omnis avarus ex potu situm multiplicat, quia
cum ea quae appetit adeptus fuerit, ad appet^nda alia amplius anhclat.
and often, and I from them never any thing at all; my obligations to them
being so prescinded from all specialities and particular restrictions, that
they never could show neither what, nor when, nor time, nor place, nor any
other circumstance whatsoever, denotating the existence of any thing on earth,
wherewith to upbraid my acceptance: yet I shall wish, (if so it please the
Public) that they be satisfied and reimbursed of what they can with any kind
of reason demand.

78. For as Julius Caesar, after he had repudiated his wife, being desired to
call her home, because the Judges had absolved her from that adultery whereof
with Clodius she was accused, did very gallantly reply, that the wife of Caesar
must be free of Suspicion, as well as Guilt: so, though I may vindicate my
self, and the land of my progenitors from the stain of that debt, wherewith
some peevish and malicious men would adulterate the hitherto-immaculate purity
of our Family; yet would I rather choose some little coin should be bestowed on
them, therewith to stop their bawling mouths, then have any the meanest
distrust or jealousy remaining though without a cause.

79. I expect, that the Public will be pleased to undergo (after what manner
to them shall seem most fit) the performance thereof: which that they do, even
in the most expensive way, is no new thing and in matters of far less
concernment.

80. Many have had their estates made up by Monopolies, and other such public
exactions, who afterward employed the utmost of their power for subverting the
State, to which they had been so much beholding, although before that time they
had never made apparent their deservings for so great a favor.

81. How many have there been about the Courts of Kings, who having no higher
qualification, then to sweep the Privy rooms, or at most, to make the Kings
bed, were short while after so bedaubed with Honors, that (although their
endowments continued still in the same degree of baseness) they disdained the
touching of a Missive directed to them, whereof the Superscription spoke not,
To the most noble, high, and potent Earl, with other Signorial Titles, attended
by an and caetera in the rear?

82. Cheating at Cards, Dice, Bowling, Tennis, or any other Game, where
confederacy or betraying of trust has at any time proved advantageous, and
all those other sneaking means that are commonly at corrupt Courts practiced,
for cramming their bags full of money, upon any terms, have been in many
places, this long time, the usual Scale of Promotion, and very often the most
infallible way for attaining to most sublime and splendid Dignities: which sort
of Nobility, without Valor, Wit, or Learning, may be fitly termed a kind of
Metaphysical wonder, or relation sine fundamento and fundandi ratione.

83. I have seen beyond sea a Marquess of twenty thousand Crowns a year, who
albeit he obtained both his Title and Rents, for having served his Prince in
the quality of a Pander, would nevertheless have sworn with as much Grandeur,
and pretended conscience upon his Honor, as if he had been a Conqueror of
several mighty Nations. I have likewise known of those that have been Lorded
above their fellow-Courtiers, for their greater dexterity in the winding of a
Hunting-horn; in which faculty nevertheless, the education of a Shepherd or
Postilion was sufficient to make one in a very short space by far to excel them.

84. This evidenceth many to have been enriched by the Public, whose service
thereto, or merit otherways, deserves scarcely the retribution of private
thanks. As for my self, because I have promised to do for the Public that
which shall be better then ten times my estate, I cannot think it will be
imputed for boldness to me, to require it be made free for my proposed service;
and for doing thereof, such debt as shall be thought fit to defray, be
forthwith made a Public burden; with the public expense to be discharged, if
so to them it seem expedient, and no other ways.

86. But seeing it has been said by some, who not long since did sit at the
Helm of the Scottish State, when by one of the most eminent persons in the Army,
an exemption but from some few months maintenance (now called the Sess) of my
own lands was demanded, in compensation of thrice as much which I had disbursed
upon Warrants from the Public, for which, by an Act of Parliament, there was
allowed retention in future dues of that nature, with assurance that my
endeavors to the honor of my Country, should quickly appear for deserving,
worth a greater courtesy, That when such endeavors should be made effectual,
it would be then time enough to appoint a recompense: the illess noble Lord not
considering, that the refusal was unjust, though I had not been endowed with
faculties for any such design, the like not having been denied to any
well-affected Gentleman but my self; nor taking notice, that by those and
suchlike enormous pressures, I have been these twelve years past disabled from
prosecuting so powerfully my intended purpose, as otherwise I would have done,
had I been clear of those impediments.

87. I will therefore halt a little in the divulgement of this my great
undertaking, left I should participate in such kind of men's precipitancy, by
showing no less rashness in my exposing of precious things to their acceptance,
then they have done of incogitancie, by their sudden rejecting the grant of my
most equitable requests.

The project of the sixth Book, entitled, PHILOPONAUXESIS.
THe Author in the first five Books having very posedly digested the causes
promptive to the removal of all obstacles impediting the exposal of his
brain-endeavours, does in this sixth and last of his Introduction, prove that
the concession of these his just demands, will prove conducible to all
industrious negotiations and employments whatsoever. And whereas by the Usurer
the contrary was upbraided, he retorts back the dart of that obloquie on whence
it came, and shows what innumerable prejudices have redounded to
Merchandising, Scholarship, Husbandry, Mechanism, Nobility, Gentry, Disport,
Exercise, and, in sum, to all the persons, professions, and diversions of
honest men, of what degree or quality soever, by the Gangrene wherewith Usury
and Avarice has seized upon the Land, since the domination of Hypocrisy over
its inhabitants. He declares likewise much of these calamities in behalf of
all those forenamed Vocations, Arts, Disciplines, Recreations, and those that
plied all or either of them, to have occurred by reason of his own particular
pressures under the Foenoratory yoke. And therefore, to extricate him out of
those impesterments, and dis-intangle his estate from the intricacies wherein
the Flagitator keeps it involved, he sues the Supreme Authority, and begs the
favor of a Judge whose qualifications he delinectes. He solveth all the
Scruples that oppose his suit, and evidently demonstrateth the grant thereof to
endanger the preparative of no incidence for the like in any time to come.
Finally, he knowing that any man in a chamber, desirous to enjoy the light of
the sun, would be offended at him, who, by holding the windows shut, should
detain him in darkness; as also be displeased with such a one as would keep
fast the door against that person did intend to present him with a rich
Diamant; Seeing the expansion of a door and window-leaf is able to admit the
brightness of the one, and wealth of the other: He expects that the State,
considering how easily he may be disburdened of the aforesaid letts, and how
upon their removal depends an illumination and enrichment of the Mind in the
knowledge of diverse exquisite things, will not wittingly lose a matter of so
great concernment, for the not-performance of so mean a task: for when Utility
may be obtained with ease, and the steps to Profit trod upon with facility, it
needs not to be imagined, where Wisdom superiorizeth most, that such
conveniences will be set at naught, and omitted. In hopes therefore of a
gracious retribution, and with a strenuous assurance of a plenary discharge of
his promise, The Author very daintily closing this sixth Book, puts a
Catastrophe to the whole Introduction; the publishing of the Book it relates
to, depending totally upon the removal of the often-aforementioned impediments,
then which the Author asks no more for helps: for, Qui impedimenta tollit,
praestat adminicula.

The Sixth BOOK Of the INTRODUCTION, entitled, Philoponauxesis, Or,
Furtherance of Industry. Wherein is evidenced, that the grant of the Authors
demands will prove (besides that of the Universal Language, and other kinds of
Literature) conducible to all manner of other virtuous undertakings whatsoever.
1. IF there happen to be any, who for the better repelling of my demands,
would allege (all other reasons failing them) that the grant thereof might
prove very damageable to traders in Merchandise, whose fortune wholly consists
in the frugal managing of their money; it may very fitly be answered (if they
be Scottish Merchants who move the doubt) that by casting in such a scruple,
they most unjustly impute that fault to others, whereof themselves are very
hainously guilty; seeing under the title of Merchant, and mask of the honesty
thereof, they do that, which (of any thing) is to Merchandising most
destructive. Quis metus aut pudor est, unquam properantis avari.


2. They lend money upon Usury to none, but such as have estates in land,
without any regard to traffic: for whether the intention of the Lender be
considered, or use that the Borrower commonly puts it to, all Mercantil
negotiation is exceedingly eclipsed by it.

3. There being nothing surer, then that for the most part suchlike borrowers,
in Hawks, Hounds, Wenching, Gaming, Tippling, Swaggering, Fidling, Rioting,
Revelling, and other suchlike profligate courses of a most effusive and vast
expense, squander away the money so lent, without casting an eye to any thing
tending to the furtherance of the exchange of Ware, toward the necessary use
of man.

4. Hi incuban^ and excubant, ut auro insidientur. Diu tamen vivant avari^, nam
se diutius torquebunt.
And that likewise, the Lenders of money unto such men, minding chiefly their
own ingreatning, when they think a competent time has expired, for engendering
upon the emitted Coin a progeny numerous enough for their enrichment, require
from their respective debtors the sum at first so lent, with its usurious
attendants; which, if obtained, they, possibly at the hands of some other no
less debosh'd then the former debtors, make purchase of some Land: if not, then
are they sure, by Decrees of Apprising according to the harsh Law of Scotland,
to take possession of the land of the debtor.

5. So that however the matter go, being certainly assured of Land, which was
the thing they aimed at, as soon as they find themselves invested therewith,
they cast off the Vizard of Merchant, wherewith they cheated the world, and
turning once landed men, they altogether scorn to traffic any longer.

6. But the best is, that the sons of those, because of their fathers having
acquired Land, Quanta dementia est, sui baeredis res procurare, and sibi negare
omnia! O egregiam phrenesin, egenus vivere, ut dives moriare!
(though the said fathers, by virtue of their long-accustomed parsimony, snudge
out their own time, without any danger of thraldom by debt) strive usually to
be renowned (the better to appear Gentleman-like) for such extravagant actions,
as carrying along with them profuseness of charge, occasioned the sale of those
lands which by their fathers were purchased.

6. And as from the same causes, with all their concomitances, proceed always
the same effects; Prodigus est natus, de parco patre creatus.
so does such a course of life as was kept by those that did dilapidate the
foresaid lands at first, produce an inevitable necessity of redisponing them,
and that oftentimes to the first abalienators sons, who, bitten with penury,
Pecunia avaro supplictum est.
for the lavishness of their fathers, become miserable scrape-goods for their
childrens subsistence.

8. After which manner, Non sibi, sed alits aries sua vellera portat; sic aliis
cumulat dives avarus opes.
the generation of one livelihood being the corruption of another, the son of
the Covetous spending what the father of the Prodigal had gained; and the son
of the Prodigal re-acquiring what the father of the Covetous had put away:
Prodigality and Covetousness, in this alternative vicissitude, Est suror haud
duhius, qum est manifesta Pl^renesis ul locuples moriaris egeno vivere fato.
were the two master-wheels that hurried Scotland into Confusion and
Hypocrisy; the Iehu, that drove the Chariot with such velocity, that since the
National subscribing of the first Covenant, one and the same estate in lands
has been observed, according to the manner of the forementioned circulation
of covetous men, and prodigals, succeeding in the veece of one another, Quod
parcus quaeres essundet, prodigus haeres.
to have interchangeably been posses^ by four several owners, hinc jude, the
seller being still (as it were) the buyers predecessor, in a diametral line, as
in a direct one, the Prodigal was to the Covetous; or inversedly, the Covetous
to the Prodigal: and this not only in one, or two, Dives es ut Croesus, sed
vivis pauper ut Irus.
but in above five hundred several parts of the Country; wherein what the
covetous father of one family had bought from the prodigal-father of another,
the covetous son of that other did recover from the prodigal-son of the first,
and that with so little virtue in either, Cui plus licet quam par est plus vult
quam licet.
that oftentimes the purchase flowed from the greater vice.

9. By such a vicious flux and reflux (within these ninety years) upon the
chanel of Land-rents, Ea cupiditas habendi istos invasit homines ut possideri,
magis quam possidere videantur.
so great prejudice has redounded, and daily redoundeth to the worthy
profession of Merchandising, the disponer not being accustomed with traffic,
and the purchaser disdaining any longer to exercise it; that all Manual Trades
in that Nation are now almost totally failed, and have fallen of late into such
a palpable decadence, that hardly shall a man be found, where these men have
being that can make a pair of Boots aright, or Tailor skilful enough to apparel
one in the Fashion, although he see the pattern before him.

10. Other Trades of weaving Silver Lace, knitting Silk Stockins, sowing of
Cut-work, with five hundred more depending on the hammer, needle, or pencil (in
other Countries as commonly practiced, as Cookery with us) may in Scotland now,
wherever the Usurer lives, be as well put amongst the antiqua deperdita, as
the malleability of glass, liquability of stone, or incombustibility of linen.

11. And the reason is, Though they had the dexterity to make the ware, there
is no Merchant to buy it; all such being turned by Usury to Mongrel-Gentlemen,
and all Gentlemen thought unthrifty, that turn not Usurers; whose both
inclinations being to convert all into money, (save so much victual and clothes
as barely may preserve their bodies from starving, which a corner of their own
Country-farm will sufficiently afford) all gallantry of Invention is ruined,
exquisite Artificers discouraged, and Civility it self trod under foot, for
want of Commerce.

Locum virtutis discru^t and obru^tur, qui semper in eugenda f^stina^ re.
12. Thus it being clear, that promiscuous Usury (the Gentleman being no more
ashamed of it, then the Burger) has been the overthrow of Merchandise in
Scotland, which is so commendable a profession, and so agreeable to Learning
and true Wisdom, that as by Literature we are justly called Microcosms; for
being able to comprehend all manner of things under specieses in the
predicament of quality: so may we be as well termed the same, for our ability
by Merchandising (were we so inclined) to bring within the compass of our
possession whatever is in the category of habere.

13. There is no doubt but to have antipathy against such opposers of honest
Negotiation, Nec a mortuo sermonem, nec ab avaro gratiam expectes.
is to sympathize with good men; and not to abhor them with a perfect hatred,
(in so far as Christian charity will allow us) is to be enemies to both
Civility and Discretion.

14. What great harm they have done to the whole Isle of Britain by their
violence against me, Avaritia ad injuriam usque grassatur.
(not mentioning their obstructing my intellectual faculties, which, to the
opprobry of Mankind it self, they oftentimes have most inhumanely labored to
suppress) I will instruct how, in my person, these men have hindered
Navigation, In omne nefas p^aecipites hoc adigunt nummi.
Commerce, by the export, import, and transport of Commodities Manufactares,
Fodinary employments for Coal and Minerals Agriculture for Tillage, Pasturage,
and Planting, and many other such feasible projects of industry, tending
altogether to the promoval of both wealth and civility in a Land.

15. I have (or at least had, before I was sequestered) a certain Harbor or
Bay, in goodness equal to the best in the world, adjacent to a place, which is
the head-Town of the Shire; whereby I am entitled both Sherif, and
Proprietaty; the Shire and Town being of one and the same name with the
Harbor, or Bay; whose promontories on each side, vulgarly called Souters, from
the Greek word (...), that is to say, Salvatores, or Savers, from the safety
that ships have, when once they are entered within them, had that name imposed
on them by Nicobulus the Druyd, who came along with my predecessor Alypos, in
the days of Eborak, that founded York, some 698 years before Ferguse the
first; at which time, that whole Country, never before discovered by the
Greeks, was named Olbion by the said Alypos, whose description in the (...)
does specify it more at large.

16. This Harbor, in all the Latin Maps of Scotland, is called portus
salutis; by reason that ten thousand Ships together, may within it ride, in the
greatest tempest that is, as in a calm; by virtue of which convenience, some
exceeding rich men, of five or six several Nations, Masters of Ships, and
Merchant-Adventurers, promised to bring their best Vessels, and stocks for
tradeing along with them, and dwell in that my little Town with me, who should
have been a sharer with them in their hazard, and (by subordinating factors to
accompany them in their negotiation) admitted likewise for a partner in their
profit, and advantages.

17. By which means, the foresaid Town of Cromarty (for so it is called) in a
very short space would have easily become the richest of any within threescore
miles thereof: in the prosecuting of which design, I needed not to question
the hearty concurrence of Aberdeen; which for honesty, good fashions, and
learning, surpasses as far all other Cities and Towns in Scotland, as London
does for greatness, wealth, and magnificence, the smallest Hamlet or Village in
England.

18. Nor was I suspicious of any considerable opposition in that my project
from any Town save, Innernasse alone, whose Magistrates (to the great dishonor
of our whole Nation) did most foully evidence their own baseness, in going
about to rob my Town of its liberties and privileges.

19. Yet was that plague of Flagitators, wherewith my house was infected, so
pernicious to that purpose of mine, that some of them lying in wait (as a thief
in the night) both for my person and means Cannibal-like, Avari (says
Chrysostom) sunt fures and latrones, ubiqu^ inu^iles, and p^iores ipsit
moretricibus: maxim^t pars horum in mo^bo ^actatur codem.
to swallow me up at a breakfast; they did, by impediting the safety of my
traveling abroad, arresting whatever they imagined I had right unto, and
inhibiting others from bargaining most barbarously and maliciously cut off all
the directory preparatives I had orderly digested, for the advantage of a
business of such main concernment, and so conducible to the weal of the whole
Island, to the great discouragement of those gallant Forreners, of which that
ever-renowned Gentleman for Wit and excellency in many good parts, Sir
Philbert Vernati by name was one; who being of Italian parents, by birth a
Dutchman, and by education expert in all the good Languages of the Christian
world, besides the Arabic and Sclavonian Tongues, wherein he surpassed, had a
great ascendent in counsel over all the Adventrous Merchants of what Nation
soever: whereof (without the foresaid lets of those barbarous obstructers) some
by all appearance had so concurred with me, that by t^eir assistance I would
ere now have banished all idleness from the commons, maintained several
thousands of persons of both sexes, from the infant to the decrepit age, found
employments proportionable to their abilities, bastant to afford them both
entertainment, and apparel in a competent measure; by various multitudes of
squameary flocks of several sizes, colors, and natures, educed out of the
bowels of the Ocean both far and near, and current of fresh water streams, more
abundance of wealth then that whole Country had obtained by such a commodity
these many years past; erected Ergastularies for keeping at work many hundreds
of persons, in diverse kinds of Manufactures; brought from beyond sea the
skilfull'st Artificers could be hired for money, to instruct the natives in all
manner of honest wades; persuaded the most ingenious hammer-men to stay with
me, assuring them of ready Coin for whatever they should be able to put forth
to sale; addicted the abjectest of the people to to the servitritiary duty of
digging for Coals and Metals, of both which in my ground there is great
appearance, and of the hitting on which I doubt as little, as of the Lime and
Freestone Quarries hard at my house of late found out, which have not been
these two hundred years remarked; induced masters of Husbandry to reside
amongst my tenants, for teaching them the most profitable ways, both for the
manner and season, of tilling, digging, ditching, hedging, dunging, sowing,
harrowing* grubbing, reaping, threshing, killing, milling, baking, brewing,
batling of pasture-ground, mowing, feeding of herds, flocks, horse, and cattle;
making good use of the excrescence of all these; improving their Herbages,
Dayries, Mellificiaries, Fruitages; setting up the most expedient Agricolary
instruments of Wains, Carts, Slades, with their several devices of Wheels and
Axletrees, Plows and Harrows of diverse sorts, Feezes, Winders, Pullies, and all
other manner of Engines, fit for easing the toil, and furthering the work;
whereby one weak man, with skill, may effectuate more, then forty strong ones
without it; and leaving nothing undone, that by either sex, of all ages, might
tend to the benefit of the labourer, or rather in applying most industriously
the outmost of their virtue, to all the emoluments of a countryfarm, or manual
trade,

20. I would have encouraged likewise men of Literature, and exquisite spirits
for invention, to converse with us, for the better civilizing of the Country,
and accommodating it with variety of goods, whether honest, pleasant, or
profitable; by virtue whereof, the professors of all sciences, liberal
disciplines, arts active and factive, mechanic trades, and whatever concerns
either virtue or learning, practical or theoretick, had been cherished, for
fixing their abode in it.

21. I had also procured the residence of men of prime faculties for bodily
exercises, such as riding, fencing, dancing, military feats of mustering
imbattleing, handling the pike and musket, the art of Gunnery, fortification,
or any thing that in the Wars belongs either to defense or assault; volting,
swimming, running, leaping, throwing the bar, playing at tennis, singing, and
fingring of all manner of musical instruments, hawking, hunting, fowling,
angling, shooting, and what else might any way conduce to the accomplishment of
either body or mind, enriching of men in their fortunes, or promoving them to
deserved honors.

22. All these things, and many more, for export of the commodities of this
Island to the remotest regions of the earth, import from thence of other goods,
or transport from one foreign Nation to another, and all for the convenience
of our British inhabitants, whether for their integrity and uprightness of
conversation, gain and utility in their means, or delight and recreation in
their disports, I would undoubtedly have ere now provided to the full, in being
(as by a friend of mine was written of me in an Epistle of his premised to a
book entitled The Genealogy of the family of the Vrquharts) a Mecaenas to the
Scholar, a pattern to the Soldier, a favorer of the Merchant, a protector of
the Tradesman, and upholder of the Yeoman, had not the impetuosity of the
usurer overthrown my resolutions* and blasted my aims in the bud.

Ad quid Prodest multa quidem possidere, and nihil agere?
23. Now if you would know what it is that the Usurer bestows on the Country,
in compensation of so large a benefit whereof he has deprived it; I will tell
you, it is laziness, greed, obstinacy, pride, beggarliness, hatred, envy,
treachery, contempt of betters, oppression, hypocrisy, cruelty, contention,
cowardliness, continual heart-burning, Nulli potest secura contingere vita, qui
de reproducenda nimium cogitat.
disquietness, and miscontentment of mind, misregard of true honor, vilifying
of virtue, and disdain of learning, with other many such like perturbations of
a most odiously wicked, and grievously troubled spirit.

24. Amongst such, he is accounted a thrifty Gentleman, who bestirreth himself
the space of two days in the whole year, Modum ^on habet avaritia, nec
capiendo expletur, sed incitatur; hoc egentior, quo plura quaesivit. Avaritia
desideratis rebus non extinguitur, sed augetur; number more ignis, cum ligna quae
consumit asceperit excrescit, and unde videtur ad momentum flamma comprimi,
paulo post ceruitur dilatari.
about the ingetting of his interests, although all the rest of the time, he be
more lither then a dormouse; and when he has got this money, covetousness will
not permit him, howbeit, to the debtor it prove destructive, to make any other
use thereof, then by joining it to the parent, which did procreate it, to beget
thereon an incestuous brat of the same kind, enixible at another term.

25. They will not be persuaded to forgo this fashion of living, because it is
easy, although it be often told, Spes mali lucri initium est jacturae.
that goods so acquired can never prosper; for that their gain is grounded on
the visible loss of another.

26. The Tradesman gets no employment; Avaros Diogenes Hydropicis comparat;
quia illi argento pleni: hi aqua referti amplius desiderant, idque utrique in
sui perniciem.
for though he make some curious work fit for sale, the Merchant will not buy
it, because his money beforehand is designed to beget interest a nor yet the
Gentleman; because the monster of the Merchants interest has devoured his
land-rents: thus the Merchant is idle, the Gentleman beggered, and the
Artificer starved for want, and all by the gallant virtue of Usury, so much
cried up in Scotland.

27. Fear of Piracy and Shipwreck, will not permit those men to adventure the
launching forth in the depth: and uncertainty how the prizes may rule, deters
them from the hazard of bargains by land; thus the Seas are not sailed, nor the
ground half tilled, nor does that parcel thereof which is labored, for lack of
apt materials wherewith to manure it, Fidelis terra, infidele mare, insatiabile
lucrum.
yield half the increase, which otherwise it would; and yet they would be rich:
whereby it is manifest, that their ignorance is great, their laziness far
greater, but their covetousness and avarice is far the greatest of all.

28. Their chief felicity consists in wealth, Haec vera est causa ne cives
quidquam honestum, honumve curent: cum insatiabili auri and argenti cupiditate,
honesta pariter and inhonesta officia complectantur; and quicquid agunt, si^is
fa^ sive nefas, id habeatur, ut pecunias cumulent, quibus subministrantibus,
veluti pecora, ventri and veneri serviunt. Plat. 8. de Legibus.
that wealth is money; which money, when they have obtained, they know not how
to use it: yet rather then not have it, they will do whatever is not good,
although what is good they will not do, for the purchasing thereof: they will
not labor for riches, by prosecuting of industrious exercises; yet would prove
treacherous for it; they will take no frugal course to attain to means, yet
will they rob, pillage, filch, pilfer, and purloyn, ere they want money.

29. They will not with us Metallurgize it, or dig one fathom deep unto the
ground, to search for a Mine, or Mineral, although the surface give apparent
signs thereof (being like the Prostapheresicians of late times, who could not
see the invention of Logarithms, which they had lying before their eyes) and
yet their thoughts are so immersed in the earth, that the sublimest of them do
seldom reach a fathom above it; Aurum omnes victa jam pictate colunt.
nor would they for the most part reach that hight, but to derogate from their
superiors, whom in duty they are bound to bear respect to, and to denude them
in all they can of their rights, whereby the better to grasp at somewhat, for
the fatning of themselves.

30. Another way they have no less detestable then this, whereupon they very
ordinarily walk, to get themselves approved men of high spirit, and that is
biviated into two paths, one whereof they tread in for oppressing of the poor,
and men of meaner chevisance then themselves, and in the other for contemning
the worth, valor, learning, or whatever else is most commendable in him, whose
means they aim at.

Cum illorum affluentia crescit simul inopia: insanus medio flumine quaerit
aquas.
31. Nay, they go so far on in this their sordid and abominable humor, that
slighting all manner of learning, and inrichment of the mind, they account
sciences and liberal arts but conceits, and toys, compared to money, which by
these clusterfifts is held in so great estimation, that though they will choose
to be hanged, before they trouble themselves with taking any kind of virtuous
course, Divitem esse non est honestum, sect ex honestis divitem esse.
for the obtaining of it, they do nevertheless repute honesty it self to
consist therein, and will commonly say, that such a one is honester then
another, by so many hundred pounds a year.

32. Notwithstanding all these unworthy, and base endeavors of theirs,
Avarorum doctrina est tanti teipsum putato, quantum habueris.
I have constantly observed them to remain still poor and needy; the reason
whereof is, that their laziness and pusillanimity not permitting them to search
for wealth, in the azure bosom of Thetis, or secessive regions of the earth,
where the title primi occupantis would prove right sufficient enough for the
possessor; Damnum potius quam turpe lucrum cligendum
they aim only at what belongs to their neighbor, one or other.

33. Who possibly being of the same disposition of avarice toward them, if the
tenaciousness of the one, interchangably encounter with the covetous humor of
the other, Semper avarus eget, congest^ pauper in auro, inter opes mendicus
opum.
with an equal number of degrees of intensive greed, darted and received to and
from each on either side: both parties, because of the parity of reaction, will
remain in the same condition, as before, without bettering or impairing their
fortune.

34. But if there be any difference in the aforesaid qualities, Avarus dum
colligit, colligitur: and dum vult esse praedo, fit praeda.
betwixt the two contesters for each others means, he, in whom the degrees
thereof are most remiss, will, (as by a Cannibal) be devoured by the other;
which other perhaps, being so served by a third, and he again by another, Gula
primo parenti abstulit paradisum, avaritia diviti aperuit infernum.
there will follow a perpetual consecutive course of intergulping one another,
till the devil, by snatching up the last in him, have quite swallowed them all,
and so rid the world of those ignominious rakehels, by whom it had been so long
impestred.

35. Such men (as is said already in the 27 Article of this same book) will not
apply themselves to navigation, because it is hazardous; nor to trading by land
because it is painful; nor yet to the ripping up of the bowels of the earth for
wealth, Illi morbo qui permanet invenis, and inhaeret in visceribus, nec
inveteratus evelli potest, nomen est avaritia.
because it is uncertain; and yet they would be rich, and have store of money;
which to attain unto, they take this course for the most part, Such as have
Land, make use of some ascriptitiary varlets, for the manuring of it, who in
their agricolary work, follow not the prescript rules of husbandry as they are
most approvable by reason, but as they were most in use in the days of their
Forefathers; for whenever the Landlords are desired, for improving of the
Land, to do other ways, their answer is, that they will not alter the fashion
of their Grandfathers, who were honest men, and the times then were good.

36. Nevertheless, when the Wife or Children gape for new provisions, then it
is that the peevish shifts are set abroach, of incroaching upon their
neighbors pasture-ground or corn-land, by removing of the march-stones, or as
aforesaid: or if they have a little money, they pack it up in a clout, then
upon good secu^ity concredit it to some one or other, who after the expiring of
a prefixed time mutually condescended on, shall be bound to restore the said
clout-birth, with an additional increase; which when obtained by its
coalescencie with the former heap, is produced a new parent, with parturiencie
for more store.

Pecunia non satiat avaritiam, sed irritat. Cui nihil est quod habet, nihil
illum constat habere.
37. This is called virtue, and has been of all other the commonest way of
thrift, since usury in Scotland has been in any request; yet by the means
thereof, the whole country is impoverished, and no man rich: for those that, in
the estimation of the vulgar, are accounted most wealthy, have nothing else but
money, which not being wealth, but the measure of appreciating it, they can no
more (to speak the truth of them) be reputed rich, then Straffords (my Lord
Leiutenant of Ireland's) ape, which had a thousand pound sterling hid in a hole.

Avarus est tanquam balneateris asinus, qui cum ligna sarmentaque deportel,
tamen semper sumo ac favillis oppletus est: nec unquam fit particeps, neque
balnei, neque teporis, nec munditici. Toto mundo eget, cujus non capit mundus
cupiditatem.
38. I Will not deny, but that a virtuous man, with less money, would quickly
become rich; because with it he would purchase those commodities, which are the
true riches that fortune bestows on us: but that money makes these men such,
I utterly disavow it; for in their clothes they are poor, in their attendance
mean, their fare course, and in their houses so bare and naked, that unless it
be the wife, or the daughter (and that peradventure not much worth neither) you
shall not perceive a moveable that merits the looking on: and why? there is no
Tradesman in the Country to make it, nor Merchant to bring it home; and though
both these were (whom, as in the 26 Article of this same Book I said already,
they banished from the Land) they have not the heart to buy it.

39. Whereby it is evident, that either the Usurer storeth up naught but money,
or if he exchange it for ware, the chaffer that he buyeth with it, is that
which in many civil Countries, to appreciate at the rate of any Coin, has been
accounted Sacrilege, to wit, the inheritance of Land, the proportion whereof
with money is more irrational, Nonne morbus insaniae similis, ac miserandus
videtur? siquis ob id non utatur vest, quod algeat, neque pane quod esuriat,
neque divitiis quod divitiarum sit avidus.
then that of the Diagonal to the side, or Diameter to the circumference.

40. The poor from the rich, of this kind of men, differ but little in their
meat, drink, clothes, and lodging; and all these a Fox has in and about his
terrier: so that truly who purveyeth but what is merely necessary for the life
of man, may be said to have but the providence of a beast: Does not the
Pismire, and the Be every whit as much and almost every fowl of the air?

41. To what end our Knowledge, if it make not all things vendible conduce to
our behalf, and wealth suppeditative of whatever exceeds not that extent: I
would have cloth from the Draper, silks from the Mercer, lace from the
Millener, hangings from the Upholster, trinkets from the Trigler, jewels from
the Lapidary, books from the Stationer, marmalads from the Confectioner, course
dulciaries from the Grocer, essences from the Perfumer, and any thing else
either of Merchant or Artificer, belonging to that Macrocosme, whereof I am the
little world.

42. Do those men I have been speaking of so, Peccarum avavitiae mentem, quod
affecerit, ita gravem reddit, ut ad appetenda sublimia tolli non possi^.
I doubt if they understand the names of the trades I have related: nor are
such professions to subsist by them, whose thoughts being fixed on money, as
the Lodestone on the Pole Star, consider not of what is convenient either for
their mind or body.

43. I have heard of one with us of the cattle aforesaid, worth a thousand
pound sterling a year, who had no other book in his house, but the Bible,
Pauperiorem se judi^at omnie abundans, quod sibi deesse arbi^ratur quicquid ab
aliis possidetur.
and that only to have a chapter in readiness after meat, when the Minister
should come to see him: all the paper he had was full of of sneesing-powder,
nor had he other pen, but that wherewith he took it; so careful he was of
materials for the exercise of the mind.

44. As for the preservation of the health of the body, prevention of diseases,
or remedies against them, they are so well versed in the terms of art
concerning them, that the word Apothecary may signify somewhat to eat for any
thing they know; Surgeons and Physicians coming along like the Burgers of some
Towns to their Land-meers but once in the five years.

45. Thus has the Usurer in less then fourscore and ten years space that he
has domineered in the Land, Quae est aviditas concupiscentiae, cum and ipsae
belluae habeant modum: inn enim rapiuut, quando usuriunt; vero praedae, cum
senserint satietatem; sed insatiabilis ost avaritia divitum.
made some of us no less savage, and barbarous, then the wildest beast that is;
and if he roam at such random, but for twenty years more, the Satyr, and the
Centaure, will in their lower parts have more humanity then many of us shall in
our brains.

46. For he rests not in the destruction of the Merchant and Artificer, but
likewise lays his heavy hand upon the Scholar, who, by reason of not allowing
him competencie of maintenance at the Schools; does not (one amongst forty
bred amidst them, even when they have past their whole course of learning) know
how to spell the English tongue aright.

47. By means of which gross imperfection, I now and then have sustained my
self no small prejudice, in the expense of time; for although I compose no
Treatises (whether in prose or verse) without some considerable deliberation,
yet for the most part, for couching them in a hand not very legible (for truly
I am no good Scribe) and not being able to find (neither in my own family,
nor within a great many miles about me, one skilful enough in vernacular
Orthography) I have oftentimes been at a great deal of more pains, in enditing
of them to the writers, and amending their errata's, then at first I was in the
framing and writing of them both.

48. Nor is there any hope in haste of amending this fault; for the most of the
parents of that Country, ever since the days of our Grandfathers, have by the
triumphancie of Usury, had the inclinations of their minds so mechanically
protruded upon the contempt of Letters, that their children have with their
very Mothers milk, imbued an aversness form learning, and all the Vtenda's
conducible thereto, fearing they should hinder the advancement of their private
fortunes, according to the trivial saying, Vbi multum de intellectu, ibi parum
de fortuna; whereof (to speak nothing of the manifold great discouragements
which in the progress of Literature I have from my infancy had through the
whole tract of my time, till this very present minute) the late course taken
for sequestrating whatever belonged to me, gave no small experiment.

49. For I have found at home, even in those that loved the better then they
did any body else, and in the eyes of the world most entirely, a very heavy and
deplorable omission, in taking a course (like Martha, who was only busied
about external things) for the preservation of corn, cattle, plate, with other
goods and and utensils, whilst they were altogether neglective of securing what
they themselves knew I preferred to all these movables; as appeared even when
they so slighted my Library, that not a book thereof escaped the touch of
Dundasse's singers; although there were not three therein, which were not of
mine own purchase, and all of them together (in the order wherein I had ranked
them) compiled (like to a complete nosegay) of flowers, which in my travels I
had gathered out of the gardens of above sixteen several Kingdoms) by having
their thoughts plunged, and totally immersed, in an extraordinary care for
these things, which with little expense, and less labor, were obtainable about
our own doors: all which books (had not that worthy and most conscientious
Gentleman Col. Tho. Fitch (to whom I was then unknown) contremanded the
sequestrators purpose of sending them to Leith in a Ship, then ready to launch
forth from Cromarty) had assuredly been thrown into the bottom of the sea (for
the Vessel whithin two days thereafter, was taken by the Hollander) or tossed
amongst the Flemish Sationers in their Shops at Amsterdam, never any more to be
thumb'd in this Isle.

50. But Providence (which does not always go along in its dispensation of
events according to the expectation of the forecasters) permitted not what they
would have most concealed, to slip out of the reach of Dundasses hands;
unwilling (as it were) for their preposterous election, that any thing should
be saved, though the loss of both was mine; with this difference nevertheless,
that upon giving of Bonds and good security, they were repossess'd with the
other movables; but as for my Books, although I obtained an Order from the
Commissioners for the Sequestration at Leith to Captain Dundass, requiring him
to let me have the refusal of them, yet he not pleasing to come to Cromartie,
where they were fast looked into Trunks, whereof himself had the keys, I was
not able, for all the favor I could make till this hour, to obtain either the
getting or buying of any of them, save a few of those which under pretext of
the Sequestrators having meddled with them, being stolen, and afterward
dispersed through the Country, were through good intelligence by me happily
recovered.

51. The little care had of my Papers and Books, by those to whom they were
entrusted, being a branch springing from the epidemical tree of Ignorance,
which, together with Hypocrisy, Usury, Oppression, and Iniquity, took root in
these parts, when Uprightness, Plain-dealing, and Charity, with Astraea, took
their flight with Queen Mary of Scotland into England, where, not without the
incitement of those her subjects who from her own Dominions had expelled her,
she lost her life: since which time, what devastation has by Usury been made
amongst the most ancient families of that Country, Avari omnem ordinem turbant,
estque avaritia arx omnium malorum.
he that runs may read it upon all the prime Castles of the Land.

52. The Usurer thus (as is obvious to the eyes of any) being the chiefest
occasion of the ignorance of Scotland, and of a huge deal of wickedness
besides, as in my own particular may be instanced: for as of any knowledge that
(by the favor of God) is in me, he would rob the whole world; so goes he
about to despoil me of all my means and inheritance against all reason;
therefore could I say no less: but who would have more, I remit him to my
Aporrectical intervals, in the Menippaean Satyrs, whereof he may see five
hundred times as much, when the Order obtained for recovering those my
Manuscripts which Dundass the Sequestrator meddled with at Cromartie, shall
prove more effectual.

53. What I have spoke of this sort of untoward men, is in some measure to
incite the State, to whom in all humility I make my address, to consider of the
many wrongs I have most unjustly sustained by them; for reparation whereof, I
heartily desire my inheritance may be made free unto me, and the privileges of
my ancient House kept entire, after the above-written proposed way; which
engaging me to the exposing of some movables in exchange, of a sufficient
stamp, and current pass, I must acknowledge my self obliged (in the strictest
manner can be conceived) toward the discharge of that duty.

54. However, instead of too hasty publishing my intent therein, which for
some reasons mentioned in the four and fiftieth of the second Book, and other
Articles to that sense, is most expedient for the time to forbear; I humbly
propose to take this course, for the satisfaction of the Public, That in case
I perform not, at a competent time to be prefixed for the purpose, whatever I
have promised, I shall be willing to forfeit both life and lands; the later
whereof will, even in the estimation of those craving men, double the worth of
all the money that they can, with any kind of pretext of reason, demand from
me. This is adhibere cautionem Mutianam, and to prescribe the readiest way how
to avoid deluding.

55. Only thus far, I would have the judges of my offer to be learned and
judicious men, Vide Book 2: Art. 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 46, 47, 48, 49, 52.
and not such as will prefer a fishes eye to a Diamant, a Babble to a Scepter,
and Tilling, Harrowing, Sowing, Reaping, Mowing, Planting, and feeding of the
flocks and cattle, to all the seven Liberal Arts; their Encyclopedia being
Agriculture: for men of that nature, being merely led by the Sense, will never
discern of things aright.

56. It was by such amongst the Turks, that Famagusta in the Isle of Cyprus
(none of them at that time carrying any respect to the inward worth of a
Christian) that the Earl of Paphos (though the compleatest Courtier, and
gallantest man of that Age) was made to carry on his shoulders a packet full of
mortar, for the repairing of a breach.

57. A horse fit for the wars, is oftentimes, by the indiscretion of his
master, appointed to go round in a Mill, and perhaps esteemed less worth then a
blind Jade, that in the discharge of that circumambulatory office shall be
found to surpass him.

58. A Country-hoydon, in carrying loads, will excel a Gentleman of fashion:
and I have known a young handsome woman prefer a man for building of a
Peat-stack in a comely proportion, to be her husband, before a Gentleman, who,
for his valor, very shortly after, became a Colonel of both Horse and Foot.

59. Silly minds have abject thoughts; and though Eagles catch not Flies,
Cameleons do. With such therefore whose spirits soar not a Grasshoppers leap
above the ground, we are not to meddle, lest, as Midas twixt Pan and Apollo,
and the Ass between the Cuckoo and the Nightingale, they pronounce an erroneous
sentence, to the disgrace of themselves, and opprobrie of Learning.

60. It is only the generous spirit endued with knowledge, to whose judicious
arbitrament I do heartily submit my self, and all my endeavors; because such a
one will not deny, but that a private Gentleman may enter in paction with the
potentest State that is, for matters touching the furtherance of the good fame
thereof: That though (as Protestants avouch) in our service toward Almighty
God we merit nothing, yet if in the performance of good offices to the Public,
we transcend the bounds of the ordinary duty of a subject, we may justly be
said to supererogate at the hands of any Sovereign Authority in the world: And
that Learning, even in time of war, is to be held in estimation; for that he
who is the God of glory and peace, is likewise the Lord of hosts.

61. Nor is there any doubt, but that he will acknowledge the profound
Literature of a Native, to bring great reputation to his Country, That such a
reputation is there far more worth then riches, and consequently riches to be
amply disposed on for the promoval of that Learning, whether it be by donatives
and largesses, positively to give encouragements to him that is so qualified;
or by a negative assistance, to remove (whatever it cost) the obstructions of
those, whether Creditors or others, that meschantly stand in the gap, to hinder
the progress of the effects thereof.

62. He will also avouch, that in all well-policed Commonweals there are
remedies appointed for helping of the debtor (much more the Aquopet) who is in
case to do his Country service, The Aquopet is he from whom debts are sought,
although he owe them not.
as well as (if not rather then) the creditor, that does naught but for his own
ends, without regard of the Public: and likewise, that such Creditors as are
but Flagitators, craving money from those to whom they never lent any, should
(will they, nill they) be enforced to confer courtesies (in abating of their
sums) upon them that never were their debtors, Qui sint aliena, volunt adsicere.
but only enthralled to them for the debts of others.

63. Nor will such a gallant man fail to assever, but that it is more
honorable for Britain, Hi saepius victi sua spe frustramur.
that my Family, which has stood therein for the space of ninety and four
generations, be established for my doing unto that my foresaid Country service,
then permitted, through the rigor of a dangerous Law, by the covetousness of
those, whose money neither I nor any of my progenitors ever saw, to be ruined
and overthrown, De male partis non gaubebit tertius haeres.
for setting up of I know not what, which shall not, nor ever yet has been
seen, in the like occasion, to stand till the third heir, or a full age: and
that the fall of an ancient House, which mutilates the Country, Neque enim
divitiae injustae nunquam constantes sun^.
is more deplorable, then the defalking of some interests, which does but, as
it were, shave off the hair of some greedy wretch.

64. I am also confident, that in the opinion of such a man, antiquity of Race
( cateris paribus) is to be preferred; and that to rescind private covetousness
for a public good, is to do no wrong at all.

65. The verity of all these things being asserted, (as in reason it ought) I
offer to the Public to make good my Parole, provided they liberate my estate
from the bondage of the Flagitutor.

66. By dis-inthralling me thus from the slavery of the importunate Riposcones,
I accomplishing my part, Vorac^ores punpura and dolia inexplebilia.
the Public will gain the reputation of re-establishing into its pristine
integrity a family of great antiquity, of furthering the course of Learning and
good Letters, of relieving the innocent from unjust oppressions; and to do
this, will obtain the unanimous consent and approbation of all the Soldiers,
Gentlemen, Commons, and People of either sex, within the whole Land, the
Flagitators only excepted.

67. For which cause, seeing I am drawing to a closure, if any happen to
imagine, this my suit to be the more unobtainable; that the preparative
thereof, may endanger the disquieting of the State with showers of Petitions,
to have public charges allocated for the payment of private debts;

68. My answer is, that my case in this particular, being quite different from
that of any other within the dominion of Scotland, whether regard be had to me,
to my Fathers creditors, or the land in debate betwixt us there is none who by
virtue of any favor by me demanded from the supreme power of the Land, can for
his interest in the like suit, pretend a right to the same courtesy to be
performed on his behalf.

69. For if we consider the Land which I claim title to, as the undoubted
inheritance of my predecessors, it is a land which never was bought nor sold,
nor otherways derived to my progenitors from any Sovereign power, then by bare
confirmations of their former rights; (the like whereof cannot with truth be
avouched of any Land in the Isle of Britain) and therefore the more heedfully
to be preserved from being a prey to the unclean Harpyes of Usury.

70. If again I be looked upon as one who for any personal courtesy done to my
self, was never obliged to any one of them who call themselves Creditors: how I
have obliged every one of them by having given to each a hundred times more
then ever I had received from them all together: how withal I am willing to
renounce my right to any thing that ever was acquired by my father: and how
lastly I am content not only to pass by the laying of any title to those many
several lands of my progenitors within the Shires of Cromartie and Aberdeen,
which in his own time he heritably disponed away and abalienated; but also to
discharge them of the vast sums of money many of them unmercifully pilled out
of my rents ever since my fathers decease; I am certainly persuaded no
compatriot of mine by such reasons will pretend to the like; or if it happen he
should, (which I believe he cannot) that offer which I make to the Public,
beyond the reach of common imitation, will quell the ambition of that suit, the
obtaining whereof totally depends upon examples he is not able I suppose to
follow.

71. To these I furthermore adjoyn this other circumstance, That in all the
Isle of Britain there shall not be found a crew of such rigorous and merciless
Creditors, ( William Robertson only excepted) who without respect to any thing
else then their own mere enrichment, care not what misery their debtor and his
posterity be brought into by their procurement; which procedure (considering
how of eight or nine times I was surety for Countrymen of mine, I was always
forced to pay the debt; how likewise, of a hundred times at least, that money
by others of them had been borrowed from me, I would ever have been well
pleased to forgo all interests for the bare sum which I lent; and how
nevertheless I do not plead immunity or exemption from any debt due by my self,
my condition (I thank God for it) being such, (...) with all manner of people I
have had to deal with, of what Country soever, that upon three hours warning I
shall pay all I owe in the world, and to the utmost farthing give satsfaction
to all those that properly can be called my creditors) may very well be thought
to furnish ground sufficient for what I have deduced, by way of grievance
against the aforesaid flagitators.

72. Wherefore I likewise answer, if ever there fall forth a contingencie of
the like occasion, in all its specialties and circumstances, the lack of any
one whereof will undoubtedly alter the case; that is to say, if (besides what I
have already said) a good deal of contiguous rent (privileged with the title
of a Shire within it self, and worthily possessed for the space of two thousand
thirty and nine years, by threscore and twelve several generations of heritable
Sheriffs, and sole owners of the whole Shire, descended (for the most part) of
one another in a direct consecutive, and uninterrupted line from father to son,
accordingly served and retoured heirs to their immediately-foregoing
predecessors in the same family) happen to undergo the lamentable disaster of
being legally threatened to be taken away by creditors, for vast sums of money,
from the righteous heir, who never was bound, nor any of his ancestors (save
his father alone) to them, or any of theirs in so much as the value of one bare
groat, and himself nevertheless able, out of the nimble reach and perspicacity
of his wit, to afford stuff equivalent to both land and money joined in one.

73. If ever, I say it chance, that all these prenotated restrictions, and
limited designations, occur in any Countryman of mine (which I trust will
first cost the revolution of the great Platonic year) the State should have my
advice, Vide art. 42, 44, 53, 54, 59, etc. of the second book and others, for
vindicating the Author from Philosisme.
were there twenty of them, to instal them (other means failing) upon the
public charge, in the place of their Forefathers, with all emoluments and
profits thereupon depending; that like so many radiant stars in one
constellation, they might dart an influence propitious to the furtherance of
the glory of this Island.

74. And in truth (for my own part) before that in the person of such a one,
should be seen the overthrow of the house of his progenitors, I would allow him
the adminiculary succor of half my means, when at best, for his aid of
support, and think in so doing to gain by the bargain; being certain (besides
that it is a deed of virtue, whose recompense, for being held by all moralists
to be in the action it self, makes the very doing thereof to pass for a
sufficient reward) that for a gratuity of that importance, so seasonably
administered, from a spark of such a nature, would never be wanting a most
thankful acquital to the utmost of his power.

75. After which manner, without striving for examples, the public may be
thoroughly and fully assured of me, and of the infallibility of my grateful
return, which shall be always ready; for that my inclination leads me, not
to receive any thing in that kind, unless it be as willingly crogated, as it
shall be accepted of.

76. Therefore to conclude, seeing there is not any Scottish man breathing, who
is not as much, if not rather more beholding to me, then I am to him; and that
my humor serves me rather to apply my self to the good of many in general,
then to be wedded to any particular interest: I humbly desire, for that neither
my self, nor any of my predecessors, have at any time been subject to any other
then the supreme Authority, that by the sacred influence thereof, I may be freed
from the bondage of the supposed creditor, whose discretion being as the broken
rod of Egypt to repose upon, let me adjure the public, by all their sacred,
and most endeared ties to patriotisme, antiquity, honor, virtue, learning, and
what else may be reputed most laudable in the behalf of one totally addicted to
their command, seriously to consider of the premises, to homologate what I
demand vouchsafe the pratrociny of my offer, and Mecenatize the request of him,
who in rearing up monuments of his engagement to them for so splendid a favor,
and for memory thereof, erecting trophies of thankfulness to their fame, shall
withal research all other occasions, wherein he may most deservingly approve
himself their eternally-devoted servant,

Thomas Vrquhart.

The Epilogue.
THat I (whilst a prisoner) was able to digest and write this Treatise, is an
effect merely proceeding from the courtesy of my Lord General Cromwell, by
whose recommendation to the Council of State, my Parole being taken for my true
imprisonment, I was by their favor enlarged to the extent of the Lines of
Londons Communication: for, had I continued as before, coopt up within Walls,
or yet been attended still by a Guard, as for a while I was, should the house
of my confinement have never been so pleasant, or my Keepers a very Paragon of
discretion, and that the conversation of the best Wits in the world, with
affluence of all manner of Books, should have been allowed me for the diversion
of my mind; yet such an antipathie I have to any kind of restraint, wherein
my self is not entrusted, that notwithstanding all these advantages, which to
some spirits would make a Jay I seem more delicious then Freedom without them,
it could not in that eclipse of Liberty lie in my power to frame my self to the
couching of one syllable, or contriving of a Fancy worthy the labor of
putting Pen to Paper, no more then a Nightingale can warble it in a Cage, or
Linet in a Dungeon.

Here must I not forget the obligation I owe to that most generous Gentleman
Captain Gladmon, for speaking in my favor to my Lord General; which gallantry
in him (upon so small acquaintance) shall assuredly be remembered by me, with a
steadfast resolution to embrace all the opportunities wherewith Fortune shall
present me, for performance of the best offices I can, in testimony of my
thankfulness.

The kindly usage of the Marshal-General Captain Alsop, whilst I was in his
custody, I am bound in duty so to acknowledge, that I may without dissimulation
avouch, for courtesies conferred on such as were within the Verge of his
authority, and fidelity to those by whom he was entrusted with their tuition in
that restraint, That never any could by his faithfulness to the one, and loving
carriage to the other, bespeak himself more a Gentleman, nor, in the discharge
of that Military place, acquit himself with a more universally-deserved
applause and commendation.

The enumeration of these aforesaid courtesies, will not permit me to forget my
thankfulness to that Reverend Preacher Mr. Roger Williams of Providence in
New England, for the manifold favors wherein I stood obliged to him above a
whole mont, before either of us had so much as seen other, and that by his
frequent and earnest solicitation in my behalf, of the most especial Members
both of the Parliament and Council of State; in doing whereof, he appeared so
truly generous, that when it was told him how I, having got notice of his so
undeserved respect toward me, was desirous to embrace some sudden opportunity
whereby to testify the affection I did owe him, he purposely delayed the
occasion of meeting with me, till he had (as he said) performed some acceptable
office worthy of my acquaintance: in all which (both before and after we had
conversed with one another) and by those many worthy Books set forth by him, to
the advancement of piety and good order (with some whereof, he was pleased to
present me) he did approve himself a man of such discretion and
inimitably-sanctified parts, that an Archangel from heaven could not have
shown more goodness with less oftentation.

To the Reader.
Sweet and judicious Reader,
ALthough you have been detained all along this little Tractate, upon the
particulars of a private family, and that the Author, as the first sight, does
thereby seem to mind rather his own profit, then your instruction: yet so much
confidence is reposed in your ingenuity, that it is credibly thought, you will
not expect great apologies from him, whose best endeavors, you know already,
have been much devoted to your service; especially for that your interest in
the future establishment of his fortune (all things being well considered)
appears every whit as great as his own: for albeit in the eyes of the
vulgar, most of the benefit of an estate seems to accrue to him that enjoys
it; yet if the fruition thereof in his person, be but a mean to a further end,
communicable by many thousands, unto each of whom is of it exposed as plenary a
possession as to himself, his share must needs, by that account, in regard of
theirs of so great a number, be but very little: herein therefore is it
evident, that the Reader in the Authors settlement is as much concerned as
himself; for who desires any thing, is also desirous of the means whereby it
is to be attained unto. Thus there being no possibility of the Authors
publication of excellent Treatises, unless he be reseated in the estate of his
predecessors, the Reader, of whatever condition, with whom literature is in any
estimation, should concur with, assist, and help him forwards to the
prosecuting of those his just demands, if not for any love to the Author, yet
his own sake at least, and that for the knowledge which thereby may redound to
himself, which (to value things aright) must needs be of more importance, then
any interest the Author can have in the means of his progenitors; for what can
the Author and his posterity suffer of damage by the want of his estate,
comparable to the prejudice sustainable by the many Readers and their
successors, through lack of his writings? unless one would think that the goods
of Fortune are more highly to be prized then those of the Mind; the contrary
whereof has been very clearly evidenced, in many several passages of the
foregoing Tractate.

Vade Liber, totumque refer mea damna per orbem,
Hostibus affigens stigmata nigra meis:
Contingatque mihi Siculi fortuna Poetae,
Cui fatale metrum non minus ense fuit;
Nec posthac demptum dices mihi creditor ensem,
Si calamo possem te jugulare meo.
SEeing the end of this foregoing Tractate is to persuade the State, out of
their wisdom, to condescend to the just demands of the Author; there can no
number like that of Two and thirty, which by the Rabbis of old was ascribed to
wisdom, and by Pythagoras to justice, be pitched upon, so apposite for
terminating the sum of these subsequent Proquiritations, according to the
tenor of this Algebraical Hexastick.
Of Postulata's a sursolid, whose
Content does twice that Square of Squares enclose,
Which is the double of the Cube of two,
Is here displayed, for the Author's sake, to show
How that Square dealing will him best become,
Whereby he gets his own in solidum.
1.
THat he, whose good name is like to be eternized in the grave, should not in
his lifetime be neglected by the State of an immortal fame, is the hope of

A. S.
2.
That to the overthrow of Equity in the person of the Author, the State suffer
not any Law of theirs to become the executioner of the spleen and covetousness
of his implacable adversaries, is the humble desire of

B. H.
3.
That they who look merely to the present time, without any regard of the
future, be not permitted by the State to deprive him of his means, who, for the
weal of after-ages, spends his time most virtuously, is the desire of

D. I.
4.
That outlandish Nations, with whom the Author has much acquaintance, may, for
the States favor to him, when they shall restore him to his own, after the
above-written manner, offer up a most cordial sacrifice to their Authority, is
the humble desire of

Ai. Bs.
5.
That seeing the most of Scotland is subdued, those that had long before that
enslaved themselves to the most abominable vice of oppressing others, be not
permitted by the Conqueror to meddle with the estate of him that never injured
any, is the earnest suit of

E. G.
6.
Seeing the Authors Treatises are conducible to posterity, for the weal whereof
the now-established Authority has undergone so many difficulties, that for its
respect to them, and hopes of their retribution of praises, he may be better
rewarded, then if he were a present-time-server, without consideration of the
future, is the desire of

Ei. Z.
7.
Seeing from the creation of the world, it has pleased the Author to deduce
his extraction, without baulking since the days of Adam, so much as one of his
progenitors on the paternal side, That the State vouchsafe to put him in a
consistence of protracting his posterity through as many hereditary successors
in a lineal descent, according to the contents of the preceding Tractate, is
the desire of

K. F.
8.
Seeing the most innocent of the Scottish Nation is no more blameless, then he,
that his sequestration should be taken off and a considerable acknowledgement
allowed him, for the great loss he sustained by the rigor of the
subsequestrator, is the desire of

V. Fs.
9.
Seeing the Author has been still faithful to his trust, never culpable of
Parole-breaking, but always true in every word and action, That the generosity
of the State will not suffer him to be exposed to the inhumane dealing of those
Countrymen of his, who for their own ends, make no bones of being guilty of
greater breaches, is the desire of

Wh. Y.
10.
Seeing he is born to the profit of a few, who thinks only on the people of
his age, and to that of fewer, whose thoughts exceed not the reach of his own
proper interest, That the illustrious State shall consider of the difference
betwixt the Authors competitors of dark and narrow projects, and his own
splendid and ample endeavors, comprehensive by appearance of the whole
latitude of time, is the humble desire of

X. Ya.
11.
The Authors family being of the greatest antiquity in Scotland, and by an
especial providence till this time preserved from that utter subversion
intended by the iniquity of his covetous and dissembled enemies, should in my
opinion obtain a larger measure of protection from the State, then any other
race in that land, and himself favored with the grant of all that in this
foregoing Treatise is demanded by him, (which that it be so) is the humble
desire of

Gh. Eu.
12.
That the shire of Cromarty, which ever from the beginning has been the
receptacle of the most harmless inhabitants, be not bestowed on any other then
the Author, whose predecessors, for uprightness and integrity of carriage, had
not their equals in that Nation, is the desire of

Yo. Bu.
13.
That the noblest State in the world, will not now permit that to be exposed to
sale, which never hitherto was made vendible in any preceding age, and that the
Lands and shire of Cromarty, (which by none that ever breathed were either
bought or sold) should by a grant from the State, be in the heritable
possession of the Author, as nearest in line to the aboriginary owner, is the
earnest desire of

T. Wi.
14.
That the Author being but as a clear spark, from whence gleameth the most of
the pure light that is to be seen of any learned invention in that Country of
Scotland, it be not quenched and quite extinguished, by the foul and black
water of an usurious puddle drunk up there, by the natives almost of all sorts,
is the humble request of

Bu. Ts.
15.
The Authors education having been more abroad then at home, whereof England
may duly claim no small share; that by the State of that Nation, he should be
singled out to suffer more then the disaffecters of both their rule and
countrymen, is not the expectation of

Woe. Kn.
16.
That the Authors unwillingness to acknowledge an Ecclesiastical soveraigntie
above the supreme established Civil authority, be not a motive to deal more
rigorously with him, then with any of those other his compatriots, that turn
tail to every government, without affection to any, is the desire of

V. Ye.
17.
There being scarce any other Gentleman in Scotland, who to the press so freely
adventureth his name as himself, that the Author's thus favoring this Isle
with elucubrations beyond the reach of most of his compatriots, may not for his
service to the public by the attolerance of the State suffer any detriment by
his own countrymen in his private fortune, is the desire of

Q. O.
18.
That the reasons deduced by the Author in the above-written Treatise, why he
should not be made liable to any other debt then that of his own contracting
may be so relished by the supreme authority of the Land, as that thereby he may
be exonered of any other burden, is the humble desire of

C. W.
19.
Their being none in Scotland less covetous then he, nor more averse from the
excessive love of money, that it may please the State so to protect him, as
that he be not made a prey to the most avaritious men of any, and such as
respect Silver and Gold beyond whatever else is most precious in the world, is
the humble desire of

L. Chapter
20.
Seeing the Authors unwillingness to pin his faith implicitly to the sleeve of
the Ministry, would at Sterling have debarred him (although otherways he had
been willing) from being admitted to any charge in the Scottish army against the
English; and that therefore his going to Worcester would by all appearance seem
rather to have proceeded from his desire to shun old adversaries at home, then
to acquire new ones abroad, that he should be looked upon with a more amicable
eye from the State, is the humble opinion of

M. Gs.
21.
That the exemplary civility of the Author, for being apt to have influence on
the minds of the rudest of his kindred and neighbors, even unto the remotest
hills of Scotland, may persuade the State, whose endeavor it is to bring them
into as near a conformity as may be, in Manners and Language with the natives
of England, to settle him, without encumbrance, in the inheritance of his
predecessors, is the desire of

Du. Th.
22.
Seeing the States adversaries had kept some three years ago a Garrison in the
Authors house for twelve months together, and that for these many years past,
by several exactions, tolerated plunderings, and other suchlike unmerciful
dealings, without any just occasion given, his rents have been made almost
totally unserviceable, that he may now, for his greater peace in the future, be
exonered of the English Garrison that is in his house; and after its removal,
have himself fully settled in his own, with all manner of ease and tranquillity,
is the humble desire of

N. Wa.
23.
Seeing the grant of what is demanded in this Treatise, can no ways introduce a
preparative of any dangerous consequence, as has been evidently shown in the
above-written Introduction, That the State may be pleased, without any
suspicion of being troubled upon the like grounds by any other of his
Compatriots, condescend to his desires therein, is the hearty wish of

P. Oi.
24.
That sublime. Natural and Moral Philosophy, Mathematics, Poesy, and many
other kinds of good Literature, should not be any longer suppressed by the
injustice of devouring and insatiable seekers ignorant of every thing that is
not lucrative for the bag, is the desire of

Au. Ps.
25.
Seeing many in Scotland live at ease who enjoy more of their neighbors
unlawfully-acquired goods then formerly was their own. That the Author who
never yet could for the importunity of waspish seekers, and terror of a
rigorous Law, most often in the mouths of partial men, get applied, in the
most fertile year that was, for his own use the tenth part of his rent, should
now by the magnificence of the State, reap the fruits of his own* without the
hazard of such terrible soakers, is the earnest desire of

Gu. Dn.
26.
As the overthrow of Vice should be the establishment of Virtue, That the
conquest of his opposers reseat the Author in his own inheritance, and that the
State of England do it, which professes the subdument of irregular spirits, is
both the expectation and desire of

Tm. Ou.
27.
Seeing the Authors design has been these many years the same, in matter of
furthering Manufacture, Commerce, with all manner of Trading and Negotiation
with the most industrious of the English now inhabiting Scotland That the State
will not, in favor of those that have obstructed the performance of so worthy
enterprises, denude him of his just inheritance, is the desire of

Yi. Pn.
28.
As love to the English Nation more then to their money, deserves from that
Government the larger influence of grace; so, that the Authors affection to the
equitable Customs, and innate Civility of that Nation, being of a more generous
temper then that of others, who labored their introduction for pecunial
interests, may be regarded with an eye of greater favor, is the humble desire
of

Gn. We.
29.
Seeing there are many heritors in Scotland, who though for being actually in
charge against the English, as pretended opposers of Presbytery, they did
either enrich themselves, or by their levies and quarterings received great
profits to the no small damage of the Country, do nevertheless enjoy their
means at this time (whose good fortune notwithstanding thereby, I wish no man
to envy) with as much tranquillity as before; That the Author, who never yet
had any benefit to the prejudice of another, be placed rather in a better then
worse condition then any of those, is the desire of

Tu. I.
30.
That the vexation uncessantly for these ten years past sustained by the
Author, from men of unsatisfiable appetites, in matter of worldly means, may
not, as formerly, to the great hinderance of divulging learned Treatises, be
any longer an impediment unto him, is the earnest desire of

R. You.
31.
That a plenary grant of the Authors demands, after the manner above specified
in the Tractate of his Introduction, will prove a great encouragement to good
spirits, in the prosecuting of virtuous endeavors, is the opinion of

Wu. Fn.
32.
That this is the unanimous desire of all the good persons of either sex, with
whom, of any Nation, in whatever Country, whether at home or abroad, the Author
has been formerly acquainted, is testified by

Tu. Us.
Parva peto: debens minus: and plus spondeo: at istis
Plura dabit genio spero Camaena meo.
Englished thus.
Little I ask: I owe less on the score:
I promise much; yet hope to perform more.
FINIS.
THough in this almost extemporary Treatise, composed amidst most of the
disturbances that are incident to one totally destitute of encouragements from
without, for undertaking enterprises of the like nature; and, by the Author
himself, in scribled sheets and half sheets, before the Ink oftentimes was well
dry, given out to two several Printers, one alone not being fully able to hold
his quill a going: there should have occurred manyer escapes of the Press then
there are pages in the Book (considering how the animadversion of the Revises,
was altogether recommended to the Compositors at the Case, who were, through
the odness of the Hand wherein the cop^e was written, very frequently apt to
mistake the sense of both single words, and full members of periods) it needs
not to be thought strange. May the Reader therefore be pleased to excuse all,
and with his pen to correct these ensuing Errata, as it is hereafter shown how
they should be amended.

Lib. Art. Lin. Errata. Emendata. 1 Tit. page 15 Credere Cedere. 1 18 3
quintessinced were quintessinced. 1 21 1 Italians Italian. 1 112 3 five and
twenty six and twenty 2 13 5 sell set. 2 17 marg. sollicie sollicitae. 2 18
marg. magnomalo magnummalum. 2 35 5 v^ry similitudina^y very similitudinary. 2
39 marg. vo^ata vocare tua. 2 44 1 for shunning that for shunning. 2 49 8
signs sines. 2 56 4 presidents precedents. 2 59 3 specified specifieth. 2 67
10 quod quid. 2 70 13 nimirum est unum. nimirum unum est. 3 35 5 Oxymal Oxymel.
3 37 8 in him in him whom I had entrusted with my affairs 3 44. marg. ditare
doliturus ditari. doleturus. 4 20 6 seccessive secessive. 4 40 2 bagpipes
bagpipe. 4 54 8 Carmelists Carmelites. 4 82 4 fire, fortune, and the extremest
pains fire, and the extremest pains fortune could inflict upon them. 4 83 3
more manyer. 4 91 5 Exscibalauron Exskybalauron or Exskybalochrysos 4 91 8 had
hate. 4 p. 80. 7 hoc site namque ira 5 5 1 the that. 5 6 marg. delibuntur
dilabuntur. 5 9 marg. Avarum Avarus. 5 12 marg. Vid. Art. 28. Vid. Art. 63 5 13
7 Baronry of Fisherie Baronries of Bray and Fisherie. 5 17 marg. pecuniae
pecunia 5 29 marg. removit removet. 5 36 marg. uti ut. 5 40 13 order orders. 6
8 7 confusion and hypocrisy; confusion; and hypocrisy. 6 24 marg. number nam 6
27 3 prizes. prices.


